                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         THE CROSS-SECTION OF HURDLE RATES FOR CAPITAL BUDGETING:
                   AN EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS OF SURVEY DATA

                                          Ravi Jagannathan
                                            Iwan Meier
                                            Vefa Tarhan

                                        Working Paper 16770
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16770


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2011




We thank Michael Fishman, Robert Korajczyk, Deborah Lucas, Robert McDonald, David Matsa, Mitchell
Petersen, Artur Raviv, Ernst Schaumburg, Michael Sher, Paul Spindt, and Timothy Thompson for
helpful comments. We also thank the focus group participants William A. Colaianni, James J. Cowhey,
Pavel A. Dorosevich, Gaea Gomez, Art Mollenhauer, and Don Porth for their input to improve the
design of the survey. This research is sponsored by the Zell Center for Risk Research and we are indebted
to its Director and Dean Emeritus of the Kellogg School of Management Donald Jacobs for his support
and advice. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Ravi Jagannathan, Iwan Meier, and Vefa Tarhan. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Cross-Section of Hurdle Rates for Capital Budgeting: An Empirical Analysis of Survey
Data
Ravi Jagannathan, Iwan Meier, and Vefa Tarhan
NBER Working Paper No. 16770
February 2011
JEL No. G12,G3,G31

                                              ABSTRACT

Whereas Poterba and Summers (1995) find that firms use hurdle rates that are unrelated to their CAPM
betas, Graham and Harvey (2001) find that 74% of their survey firms use the CAPM for capital budgeting.
We provide an explanation for these two apparently contradictory conclusions. We find that firms
behave as though they add a hurdle premium to their CAPM based cost of capital. Following McDonald
and Siegel (1986), we argue that the hurdle premium depends on the value of the option to defer investments.
While CAPM explains only 10% of the cross-sectional variation in hurdle rates across firms, variables
that proxy for the benefits from the option to wait for potentially better investment opportunities explain
35%. Estimates of our hurdle premium model parameters imply an equity premium of 3.8% per year,
a figure that is essentially the same as that reported in the survey by Graham and Harvey (2005). Consistent
with our model, growth firms use a higher hurdle rate when compared to value firms, even though
they have a lower cost of capital.


Ravi Jagannathan                                     Vefa Tarhan
Kellogg Graduate School of Management                Loyola University Chicago
Northwestern University                              Graduate School of Business
2001 Sheridan Road                                   1 E. Pearson St., Maguire Hall
Leverone/Anderson Complex                            Chicago, IL 60611
Evanston, IL 60208-2001                              v-tarhan@luc.edu
and NBER
rjaganna@northwestern.edu

Iwan Meier
HEC Montreal
3000, chemin de la Cote-Sainte-Catherine
Montreal (Quebec) H3T 2A7
Canada
iwan.meier@hec.ca
I. Introduction

      According to a survey by Womack and Zhang (2005) 38% of the total class time of the

core finance courses at major MBA programs is devoted to capital budgeting decisions,

computing net present value (NPV) and cost of capital. The tuition fees of the top 30 ranked

MBA programs by Business Week total 1.6 billion in 2010. Thus, it appears that business

schools generate considerable revenues in return for an education of the principles of corporate

finance.

      A number of studies document that when computing the net present value of a project, the

majority of firms discount future cash flows using hurdle rates that reflect their weighted average

cost of capital (WACC) (e.g. Bierman (1993), Bruner, Eades, Harris, and Higgins (1998)) and

thus indeed follow the standard approach as taught in MBA programs. Additionally, surveys

over the past four decades report that since Sharpe (1964) and Lintner (1965) introduced the

capital asset pricing model (CAPM), firms have increasingly adopted its framework to determine

their cost of equity. In fact, Graham and Harvey (2001) find that three out of four CFOs rely on

the CAPM. Thus, in spite of its criticism in the literature, it appears that CAPM is widely used

in practice.

      In a survey that we conducted, we ask firms what they use for hurdle rates in their capital

budgeting decisions. Since we know the identity of the respondents to our survey, we can match

firms with fundamental Barra betas and data from Compustat and CRSP to compute their

WACC. We document that hurdle rates firms use in practice exceed their computed WACC, i.e.,

firms add a hurdle premium to their cost of capital.2 The hurdle premium is substantial and



2
 In a roundtable discussion on capital structure and payout policy, Jon Anda from the investment banking
division of Morgan Stanley states that “my feeling is that a large number of companies today are using
hurdle rates that are well above their weighted average cost of capital” (see Smith, Ikenberry, Nayar,

                                                   2
accounts, on average, for about half of the hurdle rate. We also find that the presence of the

hurdle rate premium is independent of whether the cost of equity is inferred from the single-

factor CAPM, the Fama-French three-factor model, or computed by making assumptions about

the size of the equity premium.

      Poterba and Summers (1995) also find hurdle rates to be on the high side. They document

an average real hurdle rate of 12.2%, at a time when the long-term inflation expectation was

around 5%. They argue that the hurdle rates are higher than both the cost of debt and the cost of

equity of firms in their survey sample. Moreover, they find that hurdle rates are not related to

CAPM betas. How is it that firms claim to use CAPM and WACC, and yet their hurdle rates are

not systematically related to beta, and are also much higher than firms’ computed WACC? In

this paper, we provide an explanation based on high growth prospects that make options to wait

for better investment opportunities valuable when firms cannot undertake all positive net present

value projects due to limited availability of organization capital. We propose a model that

explains the determinants of hurdle rates and at the same time produces results that are consistent

with the previous survey findings that firms indeed use CAPM and WACC. While WACC is an

important determinant of the hurdle rate, it is not its only component.

      The key to our model is that firms with high growth opportunities incorporate a premium

associated with an option to wait to their hurdle rates. This insight is provided by McDonald and

Siegel (1986). In addressing the investment timing problem they observe that investing in a

current positive NPV project is irreversible, while the decision to defer the investment is

reversible. They argue that the correct decision is reached by comparing the NPV of the current

project with the NPV (as of the current period) that can be obtained if the investment is made in


Anda and McVey (2005, p. 52)). Additionally, Antill and Arnott (2004) claim that the hurdle rates of the
twelve oil companies they examine exceed their WACC.

                                                   3
the future. This option to wait is valuable to growth firms since it may enable them to take future

projects that possibly have higher NPVs than the (positive) NPV projects they have in the current

period. Such firms may behave in this manner due to managerial and other human capital

constraints in the current period.    At the same time, these firms may fear facing adverse

conditions in capital markets in the future when highly valuable projects materialize. We

hypothesize that in order to avoid this possibility, in the current period these firms would put

themselves in a financial position to undertake the highly valuable projects that they may

encounter in the future. In other words, current period financial flexibility concerns are likely to

be important for firms with high growth prospects. This suggests that firms with high cash

reserves would have high hurdle premia.

      It is important to emphasize that the option to wait for future projects that have higher

expected values than the current period positive NPV investments, is different from a traditional

real option attached to a specific project. If firms consider a project to be strategic, then they

judge that investing in such a project has the potential to generate additional future cash flows

that are currently not incorporated in the valuation of the project.        For instance, the first

investment in a foreign country might pave the way for other positive NPV projects in the future.

In such cases, firms could use decision trees to incorporate future cash flows. However, survey

evidence shows that firms often incorporate such real options associated with strategic projects

by using lower hurdle rates (e.g. Bruner, Eades, Harris, and Higgins (1998)). In contrast, firms

that are in a position to take advantage of options to wait would use higher discount rates in

screening projects in the current period. When firms uncover a new positive NPV project, they

have to decide whether to take it or to wait for a potentially better future opportunity. The

decision can be characterized as an optimal stopping problem. Given a number of future projects



                                                 4
with a distribution of NPVs, where only the approximate distribution is known, the firm has to

decide whether it is optimal to take a currently available positive NPV project or to wait for a

better opportunity. The average expected NPV of the future projects depends on the growth

prospects of the industry, while the dispersion is driven by the riskiness of the industry. This

suggests that both recent period industry returns and the unpredicted fraction of industry returns

would be positively correlated with hurdle premia.

      If firms do not face any constraints and capital markets are well functioning, every positive

NPV project in the current period would be funded. However, firms with high-growth prospects

may not want to take every positive NPV project in the current period since they may find even

better opportunities in the future. For this reason, firms with high growth prospects may pass up

on some good current period projects by using hurdle rates that exceed their WACC. The

difference between the hurdle rates they use and their computed WACC would represent the

premium associated with the option to wait. The option to wait is more valuable to firms with

high growth prospects who operate in an environment where the NPV distribution of possible

projects are likely to have a wider dispersion than those faced by mature firms.

      Jagannathan and Meier (2002) argue that organizational and managerial constraints may

represent another reason why firms with valuable options to wait, i.e., firms with ample growth

opportunities, would use higher hurdle rates. Since in corporate finance growth is about the sales

variable, we use sales growth per employee as a proxy to measure the presence of managerial

constraints.   Jagannathan and Meier (2002) use a real options framework that builds on

McDonald (1999) to demonstrate that depending on growth prospects and the dispersion of the

NPV distribution of future projects, the hurdle rate premium can be substantial. The optimal




                                                5
solution for when to take a positive NPV project can be found using the classical stopping

problem (also known as parking or secretary problem).

      In this paper we make several contributions. First, we document that there is a hurdle rate

premium. Second, we develop a model where hurdle rates have two components: WACC, and

variables that represent firm characteristics that proxy for the value of the option to wait. The

model enables us to estimate the equity premium, along with the loadings on firm characteristics.

Our estimate for the equity premium is identical to the figure found by Graham and Harvey

(2005) from a survey they conducted at about the same date of our survey (3.8% in both cases).

Also, unlike Poterba and Summers (1995) who do not find a significant relation between

historical beta and hurdle rates, we find that fundamental beta is positively correlated with hurdle

rates in our sample. Third, we find that actual WACC constitutes about half of the value of the

average hurdle rate, while the remaining half of the variation in hurdle rates can be explained by

variables that proxy for the value of options to wait. Furthermore, we find that dispersion of

hurdle premia is three times the dispersion of WACC. Fourth, as hypothesized, financial

flexibility considerations play an important role: firms with high levels of cash use higher hurdle

rates. Fifth, we find that firms with high growth opportunities use higher hurdle rates (they load

negatively on the Fama-French HML factor) even though their stocks earn lower returns.

Additionally, the R-square obtained from the estimation of the market model for firms that are in

the same industry (2 digit SIC) as the sample firms, is negatively correlated with hurdle rates.

Finally, we confirm Jagannathan and Meier (2002) that managerial and organizational

constraints play an important role in investment decisions: the estimate for the sales growth per

employee variable is positive and is significantly related to hurdle rates.




                                                  6
     The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section II describes the experimental

design and data. Section III discusses survey results. Section IV presents the model. Empirical

findings are discussed in Section V. Finally, Section VI concludes.



II. Experimental Design and Data

     Figure 1 gives an overview of the results from the survey literature. Apparently, starting in

the 1990s an overwhelming fraction of firms use discounted cash flow (DCF) methods.

Similarly, starting in the 1980s the use of WACC and CAPM has increased dramatically.

Interestingly, the use of company-wide hurdle rates has not declined over time. In order to

examine how hurdle rates are related to cost of capital and to test whether the hurdle premium is

related to options to wait, we combine survey questions with archival data from Barra, CRSP,

and Compustat. Hurdle rates cannot be observed directly in archival databases and require a

survey. Besides Poterba and Summers (1995), to the best of our knowledge, ours is the only

survey on hurdle rates that knows the identity of the respondents. Combining survey data with

financial databases enables us to examine the determinants of the hurdle premium.

     The survey was completed by the CFOs of 127 companies in October 2003. A high

percentage of the respondents reveal their identity (83.5%). Almost all surveys are filled out

completely and there is no decline in the number of responses towards the end of the four-page

questionnaire. Survey data has strengths and weaknesses. Surveys are the only way to obtain

hurdle rates used in practice. On the downside, surveys do not produce as many observations as

databases such as Compustat. Additionally, if survey questions are not phrased carefully, tests

based on survey responses could be misleading. In designing the survey, we carefully followed




                                               7
the advice of experts in the fields of psychology and marketing.3 We designed the questions in

such a way that we minimize the use of technical terms and names of models that are taught in a

typical MBA course. For example, we avoid terms such as “cost of capital” and “CAPM” in our

questionnaire. Instead, the survey participants were asked questions on their “hurdle rates.” It is

a well documented observation in psychology, known as the social desirability hypothesis (see

e.g. Singer and Presser (1989)), that respondents to surveys tend to try to please the conductor of

the survey by providing the answers they think the survey’s author expects. Therefore, in

designing the survey questions we tried to avoid using technical terms.             The input from

numerous finance academics helped to further improve the content of the questions.

Additionally, in order to test the survey with practitioners, we invited six CFOs from the Chicago

area to a focus group meeting. After filling out the survey, we discussed each question to assure

that the wording was not ambiguous. The survey was sent out together with a cover letter from

the Dean Emeritus of the Kellogg School of Management, Donald Jacobs, along with a postage-

paid return envelope to a total of 4,600 CFOs of U.S. companies listed in the Compustat name

file. We asked the participants to return the questionnaire within ten days. A week after the

initial mailing we sent a follow-up mailing to remind the potential participants.

      We have some evidence that the surveys were actually filled out by CFOs as we received a

number of e-mails from the CFOs requesting an advance copy of the survey results. In addition,

many respondents provided elaborate comments to open questions. The survey responses appear

to be accurate. For example, when we compare self-reported sales figures with the numbers

retrieved from Compustat, we find that a reassuring 92.3% of the respondents checked the

correct sales range.


3
 Among others, Gillman (2000) and Morgan (1988) provide guidelines for surveys and focus group
meetings.

                                                 8
      Table I compares the breakdown by industry, hurdle rate statistics, and the use of

CAPM/WACC to previous surveys. Except for the fact that our sample excludes financial firms,

the distribution across industries are comparable to other surveys.4 In all surveys and in the

Compustat sample manufacturing exceeds 50% of the sample. In our survey manufacturing

firms make up 66% of the sample.5 Firms in the wholesale and retail sectors make-up 11.6% of

our sample, while mining and construction and transportation/communication sectors are equally

represented (10.7% each). In Table I, in the Compustat sample we compute the weights by

including only the sectors that we have mailed our survey to. While our sample size is a third of

Graham and Harvey (2001), we know the identity of 106 out of 127 firms and are able to match

93 firms with Barra and CRSP/Compustat. Summary statistics of the hurdle rates in our survey

match those of Poterba and Summers (1995), and the use of WACC is comparable to Bruner,

Eades, Harris and Higgins (1998). Other characteristics (not reported in the table) of survey

firms are as follows: Firm size measured by (self-reported) sales is below $100 million for 35.2%

of the companies and 31.2% of the responding firms report sales in excess of $1 billion. The

majority of the firms (72.0%) have multiple product lines.

      Table II compares the characteristics of the 93 responding firms for which we can match

Compustat data and the Compustat sample of firms. Based on mean values it appears that the

two samples are similar except for four variables. Survey firms have higher market value of




4
  Financial firms account for 15% of the respondents in Graham and Harvey (2001). We exclude all
finance and insurance companies with the major SIC code in the ranges 6000-6499, 6700-6799; and
utilities (4900-4999) in order to exclude regulated firms. We also discard radio and TV broadcasting,
cable, and other pay TV services (4840-4949), as these firms might be driven by non-commercial
interests, e.g. religious radio stations. Finally, we exclude health, education, social services, and
museums (7200+).
5
  In a number of surveys the fraction of manufacturing firms is even more pronounced. For example, in
Gitman and Mercurio (1982) this ratio is 93.8%, while in Gitman and Forrester (1977) it is 74%.

                                                 9
assets (even though the mean book values are not statistically different).6 They also have a

higher ratio of cash-to-book assets. The book assets of survey firms also generate higher

operating profits. Finally, the survey firms are more capital expenditure intensive. Given that

manufacturing firms are somewhat overrepresented in the survey sample, this is not surprising.

Other important financial variables, such as, leverage ratio (total debt divided by book value of

assets), current ratio, total asset turnover, and return on book equity are comparable.



III. Survey Findings

         Since Poterba and Summers (1995) is the only other study where the identity of survey

firms are known, it is useful to compare their findings with ours. They comment that hurdle

rates in their sample appear to be too high compared to cost of capital. We confirm this

observation for our survey sample. As can be seen in Panel B of Table I, while our average

nominal hurdle rate of 14.8% is somewhat lower than their implied nominal rate of 17.8%

(12.2% real and inflation expectation of 5%), their median rate that we construct from their data

is 10% in real terms and 15.5% in nominal terms, which is very close to our median of 15%. The

standard deviations of the two samples are also similar. Taken together, these stylized facts

suggest that, the real discount rates used by firms have not changed much even though the two

surveys were conducted 14 years apart.

         As we discussed in Section I, Poterba and Summers (1995) find no relation between hurdle

rates and systematic risk as measured by historical betas. This is puzzling since it appears to

contradict the evidence from the survey literature that firms use CAPM along with WACC to




6
    For variable definitions, see the caption of Table II.

                                                        10
compute cost of equity and cost of capital.7 For this reason, we repeat the exercise of Poterba

and Summers (1995) for our sample by regressing self-reported hurdle rates on the same set of

financial variables they use.       Figure 2 illustrates the results from kernel-weighted local

polynomial regressions for our sample firms.            We use a non-parametric kernel method to

minimize the effect of outliers and to account for the presence of non-linearities. The figures

suggest that the relation between hurdle rates and all the explanatory variables, except for the

current ratio, are essentially flat. Even in the case of the current ratio, it appears that the

relationship is dominated by some firms which have high current ratios and high hurdle rates.

      Table III summarizes the bivariate OLS coefficients for the same set of explanatory

variables using the two survey samples in question. The table indicates that the similarity

between the two surveys extends beyond having similar summary statistics: The regression

coefficients obtained from the two samples are also comparable. In neither of the samples the

explanatory financial variables, except for current ratio, is related to hurdle rates.8 In our sample,

even the current ratio turns out to be insignificant (p-value of 0.12) once the two firms with

current ratios in excess of 10 (the cutoff rate as e.g., in Cleary (1999)) are excluded from the

analysis. Using fundamental beta from Barra instead of historical beta (estimated from five

years of monthly data) slightly increases the coefficient estimates for both the full sample and

manufacturing sector sub samples. In the case of manufacturing firms, the positive relationship

between fundamental beta and hurdle rates cannot be rejected at the 10% level. Given that




7
  Graham and Harvey (2001) find that three out of four CFOs use CAPM and 85% of the firms that
Bruner, Eades, Harris, and Higgins (1998) interview use WACC.
8
  The coefficients for total equity return have the same sign as in Poterba and Summers (1995) but differ
in size. Over the 10 years preceding the survey date (1993-2003) the S&P 500 index increased by 138%,
whereas over the period 1980-1990 considered in Poterba and Summers (1995) the index increased by
227.4%.

                                                   11
historical beta coefficients for individual firms from an index model tend to have low R-squares,

and hence provide noisy estimates, in the remainder of this paper we rely on fundamental betas.

         The bar chart in Panel A of Figure 3 shows what survey participants use as their hurdle

rate. Of the 117 firms that responded to the question on what their hurdle rate represents, a

significant percentage of the CFOs (71.8%) claim that the hurdle rate they use is their weighted

average cost of capital (WACC). In the case of 7 firms (6.0%), the hurdle rate represents their

cost of levered equity, while for 9 firms (7.7%) it reflects their unlevered cost of equity. For 17

firms (14.5%), the hurdle rate falls into the “other” category.9 The widespread use of WACC in

our sample is consistent with the findings of Gitman and Vandenberg (2000), Bruner, Eades,

Harris, and Higgins (1998), and Bierman (1993) who report that even larger fractions of firms

use WACC. As displayed in Figure 1, similar to the increased use of discounted cash flow

(DCF) techniques and CAPM, the use of WACC has also increased over time. For example, in a

survey conducted 30 years ago, Petty, Scott, and Bird (1975) document that only 30% of the

Fortune 500 firms that responded to their survey use WACC. In contrast, in later surveys, such

as the one by Bruner, Eades, Harris, and Higgins (1998), this figure is over 80%.

         In the survey, we ask the participants for the nominal hurdle rate that they have used for a

typical project during the two years preceding the survey date. Since hurdle rates represent

firms’ WACC by a substantial margin, in the case of the small number of firms which use their

levered or unlevered cost of equity, we convert their hurdle rates to their WACC equivalents. In

doing this, we use data on debt/asset ratios and tax rates from Compustat, and cost of debt

information we obtain from the survey responses.                The details of how we convert the 16

levered/unlevered cost equity responses to their WACC equivalents are described in the



9
    This category consists of firms which provide their hurdle rates without indicating what they represent.

                                                       12
Appendix.       Panel B of Figure 3 displays the distribution of hurdle rates (WACC and its

equivalents sample) used by survey firms.

      Panel A of Table IV displays summary statistics on self-reported hurdle rates for various

samples: The sample of firms which indicated what their hurdle rates are (all respondents), the

sample of firms which indicated what their hurdle rates are, but did not state what they represent

(the “other” category), the WACC equivalent sample (those who marked WACC as their hurdle

rates plus the WACC of the levered/unlevered cost of equity subsample), finally, the sample for

which we can match with Compustat, CRSP, and Barra data bases. In the next section we

analyze the determinants of the hurdle premium using this last sample. The summary statistics

for all respondents in Panel A show that the mean hurdle rate is 14.8% in nominal terms (the

median is 15.0%). In this sample none of the numbers is less than 5%, and the maximum hurdle

rate used is 40%. Furthermore, the skewness coefficient of 1.7 indicates that the distribution is

fairly symmetric, and the kurtosis coefficient of 9.6 confirms that the distribution is centered

around the mean and median. Adjusting for the average realized inflation of 2.2% during the

two years preceding the survey date (January 2001 to December 2003) produces an average real

hurdle rate of 12.3%, which is essentially same as the 12.2% real hurdle rate reported by Poterba

and Summers (1995). The mean and median of the WACC equivalent sample are 14.1%, and

14.0%, respectively. Next, we look at those firms for which we can match Barra betas and

CRSP/Compustat data. Again, the means and medians are very close to those for the full

sample.     Thus, sample selection does not change the characteristics of the hurdle rate

distribution.

      Panel B of Table IV reports the industry composition of firms in each sample. Comparing

the first (full) sample, and the sample we use in our tests (the last sample), suggest that there is



                                                13
no industry related bias. Examination of Panel C leads to the conclusion that other than the

standard deviation for the manufacturing firms (which is somewhat higher), the summary

statistics across industries are similar.



IV. Modeling Hurdle Rates

       In order to test our hypothesis that firms screen projects by adding a hurdle premium to

their cost of capital and to explore the determinants of the premium, we propose a model that

explains hurdle rates by the weighted average cost of capital plus a linear combination of firm

characteristics that are likely to be related to the value of the option to wait. We use nonlinear

least squares estimation to solve simultaneously for the equity premium that firms use to

compute their cost of equity and WACC, and the loadings on firm characteristics that proxy for

the value of the option to wait.

                                   k
(1)      Hurdle  WACC  a   b j Char j  
                                   j 1



where,

                     D                   E
(2)      WACC          rD (1  Tax )      rE
                    DE                 DE

(3a)     rE  rF   MKT PMKT

(3b)     rE  rF   MKT PMKT   SMB PSMB   HML PHML

       In the CAPM specification (3a) we use the fundamental Barra beta. In the three factor

specification (3b), in order to get the beta coefficients for SMB and HML we first subtract

 Barra rMKT from monthly returns to get a time series of residual returns in excess of what can be

explained by market returns.



                                                  14
(4)      rE  rF   Barra rMKT

We then regress five years of monthly residual returns prior to the survey date on the returns of

the factor-mimicking portfolios for SMB and HML.

      The firm characteristics variables that we include in our model are: cash-to-assets ratio,

average industry stock returns during the five years prior to the survey date, the average R-

squares of the market model in the industry that the firm belongs (again using 5 years worth of

monthly observations), sales growth per employee, and Altman’s Z- score.

      Due to tax related costs of holding excess cash and agency costs, we expect growth firms

to have high cash-to-assets ratio. There is ample evidence that shareholders force non-growth

firms to distribute their cash holdings. For example, Nohel and Tarhan (1998) show that firms

with low Q ratios improve their operating performance by distributing cash via share

repurchases. The value of the option to wait should be higher for high-growth firms, since it

may enable these firms to undertake future projects that are more valuable than the positive NPV

projects they have in the present period. These firms are likely to screen projects using a hurdle

rate that exceeds their WACC. At the same time, due to the possibility that they may face

difficulties in the future when valuable projects materialize, they are likely to maintain high

financial flexibility in the current period by having a high cash-to-assets ratio. Thus, we expect

cash-to-assets to have a positive sign.

      Financially healthy firms are likely to have higher growth prospects. Thus, measures of

financial health, such as Altman’s Z-score, are expected to have a positive estimated

coefficient.10 Systematic risk is also likely to be positively related to hurdle rates. Holding other


10
   For financially unhealthy firms, a measure of how close the firm is to bankruptcy is likely to be
positively correlated with hurdle rates. As probability of bankruptcy increases, provided that the firm has
time to wait before chapter 11 or liquidation, the higher is the value of option to wait. This represents a
lottery type of situation. Rather than accepting a project which has a positive NPV where the NPV is not

                                                    15
firm characteristics constant, fundamental Barra beta will be positively correlated with hurdle

rates since it would mean a higher WACC.

      Since stock prices reflect anticipated future growth, industries with high past returns are

likely to have high growth prospects in the future. The average expected NPV of future projects,

in turn, is likely to be positively correlated with the growth prospects of the industry. For this

reason, firms that belong to industries with high average returns are likely to have high hurdle

premia.

      Dispersion of the distribution of future NPVs is driven by the riskiness of the industry.

The firm has to decide whether it is optimal to accept a current positive NPV project or wait for a

possibly better one by using a hurdle rate with two components – WACC and the hurdle

premium. Holding the point estimate of beta constant, the lower is the R-squares of the market

model, the wider is the dispersion, thus, the higher is the value of the option for waiting.11

      Finally, managerial and other human capital constraints will influence hurdle rates in the

positive direction. High-growth firms are likely to have high opportunity costs of not waiting for

possible better projects in the future due to limited managerial talent. These firms are likely to

place a high value on the option to wait. Since in corporate finance the term “growth” concerns

the sales variable, we use a categorical variable sales growth per employee to capture human

capital constraints.



V. Empirical Findings

high enough to materially change the firm’s situation, it would be reasonable for the firm to reject the
project by using a high hurdle rate in hopes of encountering a project with a high enough NPV that would
make a difference in the firm’s value.
11
   There is also the possibility that unsystematic risk may also play a role (Goyal and Santa-Clara (2003)).
First, managers may feel that shareholders are not fully diversified and price this risk in their hurdle rates.
Second, lower R-squares involve a wider confidence around the point estimate for beta and, to be on the
safe, side managers may use higher rather than lower hurdle rates when the R-squares is low.

                                                      16
      Table V displays the results from various models that we use to determine the relative

importance of WACC, and variables related to the option to wait, in explaining the cross-

sectional variation in hurdle rates. In Columns 1 and 2 we show the results from estimating (1),

(2), for the single factor CAPM (equation 3a), and the Fama-French three factor model (3b),

respectively. The 3.8% equity premium estimate obtained from the single factor CAPM is

identical to Graham and Harvey (2005), who in a survey they conduct at approximately the same

date as our survey, find the average expected equity premium to be 3.8% (median 3.6%).

      The cash-to-assets is positively correlated with hurdle rates (at 1% level of significance).

Simutin (2010) finds that firms with high cash balances generate higher future stock returns.

Based on this finding, he argues that excess cash holdings proxy for high growth opportunities.

Since high growth opportunities imply a high valuation for the option to wait, the positive

correlation between cash and hurdle rate is as expected.12

      The dispersion of the distribution of future NPVs is driven by the riskiness of the industry,

and since low R-squares obtained from estimating the market model of individual firms in the

same industry imply a wider dispersion, the expected correlation between average industry

R-squares and hurdle rates is negative. This expectation is confirmed by the highly significant

negative coefficient for the R-squares variable. The positive estimate (significant at the 1%

level) for the sales growth per employee variable is also as expected. We use this variable as a

proxy for managerial and organizational constraints. Growth firms are more likely to find this

constraint to be binding. As a result, they would put a high value for the option to wait. The

12
  Opler, Pinkowitz, Stulz, and Williamson (1999) analyze the tradeoff between the benefits and costs of
cash holdings. While cash holdings create value by providing financial flexibility to take advantage of
future profitable projects, cash holdings also involve tax related costs and agency costs (e.g., by enabling
managers to engage in empire building types of activities). In fact, Pinkowitz, Stulz, and Williamson
(2006) find that in countries with weak investor protection, cash is discounted at a higher rate. However,
in countries with intense shareholder activism (such as the U.S.), benefits of cash exceed its potential
costs (especially in the case of growth firms).

                                                    17
positive and highly significant estimate for the variable in question is consistent with this

interpretation.

      Thus, the three variables discussed above each have the expected sign and are statistically

significant. However, even though the other two variables – average industry return, and the

financial health of a firm as measured by Altman’s Z-score – are, as expected, positively

correlated with the value of the option to wait, the financial health variable is not statistically

significant when CAPM is used (it is significant at the 5% level when the three-factor model is

used). The model estimated in Column 1, explains 45% of the cross-sectional variation in hurdle

rates. Furthermore, Panel A of Figure 4 shows the relation between the predicted values of

hurdle rates (horizontal axis), and the actual hurdle rates (vertical axis). The 45 degree line in

the figure is superimposed. However, when we run a regression of predicted values on actual

hurdle rates we obtain a slope that is not statistically different from one (estimated slope

coefficient is 0.87 with a standard error of 0.15), and the estimate for the intercept is 0.025 (with

a p-value of 0.27).

      In Table V, Column (2) displays the results from estimating (1), and (2) using the three-

factor model (3b). An interesting result is that the estimated loading on the HML factor is

negative. The literature finds that value stocks earn higher returns than growth stocks. The

negative estimated coefficient for the HML factor indicates that growth firms use higher hurdle

rates than value firms. Thus, while value firms earn higher returns, growth firms expect to earn

more on their future projects and use higher hurdle rates. At the same time, the estimated equity

premium becomes smaller in this specification. However, the 3.8% equity premium estimate of

Column 1 is still within one standard deviation of the estimate for the equity premium in Column

2. The results also show that the SMB loading is unrelated to hurdle rates. Given that small



                                                 18
firms are more likely to suffer from financial constraints, this suggests that capital rationing

cannot explain the high hurdle rates. Another finding is that estimated coefficients for variables

that proxy for the value of option to wait are robust with respect to whether the single-factor

CAPM or the three-factor model is used. The three factor model has slightly higher explanatory

power than CAPM (0.49 vs. 0.45). Finally, we find that in our models the intercept coefficient is

not statistically different from zero. This suggests that we are not missing any systematic

adjustments managers may be making to hurdle rates, such as using a higher hurdle rate to

account for possible optimism in the cash flow projections.

      It is possible that the results in columns 1 and 2 may be driven by the non-linear

specification and also by simultaneously solving for the implied equity premium.               To see

whether or not this is the case, in Columns 3 and 4, we repeat the two exercises by including the

three components of WACC in linear regression models for the single and three-factor models

without simultaneously inferring the equity premium. The results displayed are remarkably

similar to those in columns 1 and 2 in terms of magnitudes, statistical significance, and

explanatory power. The similarity of the options related coefficients across the four columns

indicate that the results are robust not just with respect to the non-linear and linear specifications,

but also with respect to CAPM vs. the three-factor model. Taken together, this suggests that the

variables we use to proxy for the option value to wait are orthogonal to the cost of capital

component of hurdle rates.

      This observation is confirmed by Panels B and C of Figure 4 which break up the two

components of hurdle rates. As in Panel A, both Panels B and C have the 45 degree line

superimposed. In Panel B the horizontal axis is the predicted WACC, while the hurdle rate

minus the predicted hurdle premium (i.e., cost of capital plus the error term) is plotted on the



                                                  19
vertical axis. The estimated slope coefficient is not statistically different from one (0.93, with

standard errors of 0.30), and the intercept is not different from zero (0.011 with a p-value of

0.63). Panel C examines the hurdle rate premium by plotting the predicted hurdle premium

(horizontal axis) against hurdle rate minus implied WACC using 3.8% as the equity premium

(vertical axis). As in Panels A and B, the slope and intercept terms in Panel C are not different

from one and zero, respectively.

      In Table VI we pursue the relative importance of cost of capital and the option value to

wait components of hurdle rates in explaining both the levels of and the cross-sectional variation

in hurdle rates. In (5) and (6) we examine the cost of capital component using CAPM and the

three-factor model, respectively. Judging by the R-squares of 0.11 and 0.17, we conclude that

cost of capital is an important component. In fact using beta alone (Model 7) results in an

R-square of only 0.03. The failure of (5) to satisfactorily explain hurdle rates can also be seen in

Panel A of Figure 5: only one of the observations is below the 45 degree line. Apparently, this

situation cannot be attributed to the inferred equity premium of 3.8% since using the historical

risk premium of 6.6% (Panel B) does not produce a material improvement.13

      Two additional comments are in order: One, the intercept estimates in (5) and (6) indicate

that 6.3% to 7.7% of the average levels of hurdle rates cannot be explained by WACC. Two,

while the cost of capital component belongs in the specification of hurdle rates, it is less

important in explaining the variation in hurdle rates than the option to wait component. The

linear model in (9) has an R-square of 0.37 suggesting that the premium component has

approximately three times the explanatory power of the cost of capital component. However, in

spite of this, based on the estimated intercept of 0.079, this component alone is not sufficient in


13
   Welch (2000) reports that academic financial economists forecast an arithmetic average equity
premium over a 10-year horizon of 7%.

                                                20
explaining the hurdle rates either. The implication that emerges from Table VI is that the

specification of hurdle rates needs to include variables that capture both components.

Combining the findings of Tables V and VI reveals that our non-linear models which

simultaneously infer the equity premium (Models 1 and 2 of Table V) are superior to the two

linear models that incorporate both components (Models 3 and 4 in Table V). Our models have

the highest explanatory power (0.45 vs. 0.41 when CAPM is used and 0.49 vs. 0.48 when the

three-factor model is used). At the same time, our two models have intercept estimates that are

undistinguishable from zero. In sum, our models succeed in explaining both the average levels

of hurdle rates and also the cross-sectional variation of hurdle rates.



VI. Conclusion

      We examine the cross-sectional variation in hurdle rates that firms use in their capital

budgeting decisions. We find that managers systematically add a hurdle premium to their

CAPM based cost of capital. The size of this premium is substantial; it makes up about one half

of the average hurdle rate used in practice. Following McDonald and Siegel (1986) we argue

that the option to defer investments can explain the hurdle premium. This option to wait is most

valuable to firms with growth opportunities facing organizational capital constraints that limit the

rate of growth.

      We develop a model of hurdle rates where the CAPM beta enters nonlinearly through the

weighted average cost of capital (WACC) and variables that proxy for the option to wait that

enter linearly. The coefficient estimates corresponding to the variables that proxy for the value

of the option to wait for better future investment opportunities have the right signs and are

statistically significant. We find that firms with higher hurdle rates keep higher cash balances,



                                                 21
which is consistent with maintaining financial flexibility to undertake future valuable projects

when they materialize. Such firms tend to be growth firms loading negatively on the Fama and

French (1993) HML factor, which is also consistent with our hypothesis that the option to wait is

more valuable to growth firms.

      The model explains the level of hurdle rates and 45% of is cross-sectional variation across

firms. The implied equity premium of 3.8% that we infer from the model is identical to the

average equity premium that Graham and Harvey (2005) report in their survey of CFOs. The

specification of our model is robust to whether we use CAPM or the Fama-French three-factor

model. Since small firms are more likely to suffer from capital rationing, the insignificant factor

loading for the Fama and French (1993) SMB factor suggests that the high hurdle rates are not

driven by capital market constraints. Furthermore, the zero intercept of the model suggests that

managers do not use higher hurdle rates to compensate for optimistic cash flow projections.

      While we find both the cost of capital and the hurdle premium components to be important,

cost of capital can only explain 10% of the variation in hurdle rates across firms, whereas proxies

for the option to wait explain 35%. Further, the variation of the hurdle premium across firms is

three times the variation in cost of capital.

      Our analysis reconciles two seemingly contradictory findings in the literature. Since the

hurdle premium (the difference between the hurdle rate used by a firm and its CAPM based cost

of capital) varies substantially more than the cost of capital across firms, it masks the relation

between the hurdle rate and the CAPM beta. This may explain why Poterba and Summers

(1995) do not find CAPM betas to be significant in explaining hurdle rates. We also find that the

CAPM based cost of capital is an important determinant of the hurdle rate that a firm uses. This

is consistent with Graham and Harvey (2001) who report that most managers use the CAPM.



                                                22
We hope that our findings – that the hurdle premium is about the same as the cost of capital and

varies much more across firms – will stimulate further research that will help understand how

firms arrive at what hurdle premium to use.




                                              23
Appendix

Converting Levered/Unlevered Cost of Equity Hurdle Rates into WACC Equivalents

      In 13.7% of the cases where survey participants indicate that they use either levered or

unlevered cost of equity as their hurdle rate, we transform these cost of equity figures to their

weighted average cost of capital (WACC) equivalents. If they indicate that the hurdle rate

represents their cost of levered equity, we use this rate as the cost of equity and average it with

their after-tax cost of debt and market value weights to compute their WACC. If they indicate

that the hurdle rate represents their cost of unlevered equity, we check if these firms have any

debt. Obviously, for the four firms that do not have any debt, unlevered cost of equity and

WACC are identical. For firms with debt in their balance sheets, we lever up the reported cost of

unlevered equity to obtain their cost of levered equity, and then compute WACC.

      To compute WACC we use Compustat data to infer the market value-based weights for

cost of debt and cost of equity. To compute the weight of debt, we divide total debt (Compustat

items DLTT + DLC) by total debt plus market value of common and book value of preferred

equity (CSHO × PRCC_F + PSTK). For the weight of equity we use (1 – weight of debt).

      The mean life of a typical project for firms in our survey sample is 6.8 years. For this

reason, we use the 10-year Treasury bond rate, which was 4.3% at the time of our survey, as a

proxy for the risk-free rate.14 For the before-tax cost of debt we use the survey participants’

answers to our question regarding what the interest rate on their senior debt is.15 The survey



14
   This choice seems to be justified for other reasons as well: In their survey of 27 highly regarded
corporations, Bruner, Eades, Harris, and Higgins (1998) find that more than 70% use a 10-year or longer-
term Treasury rate as the proxy for the risk-free rate. They report that only 4% of the firms in their survey
use the 90-day T-bill rate.
15
   We do not know whether their answers refer to the coupon rate or the yield to maturity of their senior
bonds. Thus, for firms that have not issued debt recently, it is possible that their answers do not reflect
the marginal cost of debt if they report coupon rates. However, given the secular decline of interest rates

                                                     24
provides data on the before-tax cost of debt for 88 firms. Using Compustat data, we check

whether firms that left the interest rate question blank had any debt. Out of the 39 non-

responding firms we can match Compustat data for 28, and 16 of these firms turn out to have no

debt. The remaining 12 firms with debt left the interest rate question blank.16 For these firms we

use their Altman’s Z-score and the default spreads at the time of the survey to assign interest

rates. If a firm’s Z-score is greater than 3, a score that indicates a very low probability of default

(8 firms), we assign the 10-year Treasury bond rate in effect at the time of the survey plus 1

percent (5.3%). For the two firms with Z-scores of less than 1.81 (financially unhealthy firms),

we assign the 10-year Treasury rate plus 4 percent (8.3%). Firms that have Z-scores in the

interval between 1.81 and 3 (2 firms) are assigned a before-tax cost of debt of 6.3. Finally, for

firms that report a rate below the 10-year Treasury rate (4.3% at the time of the survey) we add a

spread of 0.5% to the Treasury rate. Therefore, all our WACC calculations assume cost of debt

of at least 4.8%.

      We calculate a firm’s tax rate by dividing total income taxes (Compustat item TXT) by

income before taxes PI). When item TXT or PI is negative (tax credits and negative profits,

respectively), we set the tax rate to zero. Additionally, we cap the tax rate at 34 percent.17




that started in the late 1990s and continued during the early 2000s, this should work against finding a
hurdle rate premium.
16
   Out of these 12 firms, 2 have less than 1% debt (as a fraction of market value of assets) and another 6
less than 5%.
17
   The tax rate we obtain in this manner reflects a firm’s average and not marginal tax rate. However, we
were unable to obtain a sufficient number of observations on marginal tax rates.

                                                   25
References

Antill, Nick, and Robert Arnott, 2004, Creating value in the oil industry, Journal of Applied
Corporate Finance 16(1), 18-31.

Bierman, Harold J., 1993, Capital budgeting in 1992: A survey, Financial Management 22(3),
24.

Brigham, Eugene F., 1975, Hurdle rates for screening capital expenditure proposals, Financial
Management 4, 17-26.

Bruner, Robert F., Eades, Kenneth M., Harris, Robert S., and Robert C. Higgins, 1998, Best
practices in estimating the cost of capital: survey and synthesis, Financial Practice and
Education 8, 13-28.

Cleary, Sean, 1999, The relationship between firm investment and financial status, Journal of
Finance 54(2), 673-692.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks
and bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33 (1), 3-56.

Fremgen, J. M., 1973, Capital budgeting practices: A survey, Management Accounting 54(11),
19-25.

Gillham, Bill, 2000, Developing a questionnaire, Continuum, New York, NY.

Gitman, Lawrence J., and John R. Forrester Jr., 1977, A survey of capital budgeting techniques
used by major U.S. firms, Financial Management 6, 66-71.

Gitman, Lawrence J., and Vincent A. Mercurio, 1982, Cost of capital techniques used by major
U.S. firms: Survey and analysis of Fortune’s 1000, Financial Management 11, 21-29.

Gitman, Lawrence J., and Pieter A. Vandenberg, 2000, Cost of capital techniques used by major
U.S. firms: 1997 vs. 1980, Financial Practice and Education 10(2), 53-68.

Goyal, Amit K., and Pedro Santa-Clara, 2003, Idiosyncratic risk matters! Journal of Finance
58(3), 975-1007.

Graham, John R., and Campbell R. Harvey, 2001, The theory and practice of corporate finance:
evidence from the field, Journal of Financial Economics 60, 187-243.

Graham, John R., and Campbell R. Harvey, 2005, The long-run equity risk premium, Finance
Research Letters 2, 185-194.

Ibbotson, 2004. Yearbook, Ibbotson Associates, Chicago, IL.


                                             26
Istvan, Donald F., 1961, The economic evaluation of capital expenditures, Journal of Business
36, 45-51.

Jagannathan, Ravi, and Iwan Meier (2002). Do we need CAPM for capital budgeting? Financial
Management 31(4), 55-77.

Kim, Suk H., Trevor Crick, and Edward J. Farragher, Foreign capital budgeting practices used by
the U.S. and Non-U.S. multinational companies, The Engineering Economist 25(3), 207-215.

Klammer, Thomas P., 1972, Empirical evidence of the adoption of sophisticated capital
budgeting techniques, Journal of Business 45(3), 387-397.

Klammer, Thomas P., and Michael C. Walker, 1984, The continuing increase in the use of
sophisticated capital budgeting techniques, California Management Review 27(1), 137-148.

Lintner, J., 1965, The valuation of risk assets and the selection of risky investments in stock
portfolios and capital budgets, Review of Economics and Statistics 47, 13-37.

Mao, James C.T., 1970, Survey of capital budgeting: Theory and practice, Journal of Finance
25(2), 349-360.

McDonald, Robert, 1998. Real options and rules of thumb in capital budgeting. In: Brennan,
M.J., Trigeorgis, L. (Eds.), Innovation, Infrastructure, and Strategic Options. Oxford University
Press, London.

McDonald, Robert, and Daniel Siegel, 1986, The value of waiting to invest, Quarterly Journal of
Economics 101(4), 707-728.

Moore, James S., and Alan K. Reichert, 1983, An analysis of the financial management
techniques currently employed by large US corporations, Journal of Business, Finance, and
Accounting 10, 623-645.

Morgan, David L., 1988. Focus groups as qualitative research, Sage Publications, Newbury Park,
CA.

Nohel, Tom, and Vefa Tarhan, 1998, Share repurchases and firm performance: new evidence on
the agency costs of free cash flow, Journal of Financial Economics 49(2), 187-222.

Opler, Tim, Pinkowitz, Lee, Stulz, René, and Rohan Williamson, 1999, The determinants and
implications of corporate cash holdings, Journal of Financial Economics 52, 3-46.

Petry, Glenn H., 1975, Effective use of capital budgeting tools, Business Horizons (October), 57-
65.

Petty, William J., Scott, David F., and Monroe M. Bird, 1975, The capital expenditure decision-
making process of large corporations, The Engineering Economist 20(3), 159-172.

                                               27
Petty, William J., and Oswald D. Bowlin, The financial manager and quantitative decision
models, Financial Management 5(4), 32-41é

Pinkowitz, Lee, René Stulz, and Rohan Williamson, 2006, Does the contribution of corporate
cash holdings and dividends to firm value depend on governance? A cross-country analysis,
Journal of Finance 61(6), 2725-2751.

Poterba, James M., and Lawrence H. Summers., 1995, A CEO survey of U.S. companies’ time
horizon and hurdle rates, Sloan Management Review (Fall), 43-53.

Schall, Lawrence D., Sundem,Gary L., and William R. Geijsbeek Jr., 1978, Survey and analysis
of capital budgeting methods, Journal of Finance 38(1), 281-287.

Sharpe, William F., 1964, Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium under conditions
of risk, Journal of Finance 19, 425-442.

Simutin, Mikhail, 2010, Excess cash and stock returns, Financial Management 39(3), 1197-
1222.

Singer, Eleanor, and Stanley Presser, 1989, Survey research methods: A reader, University of
Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.

Smith, Clifford, David Ikenberry, Arun Nayar, Jon Anda, and Henry McVey, 2005, Morgan
Stanley roundtable on capital structure and payout policy, Journal of Applied Corporate Finance
17(1), 36-53.

Trahan, Emery A., and Lawrence J. Gitman, 1995, Bridging the theory-practice gap in corporate
finance: A survey of chief financial officers, Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance 35(1),
73-87.

Welch, Ivo, 2000, Views of financial economists on the equity premium and on professional
controversies, Journal of Business 73 (4), 501-537.

Womack, Kent L., and Ying Zhang, 2005, Core Finance Course Trends in the Top MBA
Programs in 2005, working paper, Dartmouth College.




                                              28
Table I: Comparison of survey samples.
Panel A shows the industry breakdown using 2-digit SIC codes. “-” indicates that these sectors were excluded from the survey/sample or not listed
as a category in the questionnaire. Panel B shows summary statistics on hurdle rate and the percentage of survey respondents that use CAPM and
WACC.

Panel A
Industry                              SIC         Poterba and       Bruner, Eades,    Graham and        Compustat        Jagannathan,
                                      Code      Summers (1995)       Harris, and     Harvey (2001)       (2003)           Meier, and
                                                                    Higgins (1998)                                       Tarhan (2010)
Agriculture, forestry, fishing        01 - 09         0.0                 3.7              -                0.6               0.0
Mining, construction                  10 - 17         4.4                 0.0              4.0             10.5              10.7
Manufacturing                         20 - 39        60.6                77.8             51.3(a)          64.5              66.0
Transportation, communication         40 - 49        12.5                11.1             18.2(b)          10.1 (c)          10.7 (c)
Wholesale and retail trade            50 - 59         6.9                 3.7             11.1             13.7              11.6
Finance, insurance, and real estate   60 - 67         6.9                 -               15.4               -                 -
Services                              70 - 89         5.6                 3.7              -                0.6(d)            1.0(d)
Total obs.                                           228(e)              27(f)           392(g)           5,108               127

Panel B
Hurdle Rate
Mean                                             12.2% (real) (h)                                                       14.8% (nominal)
                                                   =17.8% nom
                                                                                                                              1
Median                                               10.0%(i)                                                                 5.0%
Standard deviation                                   ~5.6%(k)                                                                 5.0%
Use CAPM                                                                81%(l)            74%
Use WACC                                                                85%(m)                                               71.8%




                                                                        29
Notes to Table I:
(a)
      Combines the survey categories “manufacturing” and “high-tech”; excludes “energy” (see footnote c below) which is reported in the survey
      category “transportation/energy”.
(b)
      Including “energy”; SIC codes 46, 49 (5540 and 5541).
(c)
      Excluding radio/TV and utilities providing gas, electricity, and water supply (SIC codes 4830, 4941).
(d)
      Only SIC code 70 (hotels, other lodging places).
(e)
      160 respondents identified their firms. The questionnaire was sent to each CEO in the 1990 Fortune 1,000 list.
(f)
      Firms that were selected by their peers for best financial management practices according to Business International Corporation (1992),
      “Creating World-Class Financial Management: Strategies of 50 Leading Companies,” Research Report 1-110, New York, NY, 7-8. From the
      50 companies, 18 with headquarters outside the US were excluded, 5 declined to participate.
(g)
      Questionnaires were sent by mail to each CFO in the 1998 Fortune 500 list and faxed out to 4,400 Financial Executives International (FEI)
      member firms. The raw data and a detailed description of the dataset are available on Campbell R. Harvey’s website.
(h)
      66.2% of the respondents report nominal rates and the authors convert these to real rates using a long-term expected inflation rate of 5%.
(i)
      Page 46: 1/3 of all firms use <10% and the most common rate, used by 1/5 of the firms, is 10%.
(k)
      This is an approximation based on the midpoints of the categories and the frequencies shown in Figure 2 (page 46).
(l)
      An additional 4% use sometimes WACC, only 4% answered no (2 firms did not answer this question). 89% use some form of cost of capital as
      their discount rate (an additional 7% sometimes).
(m)
      An additional 4% use a modified version of CAPM.




                                                                        30
Table II: Firm characteristics of surveyed firms.
The mean and median firm characteristics are tabulated for the 93 responding firms for which we can
match with Compustat data in 2003 and for the 3,832 non-responding firms in Compustat. We exclude
utilities, radio/TV broadcasting, cable, and other pay TV services (4840-4999), finance and insurance
companies (SIC codes 6000-6499, 6700-6799), and health/education/social services, and museums
(7200+). Book value of assets is Compustat item AT. Market value of assets is defined as book value of
liabilities (LT) plus market value of assets, which is the sum of preferred stock (PSTK) and market value
of common equity (PRCC_F × CSHO). Current ratio is current assets divided by current liabilities (ACT /
LCT), total debt is the sum of debt in current liabilities plus long-term debt (DLC + DLTT), and return on
book equity is the ratio between net income and book equity (NI / CEQ). For the characteristics that are
expressed as fractions of book assets, we trim the top and bottom 0.5% of all Compustat firms, and then
report the characteristics for responding survey firms and non-responding Compustat firms. The last two
columns show the p-values for the difference in mean t-test and Fishers’s exact test for differences in
medians under the null hypothesis of zero mean and median, respectively.

                                            Survey                Computstat            Difference tests
                                            N = 93                 N = 3,832               p-values
                                       Mean      Median         Mean     Median         Mean Median
Book assets                             4,293       524          2,556        158        0.23      0.00
Market assets                           8,821       680          4,168        279        0.02      0.00
Sales                                   4,142       373          2,392        144        0.15      0.01
Market/book assets                       2.37      1.69           3.09       1.60        0.21      0.46
Cash/book assets                         0.15      0.07           0.20       0.11        0.05      0.09
Sales/book assets                        0.66      0.47           0.70       0.51        0.27      0.75
Current ratio                            2.53      1.80           2.87       1.97        0.27      0.25
Total debt/book assets                   0.29      0.24           0.29       0.19        0.99      0.40
Capital expenditures/book assets         0.06      0.04           0.04       0.03        0.00      0.09
Operating income/book assets             0.05      0.07           0.02       0.05        0.03      0.01
Return on book equity                   -0.01      0.05           0.07       0.07        0.38      0.40




                                                   31
Table III: Hurdle rates and financial characteristics.
The table shows coefficients and standard errors (in brackets below) for bivariate regressions. The
dependent variable in all regressions is self-reported hurdle rate. All explanatory variables are defined as
in Figure 2 above, with the exception of the dividend payout ratio that is expressed in % to make the
coefficients comparable to Poterba and Sommers (1995). *** indicates significance at the 1% level, ** at
the 5% level, and * at the 10% level. Standard errors are below in brackets.

Characteristics                        Poterba and Summers (1995)              Jagannathan, Meier, and
                                                                                     Tarhan (2010)
                                        All firms         Manufacturing       All firms     Manufacturing
P/E ratio                               – 0.008             – 0.018            – 0.019          -0.018
                                         (0.031)             (0.036)            (0.020)         (0.029)
Dividend payout ratio (in %)            – 0.002             – 0.002            – 0.026         – 0.027
                                         (0.002)             (0.002)            (0.020)         (0.026)
Current ratio                             1.889***            1.891***          0.791***         0.776***
                                         (0.633)             (0.746)            (0.196)         (0.240)
% change in EPS (past 10 years)           0.062               0.072             -0.035          -0.221
                                         (0.051)             (0.055)            (0.219)         (0.321)
Total equity return (past 10 years)     – 0.052             – 0.039            – 0.168         – 0.663
                                         (0.052)             (0.057)            (0.433)         (0.745)
Historical beta                         – 0.102             – 0.067              0.754           2.048
                                         (1.411)             (2.038)            (0.834)         (1.375)
Fundamental beta                                                                 1.950           3.127*
                                                                                (1.249)         (1.884)
Equity market-to-book                   – 0.187              – 0.287             0.127           0.046
                                         (0.170)              (0.307)           (0.168)         (0.217)
Tobin’s q ratio                         – 0.043              – 0.336             1.229           1.384
                                         (0.622)              (0.777)           (0.715)         (1.054)
Stock turnover rate                       0.003                0.008             0.459           1.005*
                                         (0.007)              (0.008)           (0.381)         (0.560)




                                                     32
Table IV: Statistics on hurdle rates and industry affiliation.
Panel A shows summary statistics of self-reported hurdle rates for three samples (in percent). The hurdle
rates represent the nominal rate that the company has used for a typical project during the previous two
years. In the column “WACC equivalent sample” we drop firms do not use WACC or cost of
levered/unlevered equity (category “other”). We convert self-reported hurdle rates that represent the cost
of levered or unlevered equity are to their weighted average cost of capital (WACC) equivalents. This
conversion procedure is explained in Section III.C. For two out of the 17 firms that use either cost of
equity or unlevered cost of equity we cannot match the debt-equity ratio from Compustat to calculate the
WACC equivalent. Therefore, we report the 101 WACC equivalent hurdle rates. The last column shows
the sample statistics for WACC equivalent hurdle rates for which we can match beta from Barra and
information from CRSP/Compustat. Panel B tabulates the fractions of firms in each industry.

Panel A
Hurdle rate                             All              Category           WACC           Sample matched
                                    respondents           “other”          equivalent       with Barra and
                                                                            sample         CRSP/Compustat
Mean                                    14.8               17.6                14.1              14.5
Median                                  15.0               15.0                14.0              14.9
Minimum                                  5.0                9.0                 5.0               7.0
Maximum                                 40.0               40.0                30.0              30.0
Std. dev.                                5.3                6.4                 4.9               4.3
25th percentile                         12.0               12.0                10.8              12.0
75th percentile                         16.0               22.5                15.0              16.0
Skewness                                 1.4                0.7                 1.7               1.0
Kurtosis                                 6.7                2.2                 9.6               4.6
N                                       119                 18                 101                73

Panel B
Industry                                All              Category           WACC           Sample matched
                                    respondents           “other”          equivalent       with Barra and
                                                                            sample         CRSP/Compustat
Mining, construction                    10.7                28.6                8.3               8.1
Manufacturing                           66.0                50.0               67.9              66.2
Transport, communication                10.7                14.3               10.7              12.2
Wholesale and retail trade              11.6                 0.0               11.9              12.2
Services                                 1.0                 7.1                1.2               1.3


Panel C
Industry                               N          Mean        Median      Standard       Min          Max
                                                                          deviation
Mining, construction                    6           13.1           12.5      3.8           9.0         20.0
Manufacturing                          48           15.2           15.0      4.3           7.0         30.0
Transport, communication                9           12.4           12.0      2.2           9.0         15.0
Wholesale and retail trade              9           14.2           15.0      2.2           8.5         16.0
Services                                1           14.0           14.0      -            14.0         14.0


                                                   33
Table V: Model to explain hurdle rates.
The dependent variable in all models is hurdle rate (WACC equivalent). The values for the equity
premium and SMB and HML show implied premia from the model estimation. Beta is the fundamental
Barra beta. Debt-to-assets is total debt (Compustat items DLC + DLTT) divided by market value of
assets, which is book value of total liabilities and preferred stock plus shares of common stock
outstanding times price (LT + PSTK + PRCC_F × CSHO). Cash/assets is CHE to market value of assets,
industry return is the average monthly return of the firms in the same 2-digit SIC industry over the past 5
years, and the industry R-square is the average R-square from the index model of firms in the same 2-
digit SIC industry (using 5 years of monthly returns and the S&P 500 as the index). Sales
growth/employee ([(SALEt – SALEt-1)/SALE t-1]/EMP is a categorical variable where firms are assigned
to 1 if the value is lower than mean – 2 standard deviations across all firms; the next category is from
mean – 2 std. dev. to mean – 1.5 std. dev., for which we assign 2, etc. For values larger than mean + 2
std.dev. we assign 10. Financial health (Altman’s Z-score) is a categorical variable which is 1 if z-score
< 1.81 (financially unhealthy), 2 if z-score ≥ 1.81 and < 3 (neutral), and 3 if ≥ 3 (financially very healthy
firms).

                                 Nonlinear model                            Linear model
                               (1)               (2)                    (3)               (4)
                              CAPM          Fama-French               WACC             WACC
                                           3-factor model           components      components and
                                                                                     Fama-French
                                                                                        factors
 Intercept                     0.014               0.034               0.062*            0.074*
                              (0.022)             (0.023)             (0.038)          (0.038)
 Equity premium                0.038***            0.028**
                              (0.011)             (0.012)
 SMB                                               0.004                                   0.010
                                                  (0.008)                                 (0.006)
 HML                                              -0.012***                               -0.012***
                                                  (0.005)                                 (0.004)
 Beta                                                                  0.027**             0.020*
                                                                      (0.010)             (0.010)
 Debt-to-assets                                                        0.008               0.015
                                                                      (0.025)             (0.023)
 Cost of debt                                                         -0.172              -0.056
                                                                      (0.360)             (0.349)
 Cash/assets                   0.119***            0.098***            0.126***            0.096***
                              (0.037)             (0.037)             (0.039)             (0.038)
 Industry return               0.054               0.052               0.071               0.055
                              (0.042)             (0.041)             (0.046)             (0.044)
 Industry R-square            -0.374***           -0.398***           -0.361***           -0.406***
                              (0.097)             (0.095)             (0.105)             (0.100)
 Sales                         0.008***            0.007***            0.008***            0.007***
 growth/employee              (0.002)             (0.002)             (0.002)             (0.002)
 Financial health              0.007               0.010**             0.009               0.012*
                              (0.005)             (0.005)             (0.006)             (0.006)
 Adjusted R2                   0.452               0.494               0.410               0.482


                                                     34
Table VI: Separating WACC and the explanatory variables for hurdle premium.
The dependent variable is hurdle rate (WACC equivalent). Variable definitions are the same as in Table V.

                                       Nonlinear model                                                      Linear model
                                  (5)                    (6)                     (7)                (8)                   (9)
                                 CAPM              Fama-French                Only beta           WACC               Model without
                                                   3-factor model                               components              WACC
 Intercept                    0.063***             0.077***                  0.124***          0.158***              0.079***
                             (0.011)              (0.038)                   (0.012            (0.024)               (0.024)
 Equity premium               0.047***             0.031**
                             (0.011)              (0.014)
 SMB                                               0.009
                                                  (0.008)
 HML                                              -0.014**
                                                  (0.006)
 Beta                                                                        0.020*            0.026**
                                                                            (0.011)           (0.011)
 Debt-to-assets                                                                               -0.035
                                                                                              (0.025)
 Cost of debt                                                                                 -0.052
                                                                                              (0.410)
 Cash/assets                                                                                                         0.158***
                                                                                                                    (0.038)
 Industry return                                                                                                     0.055
                                                                                                                    (0.045)
 Industry R-square                                                                                                  -0.284***
                                                                                                                    (0.100)
 Sales growth/employee                                                                                               0.008***
                                                                                                                    (0.003)
 Financial health                                                                                                    0.006
                                                                                                                    (0.005)
 Adjusted R2                  0.114                0.165                    0.030              0.094                 0.371




                                                                       35
Figure 1: Adoption of DCF methods, WACC, CAPM, and company-wide hurdle rates over time.
The surveys on capital budgeting practices of U.S. firms are listed in chronological order below the horizontal time axis. The scatter plot
summarizes their findings regarding the percentage of firms that: (i) Use discounted cash flow (DCF) methods, including net present value (NPV),
adjusted present value (APV), internal rate of return (IRR), and the profitability index (PI); (ii) Use the weighted average cost of capital (WACC)
to discount cash flows; (iii) Employ the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) to compute cost of equity; and (iv) Use a company-wide hurdle rate.

                                     DCF methods                             WACC                                                      CAPM                                                  Company-wide hurdle rate
   100%



    80%



    60%



    40%



    20%



     0%
       1960                   1965           1970                   1975                      1980                                                   1985    1990                                                 1995                                                           2000                                                          2005
                                                             - Schall et al. (1978)


                                                                                               - Kim and Farragher (1981)




                                                                                                                                                              - Poterba and Summers (1995)

                                                                                                                                                                                               - Bierman (1993)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   - Trahan and Gitman (1995)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    - Graham and Harvey (2001)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 - Jagannathan et al. (2010)
                                                             - Brigham (1975)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                - Gitman and Vandenberg (2000)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                - Bruner et al. (1998)
                                                                                                                               - Klammer and Walker (1984)
                                                                                               - Gitman and Mercurio (1982)


                                                                                                                               - Moore and Reichert (1983)
                                                             - Petty and Bowlin (1976)
                                          - Fremgen (1973)
                                          - Klammer (1972)
            - Istvan (1961)




                                                                Petry (1975)


                                                                Gitman and Forrester (1977)
                                             Mao (1970)




                                                                 Petty et al. (1975)




                                                                                                                              36
Figure 2: Hurdle rates and firm characteristics.
Kernel-weighted local polynomial regressions of hurdle rate on various firm characteristics. For the local
mean smoothing we apply the Epanechnikov kernel function with a rule-of-thumb bandwidth estimator
(the bandwidth is shown below the graphs). The characteristics are P/E ratio (Compustat items
PRCC_F/EPSPX), dividend ratio (DVC/IBAD), current ratio (ACT/LCT), percentage change in earnings
per share ([EPSPXt – EPSPXt-10] / EPSPXt-10), total past equity return                  over 10 years
([PRCC_Ft/CUMADJt) – PRCC_Ft-10/CUMADJ t-10] / [ PRCC_Ft-10/CUMADJ t-10]), historical beta
(regressing five years of monthly total stock returns on stock market returns), fundamental beta from
Barra, market-to-book equity ratio ([CSHO × PRCC_F] / CEQ), Tobin’s q ([AT + CSHO × PRCC_F –
CEQ – TXDB] / [0.9 × AT + 0.1 × MKVAL]), and stock turnover rate (SHSTRD/CSHOQ). The footnote
below indicates outliers that have been removed from the graphs.



A: Price-earnings ratio                                                                               B: Dividend payout ratio
        .4




                                                                                                        .4
                                                                                                        .3
        .3
   Hurdle rate




                                                                                                  Hurdle rate
                                                                                                      .2
  .2




                                                                                                        .1
        .1




                                                                                                        0




                 -100                     -50                      0              50   100                      -.5                       0                    .5               1       1.5
                                                               P/E ratio                                                                              Dividend payout ratio
                 kernel = epanechnikov, degree = 0, bandwidth = 10.74                                           kernel = epanechnikov, degree = 0, bandwidth = .31




C: Current ratio                                                                                      D: Percentage change in EPS
        .4




                                                                                                        .4
        .3




                                                                                                        .3
  Hurdle rate




                                                                                                  Hurdle rate
      .2




                                                                                                      .2
        .1




                                                                                                        .1
        0




                                                                                                        0




                 0                                 5                         10        15                       -15                -10                -5               0            5   10
                                                             Current ratio                                                                       Change in earnings 1993-2003
                 kernel = epanechnikov, degree = 0, bandwidth = 1.16                                            kernel = epanechnikov, degree = 0, bandwidth = 2.71




                                                                                             37
E: Total equity return                                                                                   F: Historical beta
        .4




                                                                                                           .4
                                                                                                           .3
        .3
   Hurdle rate




                                                                                                     Hurdle rate
                                                                                                         .2
  .2




                                                                                                           .1
        .1




                                                                                                           0
                 -2                  0                   2               4            6   8                            0                         1                    2              3   4
                                                   Total stock return 1993-2003                                                                               Historical beta
                 kernel = epanechnikov, degree = 0, bandwidth = .75                                                kernel = epanechnikov, degree = 0, bandwidth = .52




G: Fundamental beta                                                                                      H: Market-to-book ratio
        .4




                                                                                                           .4
        .3




                                                                                                           .3
  Hurdle rate




                                                                                                     Hurdle rate
      .2




                                                                                                         .2
        .1




                                                                                                           .1
        0




                                                                                                           0




                 0                   .5                 1              1.5            2   2.5                      0                         5                   10                 15   20
                                                      Barra fundamental beta                                                                          Equity market-to-book ratio
                 kernel = epanechnikov, degree = 0, bandwidth = .26                                                kernel = epanechnikov, degree = 0, bandwidth = 1.97




I: Tobin’s q                                                                                             J: Stock turnover rate
        .4




                                                                                                           .4
        .3




                                                                                                           .3
  Hurdle rate




                                                                                                     Hurdle rate
      .2




                                                                                                         .2
        .1




                                                                                                           .1
        0




                                                                                                           0




                 0                         2                      4               6       8                        0                         2                       4              6    8
                                                               Tobin's q                                                                                      Stock turnover
                 bandwidth = .8                                                                                    bandwidth = .8




                                                                                                38
Notes to Figure II:
The following observations in each Panel have been excluded for the local polynomial fitting and are not
shown in the graph:
A: (hurdle rate 0.12, P/E ratio 467) and (0.14, 479). Additionally, the observation with hurdle rate = 0.40
shown in the graph is excluded when fitting the curve.
B: (hurdle rate 0.15, dividend payout ratio -2.8).
C: (hurdle rate 0.20, current ratio 25.2). Additionally, the observation (0.40, 9.7) is shown in the graph but
excluded when fitting the curve.
E: (hurdle rate 0.15 and total equity return 11.7) and (0.09, 82.5).
H: Negative ratios and ratios larger than 20: (WACC equivalent hurdle rate 0.20 and equity market-to-
   book ratio 25.6) and (0.14, -14.6).




                                                     39
Figure 3: What self-reported hurdle rate represents.
A total of 117 firms responded to the question what the firm’s hurdle rate represents (Panel A). The
eleven firms that explicitly indicate that they add a premium to the weighted average cost of capital
(WACC) to assess their hurdle rate are included in the category WACC. Panel B shows summary
statistics of self-reported hurdle rates. The hurdle rates represent the nominal rate that the company has
used for a typical project during the previous two years. Self-reported hurdle rates that represent the cost
of levered or unlevered equity are converted to their weighted average cost of capital (WACC)
equivalents (see Appendix A for details) and firms in the “other” category are dropped from the sample.
We report the hurdle rates for the remaining 101 firms.



Panel A


                           WACC


          Cost of levered equity


      Cost of unlevered equity


                            Other

                                    0     20      40       60          80
                                                % of firms


Panel B

                           Hurdle rate (WACC equivalent)
                  30
              % of firms
            10    0   20




                           .05    .1      .15    .2    .25        .3
                             Hurdle rate (in %, nominal)




                                                             40
Figure 4: Comparison of the predictions of the full model with self-reported hurdle rates.
Panel A compares predicted hurdle rate from the full model on the horizontal axis with self-reported
hurdle rates shown on the vertical axis. Panels B and C decompose the predicted values in two
components: Predicted WACC against the WACC = hurdle rate – predicted premium and predicted
premium against premium = hurdle rate – computed WACC. The solid line in all three panels is the 45-
degree line.

Panel A
                 .3
                 .2
   Hurdle rate
                 .1
                 0




                      0                         .1                          .2                                  .3
                                              Predicted hurlde rate (full model)



Panel B                                                                         Panel C
    .15




                                                                                        .2
                                                                                        .15
    .1




                                                                                 Hurdle premium
  WACC
  .05




                                                                                       .1
                                                                                        .05
    0
    -.05




                                                                                        0




                          0               .05               .1       .15                          0     .05                .1               .15   .2
                              Predicted WACC (full model)                                             Predicted hurlde premium (full model)




                                                                           41
Figure 5: Relationship between hurdle rates and WACC.

The two scatter plots show predicted hurdle rates when using WACC plus a constant (Model 1 in Table
VI). Panel A uses the implied equity premium of 3.8% and Panel B assumes an equity premium of 6.6%
based on a historical average from Ibboston (2004).

Panel A                                                                Panel B
                .3




                                                                       .3
                .2




                                                                       .2
  Hurdle rate




                                                         Hurdle rate
                .1




                                                                       .1
                0




                                                                       0
                     0   .1          .2        .3                           0    .1          .2   .3
                              WACC                                                    WACC




                                                    42
