                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                A GLOBAL VIEW OF PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH IN CHINA

                                          Chang-Tai Hsieh
                                            Ralph Ossa

                                        Working Paper 16778
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16778


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2011




Mu-Jeung Yang and Seyed Ali Madanizadeh provided excellent research assistance. We thank Robert
Feenstra, Gordon Hanson, and John Romalis for help with the data used in an earlier version. We also
thank Sam Kortum, Andres Rodriguez-Clare, and participants in several conferences and seminars
for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Chang-Tai Hsieh and Ralph Ossa. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
A Global View of Productivity Growth in China
Chang-Tai Hsieh and Ralph Ossa
NBER Working Paper No. 16778
February 2011, Revised July 2015
JEL No. F1,F4,O4

                                             ABSTRACT

How does a country's productivity growth a¤ect worldwide real incomes through international trade?
In this paper, we take this classic question to the data by measuring the spillover e¤ects of China's
productivity growth. Our framework features traditional terms-of-trade e¤ects and new trade home
market e¤ects as suggested by the theoretical literature and works from a reference point which perfectly
matches industry-level trade. Focusing on the years 1995 to 2007, we find that the spillover e¤ects
of China's productivity growth are small causing the real incomes of China's trading partners to increase
by only 0.1 percent on average.


Chang-Tai Hsieh
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S Woodlawn Ave
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
chsieh@chicagoBooth.edu

Ralph Ossa
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
ralph.ossa@chicagobooth.edu
1        Introduction

One of the classic propositions of international economics is that a country’s productivity

growth can not only bene…t but also harm its trading partners. In traditional models of inter-

industry trade based on comparative advantage, productivity shocks transmit only through

terms-of-trade e¤ects. They tend to bene…t the trading partners if productivity growth is

biased towards export-oriented industries and harm the trading partners otherwise (Hicks,

1953). In newer models of intra-industry trade based on product di¤erentiation, productivity

shocks also transmit through home market e¤ects. They tend to bene…t the trading partners

if productivity growth is biased towards industries with a relatively high trade elasticity and

harm the trading partners otherwise (Venables, 1987).

        For example, if China’s productivity growth was biased towards its textile industry, this

would cause an improvement in the US terms-of-trade because this is one of China’s export-

oriented industries. In particular, US consumers would then be able to purchase textiles at

lower prices which would make US exports more valuable relative to US imports. Similarly, if

China’s productivity growth was biased towards its paper industry, this would imply a favor-

able home market e¤ect in the US because this is one of the high trade elasticity industries.

In particular, there would be exit out of the US paper industry allowing entry into other

lower trade elasticity industries which would reduce the US price index because entry is more

bene…cial in lower trade elasticity industries.1

        In this paper, we take this proposition to the data by measuring the global spillover e¤ects

of China’s productivity growth. We focus on the years 1995-2007, the 14 largest countries,

and a residual Rest of the World. Our main …nding is that the spillover e¤ects of China’s
    1
    As we will see later, "Textiles and leather" is China’s most export-oriented industry and "Pulp, paper,
printing and publishing" is the highest trade elasticity industry. In a Krugman (1980) model, the trade
elasticity would be the elasticity of substitution between varieties. Entry is then more bene…cial in lower trade
elasticity industries because their varieties are more di¤erentiated implying larger utility gains. In a Melitz
(2003) model in which …rm productivities are Pareto distributed, the trade elasticity would be the shape
parameter of the Pareto distribution. Entry is then more bene…cial in lower trade elasticity industries because
their …rm productivities are more dispersed implying stronger selection e¤ects. We elaborate further on these
e¤ects later on.




                                                       2
productivity growth are small causing the real incomes of China’s trading partners to increase

by only 0.1 percent on average with the e¤ects ranging between -0.1 percent for Germany and

0.9 percent for Korea. One reason is that imports from China still only account for a small

share of overall expenditure despite its rising importance to the world economy. Another

reason is that the terms-of-trade and home market e¤ects turn out to have an o¤setting

character given the pattern of China’s productivity growth.

      Our analysis is based on a multi-country multi-industry general equilibrium model of

international trade featuring inter-industry trade as in Ricardo (1817), intra-industry trade

as in Krugman (1980), and …rm heterogeneity as in Melitz (2003). On the theoretical side, it

features terms-of-trade e¤ects as well as home market e¤ects which seems desirable in light

of the forecited theoretical results. On the empirical side, it implies an industry-level gravity

structure which allows us to measure the spillover e¤ects of China’s productivity growth

from a reference point which perfectly matches worldwide industry-level trade. The …rm-

level dimension is not essential to account for terms-of-trade and home market e¤ects, but is

important to correct for Melitz (2003) selection e¤ects when estimating China’s productivity

growth.

      Despite the considerable attention our subject received in the theoretical literature, there

is relatively little related empirical work. Our paper is preceded mainly by Eaton and Ko-

rtum (2002) who illustrate their seminal framework by quantifying the spillover e¤ects of

hypothetical US and German productivity shocks on other OECD countries. Eaton and Kor-

tum’s framework features only terms-of-trade e¤ects but no home market e¤ects and therefore

ignores one of the channels through which productivity shocks transmit. Also, it predicts full

specialization according to comparative advantage but allows only for aggregate productivity

shocks so that productivity growth is always export-biased in e¤ect.2

      Having said this, additional work has emerged since the …rst draft of our paper. Probably

most closely related is the work by Di Giovanni et al (2014) who also consider the welfare
  2
    Fieler (2011) provides a similar exercise in an Eaton and Kortum (2002) model with non-homothetic
preferences.


                                                 3
e¤ects of China’s productivity growth. While our analysis has an ex post nature isolating

the spillover e¤ects of actual productivity shocks, Di Giovanni et al (2014) take an ex ante

approach simulating the spillover e¤ects of hypothetical growth scenarios. Our exercise is also

in a similar spirit as the analysis by Levchenko and Zhang (2015) who measure the evolution

of sectoral productivities in the world economy over multiple decades. Their main point is

that there has been productivity convergence in the sense that productivity grew faster in

sectors that were less productive initially.

    In terms of its question, our paper is also related to the work of Autor er al (2013) which

investigates the local labor market consequences of Chinese import competition in the US.

Their main …nding is that local labor markets which are more exposed to Chinese import

competition also have higher unemployment, lower labor market participation, and reduced

wages. The same is true for the work of Bloom et al (2015) which examines the impact of

Chinese import competition on technical change in the EU. Their main punchline is that

Chinese import competition lead to increased technical change within …rms and reallocated

employment between …rms towards more technologically advanced …rms.

    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 lays out the theoretical

framework: it describes the basic setup, characterizes the equilibrium for given productivities,

shows how to calculate the general equilibrium e¤ects of productivity shocks, demonstrates

how to isolate the welfare e¤ects of productivity shocks, and introduces a number of extensions

to the basic setup. Section 3 turns to the empirical application: it goes over the data, describes

the estimation of the model parameters, discusses the estimation of China’s productivity

growth, explains the procedure used to calculate the spillover e¤ects of China’s productivity

growth, and reports the empirical results.3
    3
      In the interest of brevity, derivations are kept to a minimum in the main text. A detailed technical appendix
is available upon request.




                                                        4
2     Theoretical framework

2.1   Basic setup

Our framework is based on a multi-industry extension of the Melitz (2003) model used by

Arkolakis et al (2012). There are  countries and  industries. Each industry provides

consumers with a continuum of di¤erentiated varieties. Preferences over these varieties are

summarized by the following utility functions

                                                                                               
                                    Z
                                                                                         !    ¬ 1 
                                  Y X                                ¬ 1
                          =                             (    )         d                                              (1)
                                  =1   =1   0


where  is the quantity of an industry  variety from country  consumed in country ,

 is the number of industry  varieties from country  available in country ,                                            1 is

the elasticity of substitution between industry  varieties, and                                is the fraction of country

 income spent on industry  varieties.

    Firms are technologically heterogeneous which is captured by the following production
                                                              units of labor in country  to
process. Entrants into industry  of country  have to hire 
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                         is a
draw their productivities  from a Pareto distribution  () = 1 ¬                                             , where 

…xed cost of entry,  is the Pareto location parameter, and                           is the Pareto shape parameter.
                                                                                                                              
Entrants into industry  of country  wishing to sell to country  further need to hire                                         

units of labor in country  and  units of labor in country  to deliver  units of output to

country , where           1 is an iceberg trade barrier and  is a …xed cost of serving market
                                                              and the fraction of entrants
. Both the number of entrants into industry  of country  
                       
selling to country      
                            are endogenous.

    Given only these basics, we can already anticipate some of the roles the model’s traditional

and new trade elements will play. In particular, the model will feature inter-industry trade

as in Ricardo (1817) since the productivity distributions vary by country and industry. Also,

there will be intra-industry trade as in Krugman (1980) since goods are di¤erentiated and



                                                           5
consumers value variety. We will model an industry’s productivity growth as an increase in

the Pareto location parameter  which shifts the entire distribution of possible productivity

draws to the right. Since this will lead to changes in the number of entrants, productivity

growth will not only have terms-of-trade e¤ects but also home market e¤ects which would not

arise in Eaton and Kortum (2002) type environments.


2.2      Equilibrium for given productivities

Utility maximization implies that …rms in industry  of country  face demands

                                                                            ¬
                                                                             
                                                                                 

                                                                   =    1¬                                                       (2)
                                                                           

where  is the delivered price of an industry  variety,  the ideal price index of all industry

 varieties,  the wage rate, and  the number of consumers or workers.

     Pro…t maximization requires that …rms in industry  of country  whose productivity

draws exceed  charge
                                                                                           
                                                                   =                                                                    (3)
                                                                             ¬1            
                                                            1
                                          
where  =                
                           ¬1         (            )   ¬ 1   denotes the productivity cuto¤ above which revenues are
                                               

su¢ ciently high to justify incurring the …xed costs of serving market .
                                                      P R                                                                    1
   As usual, the ideal price index is given by  = (  =1 0    (  )1¬                                     
                                                                                                                       d    ) 1¬      . With

the help of equation (3), it can be rewritten as


                                                                  
                                                                                                         ! 1¬1 
                                                                  X              ¬              1¬   
                                                  =                            e 
                                                                                                                                   (4)
                                                                  =1

                           R1                                                 1
      e  = (
where                                 ¬1    (j   ))              ¬ 1        denotes the productivity of the representa-
                            

                                                                                   e  =
tive …rm in industry  of country  selling to country  which can be simpli…ed to 
                    1
(       
     ¬  +1
               )   ¬ 1    by imposing the Pareto assumption.



                                                                               6
       Free entry drives expected pro…ts down to zero so that

                                 
                                 X          ¬           ¬                                      
                                                               j     =                          (5)
                                 =1



where (   ) = (  )            
                                                is the probability that an entrant into industry  of country
                                    

                                                                        ¬1
 sells to country  and (                j     ) =        ¬  +1
                                                                                  are the expected operating pro…ts

of an entrant into industry  of country  from selling to country  conditional on selling to

country .4

       Finally, labor market clearing ensures

                                                              
                                                              X
                                                                                     
                                                       =          (      + 1)                                  (6)
                                                              =1

               P      (    +1)(  ¬1)
where           =1                        is the fraction of country  workers hired by country  entrants
                                                                                             
to cover their …xed costs of entry as well as their variable costs of production and (  +1)

captures the expected number of workers required by entrants into industry  of country  to

cover their …xed costs of entry as well as their variable costs of production.

       Upon noticing that  = (  )  
                                              , equations (3) - (5) can be combined to
                                                



                                                                     ¬ ¬ 1                 ¬   
                                                                                    
                                        X                 ( )      ¬ 1
                                                                                    
                               
                               =                                                                              (7)
                          ¬1                   P      
                                                                                ¬ ¬ 1
                                                                                              
                                                                                                      ¬   
                                                   =1  ( )
                                        =1                                       ¬ 1
                                                                                             


Together with condition (6), this represents a system of N+NS equations in the N+NS un-
                which can be solved up to a numeraire. An obvious problem, however,
knowns  and 

is that this system depends on a large set of unknown parameters which are all di¢ cult to

estimate empirically.
   4
    While imposing free entry is a standard assumption in the literature, it is of course abstracting from many
features of real-world …rm dynamics, such as that …rms start out small, mostly fail, and those that do not fail
grow fast.




                                                                     7
2.3    General equilibrium e¤ects of productivity shocks

We avoid this problem by computing the general equilibrium e¤ects of productivity shocks

using a method inspired by Dekle et al (2007). In particular, conditions (6) and (7) can be

written in changes as
                                                             
                                                             X
                                                      1=                 c
                                                                                                                (8)
                                                             =1

                                                                              ¬     
                                                                      
                                                X                   
                                                                       
                                      b =
                                                                                               b
                                                                                                                    (9)
                                                      P             c           
                                                                                        ¬   
                                                =1      =1                
                                                                                  

                                                                                                                
where a hat denotes the ratio between the counterfactual and factual value,                                        ,
                                                                                                               =1 
                                        (  ¬ 1)(  +1)
                               =1                    
            ,                         
                                              (  ¬ 1)(  +1)        , and  denotes the factual value of industry
        =1                 =1      =1                  
                                                      
 trade from country  to country .

                                                                                   b
   Equations (8) and (9) represent a system of N+NS equations in the N+NS unknowns 
    c . Crucially, their coe¢ cients depend on
and                                                                   ,    ,   and observable trade ‡ows only so that
      

the full general equilibrium response to productivity shocks can be determined without further

information on any of the remaining model parameters. Notice that this procedure ensures

that the general equilibrium e¤ects are calculated from a reference point which perfectly

matches industry-level trade. Essentially, it imposes a restriction on the set of unknown

parameters f                   
                            g    such that the predicted  perfectly match the observed

 for given values of          and     .

   To provide a sense of the nature of these general equilibrium adjustments, Table 1 reports

the e¤ects of a hypothetical productivity shock in a simple example economy consisting of

two countries (China and the US) and two industries (1 and 2). Productivity is assumed to

grow by 10 percent in industry 1 of China and trade ‡ows are taken to be fully symmetric

as detailed in the note to Table 1. As can be seen, the productivity growth in industry 1 of

China is predicted to cause an increase in the relative wage of China as well as entry into

industry 1 of China, exit out of industry 1 of the US, exit out of industry 2 of China, and



                                                                8
entry into industry 2 of the US.

       Intuitively, expected pro…ts from entering into industry 1 become positive in China and

negative in the US. As a result, there is entry into industry 1 of China bidding up wages

so that there is also exit out of industry 2. Also, there is exit out of industry 1 of the US

depressing wages so that there is also entry into industry 2. The pattern of entry and exit

can also be understood in terms of two basic equilibrium constraints. First, labor market

clearing requires that entry into one industry leads to exit out of the other industry in the

same country. Second, constant expenditure shares imply that entry into one industry leads

to exit out of the same industry in the other country.


2.4      Welfare e¤ects of productivity shocks

Given these general equilibrium adjustments of productivity shocks, the implied welfare e¤ects

can be computed relatively straightforwardly. Changes in welfare are given by changes in real

labor income which are changes in nominal labor income de‡ated by changes in the ideal
                                  
aggregate price index: b =          .   Given the Cobb-Douglas structure of aggregate preferences,
                                  
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
this can be rewritten in terms of changes in the ideal industry price indices as b =              (  )    .
                                                                                                   =1

The trick is now to express changes in the ideal industry price indices as functions of changes

in wages and entry only. This can be accomplished by rewriting equation (4) in changes after

substituting the relationship  = (  )  
                                                  and the de…nitions of            e  which
                                                                              and 
                                         
               P                      1
                        c  ¬  )¬  . As a result, changes in welfare can then be computed
yields b = ( 
                =1   (  ) 

from5
                                                
                                                                                    !   

                                          Q
                                               X                    b                

                                b =                 
                                                                b         c
                                                                               
                                                                                                           (10)
                                          =1                        b
                                                                     
                                                =1

       To understand precisely how productivity shocks a¤ect welfare, it is useful to begin by con-

trasting two linear approximations of the growth rates of industry price indices.6 The …rst fol-
                                                                                                 
   5                                                                                                 
                                                                                                      
     Notice that no further parameter estimates are required for this computation since  =               .
                                                                                                      
   6
     All approximations discussed in this section are also …rst-order derivatives of the equilibrium conditions.
As a result, they hold exactly for in…nitesimal changes.




                                                            9
lows from equation (4) and reveals that changes in industry price indices are expenditure share

weighted averages of changes in average prices and elasticity of substitution adjusted changes
                                                       P               
                                                                                             
in available variety as one intuitively expects:      =1  (¬       +   ¬ 1¬1   ).
                                                                                        

The second follows from the expression for b given above and shows that productivity shocks

ultimately a¤ect industry price indices either directly or indirectly through changes in wages or
              P                   1  
                                               
entry:       =1  (¬  +  ¬    ). The links between these two approximations
                                                   

are given by two equations which can be derived using the relationship  = (  )  
                                                                                          
                                                                                                         

                               e  .
and the de…nitions of  and 
                         P              
   The …rst link is that   =1             0 which implies that changes in available variety

have no net e¤ect on industry price indices so that the last term out of the …rst approximation

simply drops out. The basic intuition for this result can be understood by considering the

following variety e¤ects of China’s productivity growth on the US economy. On the one

hand, China’s productivity growth implies that more Chinese varieties become available to

US consumers as additional Chinese …rms start exporting to the US. On the other hand,

China’s productivity growth means that fewer US varieties remain available to US consumers

since some US …rms are forced to shut down. The price index implications of these two

e¤ects are exactly o¤setting so that changes in the overall number of varieties available to US

consumers can be ignored.
                              P            
                                                       P                1   P           
   The second link is that      =1    
                                                         =1     +     =1           which implies
                                                                                              

that only changes in average productivity induced either directly by changes in  or indirectly
                have a net e¤ect on  . A corollary is that the basic Melitz (2003) selection
by changes in                      

e¤ects also cancel which is not too surprising since they mirror the abovementioned variety

e¤ects. One the one hand, the fact that additional Chinese …rms start exporting to the US

means that the average productivity of Chinese …rms serving the US market grows at a slower

rate than China’s productivity since these additional …rms have below average productivity.

On the other hand, the fact that some US …rms are forced to shut down means that the

average productivity of US …rms serving the US market rises since the surviving …rms have


                                                        10
above average productivity.7

       The only Melitz (2003) selection e¤ects which continue to matter are the entry e¤ects

known from Bernard et al (2007). Their basic intuition can be understood by considering

how industry 1 of the US is a¤ected by productivity growth in industry 1 of China. The

resulting exit out of industry 1 of the US reduces competition in industry 1 of the US which

increases the industry 1 price index of the US by allowing some lower productivity …rms to

serve the US market. At the same time, the resulting entry into industry 1 of China increases

competition in industry 1 of the US which decreases the industry price index of the US by

forcing some lower productivity …rms out of the US market. Under a realistic parametrization

of industry expenditure shares, entry in the US has a stronger e¤ect on US competition than

entry in China so that the former e¤ect dominates.8

       Given this background on how productivity shocks a¤ect industry price indices, it is now

easy to see how productivity shocks a¤ect welfare. In particular, changes in welfare can be
                             P          
approximated as         ¬    =1   which can be rewritten by substituting the
                              P               
                                                            
                                                       1  
second approximation        =1  (¬  +  ¬    ) from above. The resulting
                                                                           

expression is just a linearized version of equation (10):

               X
              X 
                                                                        1         
                                      ¬            ¬         ¬             +             +             (11)
                                                                                 
              =1 =1


                        P P                                       
       The …rst term     =1     =1          ¬       ¬     ¬            is the traditional terms-

of-trade e¤ect emphasized by Hicks (1953). It captures the direct e¤ect changes in wages

and productivities have on the prices of the goods produced by country  relative to the
   7
      These …ndings are similar to the …ndings in Feenstra (2010) and relate to the discussion of whether allowing
for …rm heterogeneity increases the measured gains from trade. On the one hand, Arkolakis et al (2013) show
that allowing for …rm heterogeneity often does not change the measured gains from trade provided that the
model parameters are always recalibrated to match the observed trade elasticity. On the other hand, Melitz
and Redding (forthcoming) demonstrate that allowing for …rm heterogeneity usually increases the measured
gains from trade if the model parameters are kept unchanged.
    8                                                                                            1   
      This can also be seen from the third term in approximation             =1  (¬  +  ¬    ).
                                                                                                               


If the number of entrants rises by 10 percent in China and falls by 10 percent in the US, the US price index
typically rises because US consumers spend more on US goods than on Chinese goods. Of course, the precise
adjustments are determined by complex general equilibrium forces which can be hard to predict.


                                                       11
direct e¤ect changes in wages and productivities have on the prices of the goods consumed by

country . Country  bene…ts from an increase in the price of its production bundle relative

to the price of its consumption bundle since its exports then command more imports in world

markets.
                        P P                    
    The second term        =1    =1     
                                                      
                                                          is the new trade home market e¤ect in Venables

(1987). It captures the indirect e¤ect adjustments in entry and exit have on the aggregate price

index in country . Recall that entry into one industry of country  always comes along with

exit out of another industry in country . Recall also that entry into an industry of country 

typically reduces the price index of that industry in country . Hence, the counteracting entry

e¤ects give rise to counteracting industry price index e¤ects so that the sign of the aggregate

price index e¤ect is not immediately clear.
                   P P                  P                        
    The last term    =1  =1    =  =1                       is the e¤ect productivity shocks in

country  have on welfare in country  under autarky as follows straightforwardly from setting

 = 1 in equations (9) and (11). It simply says that a country’s welfare growth under

autarky is an expenditure share weighted average of that country’s industry-level productivity

growth as one intuitively expects. The previous two terms therefore capture the additional

e¤ects arising under trade relative to autarky and thereby identify the channels through which

productivity shocks transmit under trade.9

    To illustrate the key determinants of the signs of these spillover e¤ects, we now return to

our simple example economy introduced above. Table 2 reports the e¤ects of a hypothetical 10

percent productivity growth in industry 1 of China on US welfare for three di¤erent scenarios:

China is a net exporter in industry 1, China is a net importer in industry 1, and there is no

inter-industry trade. As one expects from the classic literature, the US experiences a terms-of-

trade gain if China’s productivity growth is biased towards China’s export-oriented industry

but a terms-of-trade loss if China’s productivity growth is biased towards China’s import-
   9
     Internationally, the terms-of-trade and home market e¤ects have a zero sum character. This can be seen
most clearly in the special case  =       and  = for all  since the worldwide average welfare e¤ect is
then completely independent of terms-of-trade
                                             and home market e¤ects.  Inparticular,  it can be shown that
                                                                             
equation (11) then implies  =               
                                                    
                                                           , where 
                                                                    
                                                                      =  
                                                                             
                                                                               
                                                                                  
                                                                                        .
                                                                                 




                                                             12
competing industry.

     One subtle di¤erence from the textbook analysis is that the terms-of-trade gain the US

experiences if China’s productivity growth is biased towards China’s export-oriented industry

exceeds the terms-of-trade loss it experiences if China’s productivity growth is biased towards

China’s import-competing industry. This is also re‡ected in the fact that the US experiences

a positive terms-of-trade e¤ect even if there is no inter-industry trade. This di¤erence is due

to the existence of Krugman (1980) type intra-industry trade. In a sense, productivity growth

always features an export-bias in a Krugman (1980) model since each country specializes in

a unique set of varieties.

     Table 3 returns to the case of fully symmetric trade ‡ows and illustrates the role played

by cross-industry di¤erences in          .   It again reports the e¤ects of a 10 percent productivity

growth in industry 1 of China on US welfare. As can be seen, the US experiences a positive

home market e¤ect if China’s productivity growth is biased towards the high                     industry and

a negative home market e¤ect if it is biased towards the low                   industry. The intuition is

that the        parameters govern the strengths of the counteracting industry price index e¤ects.

If      is low, there is a lot of variation in …rm productivity so that changes in the number of

entrants lead to large changes in average productivity.

     For example, if China’s productivity growth is biased towards the high                 industry, there

is exit out of the high        industry in the US which tends to increase the aggregate price index

in the US. At the same time, there is also entry into the low            industry in the US which tends

to decrease the aggregate price index in the US. However, the latter e¤ect tends to dominate

the former e¤ect since changes in the number of entrants induce larger changes in average

productivity in the low            industry. This is because …rm productivity is more dispersed in

the low         industry so that adding or dropping marginal …rms has a larger e¤ect on average

productivity in that industry.

     Overall, this discussion suggests two key determinants of the sign of the global spillover

e¤ects of China’s productivity growth: the correlation between China’s productivity growth


                                                      13
and China’s export-orientation, and the correlation between China’s productivity growth and

the Pareto shape parameters         which can alternatively be interpreted as trade elasticities

in this environment. Of course, the magnitude of the global spillover e¤ects of China’s pro-

ductivity growth also depends critically on the pattern and volume of international trade as

captured by the import shares            in equation (11).


2.5   Extensions

While we emphasize this baseline model throughout the paper, we also report results using an

extended model featuring multiple factors and input-output linkages which we explain in detail

in the appendix. This extended model is essentially a Ricardo-Heckscher-Ohlin-Krugman-

Melitz model with input-output linkages combining all main traditions in international trade

theory. The input-output linkages are modeled along the lines of Caliendo and Parro (2015)

and mirror national input-output accounts.

   We also include nontraded goods when estimating the extended model which we abstract

from in the baseline case. However, this does not involve any modeling changes since a

nontraded goods sector can simply be interpreted as a traded goods sector with prohibitively

high trade costs. Jointly abstracting from intermediate goods and non-traded goods actually

turns out to be a reasonable simpli…cation. This is because intermediate goods tend to magnify

the spillover e¤ects of productivity shocks while nontraded goods tend to dampen the spillover

e¤ects of productivity shocks.

   We also account for observed aggregate trade imbalances in the extended model by fol-

lowing the approach of Dekle et al (2007). In particular, we introduce exogenous interstate

transfers …nancing aggregate trade imbalances which we hold constant in all counterfactuals.

Notice that unlike most quantitative trade models, our baseline model already features ag-

gregate trade imbalances even if interstate transfers are not introduced. This is because we

assume that the …xed cost of exporting are paid in destination country labor which generates

international transfers of income.


                                                    14
         In practice, we always work with the extended model and simply consider the special case
                   
       = 1 and        = 1 for all  and  for all results involving the baseline model. As is discussed
                                                                                        
in the appendix,             is the share of value added in gross production and           is the labor share

in value added. However, we allow for interstate transfers throughout our analysis so that

we can always match all aggregate trade de…cits. As a result, even our baseline results are

actually calculated using a slight extension of the model presented in the main text.10



3         Empirical application

We now apply our framework to isolate and decompose the spillover e¤ects of China’s pro-

ductivity growth between 1995 and 2007. We focus on the world’s 14 largest economies and

a residual Rest of the World. When using our baseline model, we include 14 traded goods

sectors which comprise agriculture, mining, and manufacturing. When using our extended

model, we further include a nontraded goods sector which aggregates over all other remaining

industries of the economy. The goods made by these residual industries are actually not all

entirely nontraded so that our nontraded goods sector is really a traded goods sector with

little trade.

         To calculate results using our baseline model, we need the complete matrix of industry-

level trade ‡ows  , industry-level estimates of the elasticity parameters                       and   ,   and

industry-level estimates of China’s productivity growths b . To calculate results using our

extended model, we further need information on the shares of value added in gross production
 ,                                                          
        the coe¢ cients from the input-output tables         ,   and the shares of labor and capital in

value added             and     .   Our main data sources are China’s Annual Survey of Industrial
                               
    10
      When calculating our counterfactuals, we also relax the implicit assumption that the free entry condition
always binds in all countries and industries which results in the prediction of negative entry if zero pro…ts
are not compatible with positive production. Speci…cally, we do not immediately compute the counterfactuals
with the actual vector of productivity growths but instead take slowly increasing fractions of it, starting at
zero and progressing in …ve percentage point steps. Whenever the number of entrants is predicted to be less
                                                                           ^ 
than 1 percent of its original value in a particular country and industry,  
                                                                                 001, we replace the free entry
condition for that country and industry with the condition that there is no entry in that country and industry,
^ 
   
      = 0, thereby imposing a corner solution. This happens very rarely in practice.



                                                        15
Production and the World Input-Output Database.11


3.1        Aggregation procedure for 

Our data on international and internal trade ‡ows comes from the world input-output tables

included in the World Input-Output Database. The data originally has 35 industries which

we aggregate to 15 industries by combining "Agriculture, Hunting, Forestry, and Fishing"

and "Mining and Quarrying" into "Other Tradables", "Textiles and Textile Products" and

"Leather, Leather and Footwear" into "Textiles and Leather", and everything from "Elec-

tricity, Gas, and Water Supply" until "Private Households with Employed Persons" into

"Nontraded Goods".


3.2        Estimation procedure for                    and      


We estimate the demand elasticities                    using the theoretical prediction that industry wage

payments are proportional to industry revenues with the factor of proportionality being equal
          ¬1
to         
                .12 Instead of using wage payments, we use factor payments, that is the sum of

payments to capital and labor. Calculating factor payments involves the rental rate of capital

which we obtain by assuming that the sum of factor payments across all industries amounts
     2
to   3   of the sum of revenues across all industries. We make this assumption since it implies a

plausible aggregate pro…t share of 13 .

       We estimate the trade elasticities      using the estimates of          and the theoretical prediction
                                                                                      
that …rm sales follow a Pareto distribution with shape parameter                     ¬1
                                                                                           within industries. We

follow Eaton et al (2011) in restricting attention to exporters only and back out the shape

parameter of the …rm sales distribution from a regression of the logarithm of the …rm sales rank
  11
      The Annual Survey of Industrial Production is a census of all state-owned plants and all large private
plants collected by China’s National Bureau of Statistics. Additional details on this dataset can be found,
for example, in Hsieh and Klenow (2009). The World Input-Output Database is documented in Timmer et al
(forthcoming.)
   12
      Strictly speaking, the model predicts that variable industry wage payments are proportional to industry
revenues given the assumption that …xed costs are also incurred in terms of labor. We do not take this
assumption literally when taking the model to the data and treat all reported factor payments as variable
factor payments.


                                                            16
on the logarithm of …rm sales. For our estimation of               and   ,   we use data on wage payments,

capital stocks, and …rm sales from the Chinese Annual Survey of Industrial Production.13


3.3      Estimation procedure for b

Our estimation of China’s productivity growth proceeds in two steps. In the …rst step, we
                                                                                    b
                                                                                    e  .
estimate the productivity growth of the representative Chinese …rm in each industry 

In the second step, we calculate the fundamental Chinese productivity growth b in each
              b
              e  by correcting for Melitz (2003) selection e¤ects. Recall that an increase in
industry from 

the Pareto location parameter  shifts the entire distribution of possible productivity draws

                             e  because not all Chinese entrants …nd it optimal to serve the
to the right. It di¤ers from 

Chinese market given the …xed costs  .

   Our baseline model suggests to estimate   b
                                              e  as the growth rate of real industry output
                                                                           P       ()
per worker. To see this, recall that employment in a given …rm is given by       which
                                                                   b                           1       
                                                                                                       
                                                                   e  =
can be manipulated after substituting the pricing formula to yield                         \            ,   where
                                                                                             ) 
                                                                                               (
 are the total sales in industry  of country  and  is the total employment in industry

 of country .14 The representative price  (e
                                                  ) is an output share weighted average of

the prices charged by domestic producers in the industry which follows from rewriting it as
              R1
       ) =   () (() )  (j   ) .
 (e
                                

                   b
                   e  using our data from the Annual Survey of Industrial Production. Instead
       We estimate 

of computing the growth rate of industry output per worker, we compute the growth rate

of industry output per composite factor of production which we take to be a Cobb-Douglas

aggregate of capital and labor. We calculate the labor shares from the shares of wage payments
  13
     While our estimation procedure for  is fully consistent with the baseline model, it would really have
to be somewhat adjusted to also be fully in line with the extended model. In particular, intermediate good
expenditures would have to be included when calculating the share  ¬ 1 which would tend to increase the
estimated  . However, capital expenditures would also have to be evaluated at a lower interest rate to maintain
an aggregate pro…t share of 13 which would tend to decrease the estimated  . To keep our results comparable
across speci…cations, we use the baseline estimates of  and  throughout.
  14
     Strictly speaking,  is the total employment in industry  of country  net of …xed costs because we
have assumed …xed costs to be incurred in terms of labor. As explained in footnote 12, we do not take this
assumption literally when taking the model to the data.



                                                      17
in industry revenues net of pro…ts and the capital shares as the residuals of these labor shares.

We proxy for the representative price  (e
                                             ) using producer price de‡ators which we obtain

from the China Statistical Yearbook.

       When we work with the extended model, we adjust these baseline estimates by taking
                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                  
                                                                   b
                                                                   e 
them to the power of the share of value added in gross production:             b
                                                                                e 
                                                                              =                                                      .
                                         b                          1       
                                         e  =
This adjustment is necessary because now                                        ,   where  is the aggregate input
                                                                 \
                                                                  ) 
                                                                    (
de…ned in equation (14) in the appendix. Intuitively, the productivity growth of the represen-

tative Chinese …rm in each industry is now lower than the growth rate of real industry output

per composite factor of production, because real industry output also grows because of the

improved provision with intermediate goods. As should be easy to verify, our simple adjust-

ment is exactly correct under the plausible assumption that real intermediate consumption
                                                                              ^
grows at the same rate as real industry output: ^ =                    \
                                                                                       
                                                                           (
                                                                                 )
                                                                  1                                     1
                                                                1¬                          
                                                                                           
                                                                             ¬  +1                    
       Both models further imply  =           ¬
                                                       
                                                         +1                    ¬1                  e  , where
                                                                                                                           

       is an inverse measure of trade openness. Assuming that c  = b , b can therefore
  
                                                                           1                                                      1
                 b
                 e  using the relationship b = b
be inferred from                                                             b
                                                                               e  . Intuitively, the term b
                                                                                                                                 



corrects for the e¤ects changes in trade openness have on representative productivity (the

Melitz (2003) selection e¤ects). It is well-known that such selection e¤ects are often important

and ignoring them would have indeed biased our productivity growth estimates for some

industries to a sizeable degree.


                                                                              
3.4        Estimation procedure for            ,      ,      ,     and           


We also obtain our estimates of the shares of value added in gross production,                                       ,   and the
                                                                                                                     
                                               
coe¢ cients of the input-output tables,         ,   from the world input-output tables included in the
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                               
World Input-Output Database. In particular, we calculate                                = 1¬      =1
                                                                                                    =1 =1            and
                                                                                                     =1     
                                                                                                          =1 
                        
           =1  =1   =1                 
     =                     , where  is the value of intermediate goods from industry
            =1  =1  =1   =1 

 in country  purchased by industry  in country  and  is again just the total value of

industry  trade ‡owing from country  to country .


                                                        18
    Notice that these estimates average over countries and downstream industries,                                         =     
                                                                                                                       
                
and         =        for all  and . As is explained in detail in Costinot and Rodriguez-Clare
                                                                                                
                                                                                                                      
(2014), we cannot use the more disaggregated estimates                             = 1¬          =1 
                                                                                                =1
                                                                                                                 and           =
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                  =1 
   
        
 =1
                in our calculations because entry would then lead to a process of cumulative
 =1  =1 

causation in some countries and industries. Intuitively, if the share of value added in gross

production is too low and the expenditure share on intermediates is too high in some in-

dustries, entry induces further entry because the increased variety reduces input costs too

much.15

    We calculate the shares of labor and capital in value added from the Socio Economic Ac-

counts available from the World Input Output Database. These accounts include information

on labor compensation, capital compensation, and value added so that we can construct the
                      
shares           and         straightforwardly.


3.5      Isolating the e¤ects of China’s productivity growth

Our goal is to isolate the spillover e¤ects of China’s productivity growth. To this end, we

plug the measured productivity growth rates ^ into our model and simulate what would have

happened to the world economy if only China’s productivity had changed. We do this on a

year-to-year basis considering all time periods from 1995-1996 until 2006-2007 and aggregate

over the entire time span 1995-2007 in the end. For each time period, we use the trade data

from the base year, that is 1995 trade data for the time period 1995-1996 and so on.16 Of

course, world trade ‡ows change for many reasons other than China’s productivity growth

so that the factual end-of-period trade ‡ows are generally di¤erent from the counterfactual
  15
     When faced with the same problem, Balisteri et al (2011) only average over downstream industries. Un-
fortunately, this is not su¢ cient in our case so that we average over countries as well. Strictly speaking, our
                                                                             
                                                                          =1 
extended model even suggests to calculate          = 1¬   
                                                                  =1
                                                                            ¬  +1  
                                                                                             , where   is the value of net
                                                              =1  ¬              
                                                            ¬  +1
exports in industry  of country . The adjustment       
                                                                is necessary because of our assumption that
the …xed costs of exporting are incurred in destination country labor, capital, and intermediates. We do not
take this assumption literally when taking the model to the data.
  16
     More precisely, we allow  ,  , and                                                       ^     
                                               to vary over time but use the same values for  ,  ,  ,  ,
and 
         throughout.



                                                           19
end-of-period trade ‡ows our productivity growth counterfactuals predict.


3.6      Results

Table 4 reports the share of imports from all countries in total expenditure, both excluding

as well as including nontraded goods. Table 5 summarizes the share of imports from China

in total expenditure, again excluding as well as including nontraded goods. As can be seen,

the share of Chinese imports in total expenditure is small in absolute terms even though the

share of Chinese imports in total imports is rising over time. This suggests that the spillover

e¤ects of China’s productivity growth will be small since they transmit through import shares

as decomposition (11) makes clear.

       Our estimates of      and          are listed in Table 6. Our estimates of                 range from 3.1 to

16.1 and average 6.1 and our estimates of                   range from 3.0 to 39.9 and average 8.5. These

averages are broadly within the range of existing estimates found in the literature.17 Notice

that our estimates of            and          are such that        is larger than          ¬ 1 throughout. This

is consistent with our earlier theoretical assumption that                              ¬ 1 and implies that the

sales distribution deviates somewhat from Zipf’s law. It ensures that the expected pro…ts of

entrants are always …nite in all industries.

       Our estimates of China’s productivity growth rates are also listed in Table 6 and their

distribution is plotted in Figure 1. To attenuate possible measurement error, we take China’s

productivity growth rates in each year to be the geometric average of the estimated produc-

tivity growth rates over all years. Notice that China’s productivity growth rates are large and

vary substantially across industries. They range from 5.0 percent to 13.8 percent and average

11.2 percent. To be clear, these are the unadjusted annualized values we use to calculate our

baseline results.

       Figure 2 plots these productivity growth rates against China’s export orientation in each

industry. As can be seen, China’s import-competing industries tend to grow faster which
  17
    Eaton and Kortum (2002), for example, estimate the trade elasticity to be 3.6 in one speci…cation and 8.3
in another speci…cation.


                                                             20
suggests that the associated terms-of-trade e¤ects will tend to be negative. Similarly, Figure

3 plots them against the estimated trade elasticity in each industry. Notice that China’s

productivity growth rates tend to be higher in high trade elasticity industries which implies

that the associated home market e¤ects will tend to be positive. As a result, these two e¤ects

will tend to have an o¤setting character.

    Figures 4 and 5 summarize what would have happened to relative wages and entry if

only China’s productivity had changed. These e¤ects are computed by simulating the general

equilibrium e¤ects of China’s productivity growth using the baseline model for every year. In

particular, Figure 4 shows that the wages of all countries relative to China’s wages are pre-

dicted to fall, as one would expect.18 Moreover, Figure 5 highlights that there is predicted to

be entry into China’s fast-growing industries and exit out of China’s slow-growing industries,

as one would also expect.

    Table 7 builds on these calculations and shows what would have happened to welfare if

only China’s productivity had changed. The …rst column gives the predicted welfare e¤ects

on China, the second and third columns the predicted welfare e¤ects on the "World" and the

"Rest of the World" de…ned as the output share weighted averages of the predicted welfare

e¤ects on all countries and all countries other than China, and the last column the ratios of

the entries in columns three and two. The last row computes the cumulative e¤ects by taking

geometric averages of the annual e¤ects in the previous rows.

    As can be seen, China’s welfare is predicted to increase by a cumulative 259.8 percent,

"World" welfare is predicted to increase by a cumulative 14.2 percent, and "Rest of the

World" welfare is predicted to increase by a cumulative 0.213 percent. This implies that only

1.5 percent of the worldwide bene…ts of China’s productivity growth are predicted to spill

over to other countries. The above discussion suggests that this is because Chinese imports

only account for a small share of total expenditure and the terms-of-trade and home market
  18
     Recall that we take "labor" to be a Cobb-Douglas aggregate of capital and labor in our empirical appli-
cation. As a consequence, changes in "wages" should then also be thought of as changes in Cobb-Douglas
aggregates of interest rates and wages. For expositional simplicity, we continue to use the term "wages" in the
text.


                                                      21
e¤ects work in o¤setting ways.

    Table 8 explores these welfare e¤ects further reporting the cumulative spillover e¤ects on

all countries and the components due to terms-of-trade and home market e¤ects following

approximation (11). Notice that all the welfare e¤ects are small, ranging from -0.10 percent

to 0.88 percent and averaging 0.07 percent. As we expect, the decomposition reveals that the

terms-of-trade e¤ects tend to be negative and the home market e¤ects tend to be positive

making them o¤set each other on average. They do not exactly add up to the welfare e¤ects

because they are computed using an approximation.

    Table 9 investigates whether our simplifying assumptions of abstracting from multiple

factors, intermediate goods, and nontraded goods make sense. In particular, it again reports

the welfare e¤ects computed using the baseline model and contrasts them to the welfare

e¤ects computed using the extended model, as explained in section 2.5 above. As can be

seen, the results are indeed similar with the average welfare e¤ect falling from 0.07 percent to

-0.02 percent. This is because the spillover e¤ects of China’s productivity growth tend to be

magni…ed by intermediate goods but dampened by nontraded goods.

    This is further illustrated in Figure 6 which plots the welfare e¤ects obtained from the

baseline model against the welfare e¤ects obtained from the extended model. Notice that

the results are highly correlated especially when the outliers Canada, Korea, and Rest of the

World are removed. The main reason why the welfare estimates tend to be a bit lower in the

extended model is that we use scaled productivity growth estimates. Recall that we have to

scale the productivity growth rates of the representative Chinese …rm in each industry using
                                                                         
                                                         
                                              b
                                              e 
the share of value added in gross production,             b
                                                           e 
                                                         =                  , to keep the empirics

consistent with the theory.



4    Conclusion

How does a country’s productivity growth a¤ect worldwide real incomes through international

trade? In this paper, we took this classic question to the data by measuring the spillover e¤ects

                                               22
of China’s productivity growth. Our framework featured traditional terms-of-trade e¤ects and

new trade home market e¤ects as suggested by the theoretical literature and worked from a

reference point which perfectly matched industry-level trade. Focusing on the years 1995 to

2007, we found that the cumulative welfare e¤ect on individual regions ranged between -0.1

percent and 0.9 percent and only 1.5 percent of the worldwide gains of China’s productivity

growth accrued to the rest of the world.

   Our analysis is only a …rst pass at this question. Of the many possible extensions, a

particularly interesting one would be to let aggregate manufacturing employment respond

endogenously to productivity growth. On the one hand, this would dampen relative wage

growth in China thereby generating additional terms-of-trade gains for the rest of the world.

On the other hand, this would relocate aggregate manufacturing employment to China thereby

in‡icting additional home market losses on the rest of the world. These counteracting e¤ects

may well been quantitatively important in the case of China given the extent of rural-urban

migration observed during the sample period.




                                             23
5     Appendix: Extended model

This extension adds multiple factors, input-output linkages, and aggregate trade imbalances

to our baseline model, as explained in section 2.5 of the main text. In the interest of clarity,

we present it here in a self-contained fashion which involves brie‡y repeating some material

from section 2. As in the main text, we keep derivations to a minimum and provide a detailed

technical appendix upon request.


5.1    Basic setup

There are  countries and  industries. Each industry provides a continuum of di¤erentiated

varieties. These varieties are combined into …nal and intermediate consumption using the

aggregators
                                                                                                        
                                         Z
                                                                                               !    ¬ 1 
                                       Y X                                 ¬ 1
                              =                             (    )         d                      (12)
                                       =1   =1   0

                                                                                                        
                                             Z 
                                                                                               !    ¬ 1 
                                       Y     X                                 ¬ 1
                              =                          
                                                                (     )         d                      (13)
                                       =1   =1   0


where  is the quantity of an industry  variety from country  used for …nal consumption

in country , 
                is the quantity of an industry  variety from country  used for intermediate

consumption by industry  in country ,  is the number of industry  varieties from

country  available in country ,                1 is the elasticity of substitution between industry 

varieties,       is the fraction of country ’s …nal consumption expenditure spent on industry 
             
                    
varieties, and          is the fraction of country ’s intermediate consumption expenditure from

industry  spent on industry  varieties. Final consumption is turned one-for-one into utility

so that  =   .

    Firms are technologically heterogeneous which is captured by the following production
                                                              units of an aggregate input
process. Entrants into industry  of country  have to hire 

speci…c to industry  of country  to draw their productivities  from a Pareto distribution


                                                               24
                            
                                       is a …xed cost of entry,  is the Pareto location parameter,
 () = 1 ¬                  , where                           

and      is the Pareto shape parameter. Entrants into industry  of country  wishing to sell
                                             
to country  further need to hire                      units of an aggregate input speci…c to industry  in

country  and  units of an aggregate input speci…c to industry  in country  to deliver

 units of output to country , where                     1 is an iceberg trade barrier and  is a …xed
                                                                                      , and
cost of serving market . Both the number of entrants into industry  of country , 
                                                              
the fraction of entrants selling to country ,                   ,
                                                                   are endogenous.

   The aggregate input speci…c to industry  of country  combines labor,  , capital,  ,

and intermediate goods in a Cobb-Douglas fashion and is given by

                                    0             !              !      1   
                                                                                              !1¬   
                                                                                       
                                                                                                   
                                   1                       
                            = @                                           A                                          (14)
                                        
                                            
                                            
                                                              
                                                              
                                                                                      1 ¬ 


                                                                                                         
where        are the shares of value added in gross production and                           and        ,    +      = 1,

are the shares of labor and capital in value added. To be clear, we refer to these inputs

as "aggregate" because they combine labor, capital, and intermediate goods and "country-

industry-speci…c" because this is done with country-industry-speci…c weights. Labor and

capital are freely mobile across sectors within countries as usual.


5.2     Equilibrium for given productivities

Given the Cobb-Douglas structure of the aggregate input (14), …rms spend a fraction 1 ¬                                     
                                                                                                                            

of their input costs on intermediates, a fraction                             of their input costs on workers, and
                                                                         

a fraction            of their input costs on capital. This implies that intermediate costs and
                 

capital costs can be expressed in terms of labor costs as follows

                                                              1¬  
                                                   =         
                                                                    
                                                                 
                                                                                                                         (15)
                                                                 




                                                              25
                                                                          
                                                                          
                                                      =                  
                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                            (16)
                                                                          

   The total expenditure of country  on varieties from industry ,  , consists of …nal
                =  (  +  ¬ ), and intermediate expenditures,   =
                                                                            P      
expenditures,                                                     =1   ,

where   is labor income,   is capital income,  is an inter-state transfer satisfying
P                  
  =1  = 0, and      is the intermediate expenditure of industry  from country  overall.

Together with equations (15) and (16), this implies

                                0        0                                   1                                    1
                          
                          X
                                @        @                                 A                  ¬            A  
                   =                  1   ¬ P                                    +        1    ¬                                                  (17)
                                                                                                                      
                          =1                             =1                                                           
                                                                      



   Pro…t maximization requires that …rms in industry  of country  whose productivity
                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                  
draws exceed  charge  =                 
                                                ¬1                , where  =                   ¬1
                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                   (               )   ¬ 1    denotes

the productivity cuto¤ above which revenues are su¢ ciently high to justify incurring the …xed

costs of serving market  and  is the unit cost of the aggregate input. Letting  be the

wage rate,  be the interest rate, and  be the ideal price index for industry  varieties in

country , this unit cost is given by

                                                                                 
                                                                                  Y
                                                                                                      
                                                                                        ( )(1¬  )
                                                                                                 
                               = ( )                ( )                                                                                          (18)
                                                                                  =1

                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                         P                  ¬                  1¬   
                                                                                                                                             1¬ 
     As before, the ideal price index is given by  =                                  , where              e 
                                                                                                =1   
         R1                            1
e  = (    ¬1  (j   ))  ¬ 1 denotes the productivity of the representative …rm in

          
                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                       e  = (
industry  of country  selling to country  which can be simpli…ed to                                                                 
                                                                                                                                     ¬  +1
                                                                                                                                                 )   ¬ 1   

by imposing the Pareto assumption. Upon noticing that  = (  )  
                                                                          , this can be
                                                                                                                      

rewritten using the pricing formula and the de…nition of  as


                                                                                                                         ¬ ¬ 1
                                                                                                                                    !¬       1
                   X                                                                    ¬   
                                                                                                              ¬ 1             
                                                              
           =                                                                                                                                          (19)
                             ¬        +1                     ¬1                                
                   =1




                                                                     26
                                                                    P
   Free entry drives expected pro…ts to zero so that                      =1                              j     =
      , where (   ) = (  )
                                         
                                                   is the probability that an entrant into industry  of
                                   

                                                                           ¬1
country  sells to country  and (           j     ) =        ¬  +1
                                                                                      are the expected operating

pro…ts of an entrant into industry  of country  from selling to country  conditional on

selling to country . Invoking again that  = (  )  
                                                              , this can be rewritten using the
                                                                    

pricing formula and the de…nition of  as

                                                                ¬ ¬ 1                   ¬   
                                                                                
                                     X                ( )     ¬ 1
                                                                                
                            
                           =                                                                                                (20)
                       ¬1                 P      
                                                                          ¬ ¬ 1
                                                                                           
                                                                                                     ¬   
                                              =1  ( )
                                     =1                                    ¬ 1
                                                                                           


                                         (                            +           ¬      +1                 (                      
   Input market clearing ensures  =                      + 1)                 
                                                                                                   , where                 + 1) 

captures the amount of inputs required by all entrants into industry  of country  to cover
                                                                                                             ¬      +1
their …xed cost of entry as well as their variable costs of production and                                       
                                                                                                                            captures

the amount of inputs required by all industry  …rms serving country  to cover their …xed
                                      and adding basic labor market and capital market
cost of exporting. Solving this for 

clearing, one obtains
                                                                                                     !
                                   1                                     ¬        +1
                         =                               
                                                                    ¬                                                             (21)
                              (  + 1)                                       


                                                           
                                                           X
                                                    =                                                                           (22)
                                                           =1

                                                           
                                                           X
                                                    =                                                                           (23)
                                                           =1

   Equations (16) - (23) represent a system of 6 +2 equations in the 6 +2 unknowns
                                     g which can be solved up to a numeraire. However, it is again
f              

useful to express them in changes to deal with the large number of unknown parameters.




                                                          27
5.3    General equilibrium e¤ects of productivity shocks

Following the method popularized by Dekle et al (2007), equations (16) - (23) can be written

in changes as

                                                           ^  = ^ 
                                                         ^           ^                                                                      (24)
                                          0                                                1
                                         @1                                               A                ¬             
                                                ¬   
                                                                 
                                                                        ^
                                                                     ^ 
                                                                                               +      1       ¬      
                                                                         
                         X      
                                                       =1      
                 ^ =
                                                                  
                                                                                       !                                             ^ 
                                                                                                                                  ^ 
                                                                                                                                               (25)
                                                                                                      
                         =1                                                                                           )
                                                 1¬                                  +         (1     ¬     
                                                            =1 
                                                                


                                                                                  
                                                                                   Y                                
                                                                                               (1¬  )      
                               ^ = (
                                       ^ )             (^
                                                           )                              ^                                               (26)
                                                                                   =1

                                  0                                                               !       ¬ ¬ 1
                                                                                                                    1¬        1
                                      
                                      X                                    ¬                               ¬ 1              
                                                     ^           ^                     ^
                          = @                                                                              A                           (27)
                                                                 ^                      ^
                                      =1

                                                                                       ¬    
                                                                            ^
                                        X                                   ^
                               ^ =              P
                                                                                                                   ^
                                                                                                                                               (28)
                                                                                                           ¬   
                                                                            ^                   ^
                                        =1            =1                                 ^

                           0                 
                                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                          ¬  +1
                         1 @                                                                                       
                ^ 
                 
                     =                           
                                                                           ^  ¬
                                                                         ^                                                      ^ A
                                                                                                                                               (29)
                       ^                   ¬  +1                                                 ¬  +1
                                      ¬           
                                                                                                   ¬        
                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                 


                                                                   
                                                                   X
                                                     =                        ^ 
                                                                                                                                          (30)
                                                                   =1

                                                                  
                                                                  X
                                                      =                       ^ 
                                                                                                                                          (31)
                                                                   =1

                                                                                                                                            
where a hat denotes the ratio between the counterfactual and factual value,  =                   ,
                                                                                                =1 
                          P             P                     
                                                                        P
   =          ,   =                 
                                 =1  ¬ =1  ,   =  
                                                                           
                                                                           =1  ¬
                                                                                           ¬  +1
                                                                                              
                                                                                                     ,
         =1 
                      P                                                P
  =  
              
                        
                        =1  ¬
                                     ¬  +1
                                        
                                               ,  = (1 ¬  )   
                                                                         =1  ¬
                                                                                        ¬  +1
                                                                                           
                                                                                                    ,
                          P (  +1)(  ¬1)                  P
    =     
            ,        =     =1        
                                                   ,  =   =1 (  +   ) ¬       ,  =




                                                                     28
                                                                                                    !
P                  =  ¬
                                  P         
                                                           
                                                                =                                         
     =1  ,               =1  ,       =   
                                                               ,           1¬         
                                                                                                         +   , and
                                                                                                      
                                                                                             
 denotes the factual value of industry  trade ‡owing from country  to country .

    Equations (24) - (31) represent a system of 6 +2 equations in the 6 +2 unknowns
n                                                  o
 ^  ^  ^  
                      ^   
                             ^   
                                    ^ ^   
                                               ^   . As shown above, their coe¢ cients can be expressed in
                                      
                       ,      
terms of     ,   ,        ,        and observable trade ‡ows only. It is easy to verify that the
                                                                               
model reduces to the baseline model from section 2 for                     =        = 1 8  and  and                 =08

.




                                                         29
References

[1] Autor, D., D. Dorn, and G. Hanson. 2013. "The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market

   E¤ects of Import Competition in the United States." American Economic Review 103(6):

   2121-2168.

[2] Arkolakis, K., A. Costinot, and A. Rodriguez-Clare. 2012. "New Trade Models, Same

   Old Gains?" American Economic Review 102(1): 94-130.

[3] Balisteri, E., R. Hillberry, and T. Rutherford. 2011. "Structural Estimation and Solu-

   tion of International Trade Model with Heterogeneous Firms." Journal of International

   Economics 83(1). 95-108.

[4] Bernard, A., S. Redding, and P. Schott. 2007. "Comparative Advantage and Heteroge-

   neous Firms." Review of Economic Studies 74(1): 31-66.

[5] Bloom, N., M. Draca, and J. van Reenen. 2015. "Trade Induced Technical Change? The

   Impact of Chinese Imports on Innovation, IT, and Productivity." Manuscript, London

   School of Economics.

[6] Costinot, A. and A. Rodriguez-Clare. 2014. "Trade Theory with Numbers: Quantifying

   the Consequences of Globalization." In: Handbook of International Economics, Editors:

   G. Gopinath, E. Helpman, and K. Rogo¤.

[7] Dekle, R., J. Eaton, and S. Kortum. 2007. "Unbalanced Trade." American Economic

   Review Papers and Proceedings 97(2): 351-355.

[8] Di Giovanni, J., Levchenko, A. and Zhang, J. 2014. "The Global Welfare Impact of China:

   Trade Integration and Technological Change." American Economic Journal: Macroeco-

   nomics 6(3): 153-183.

[9] Eaton, J. and S. Kortum. 2002. "Technology, Geography, and Trade." Econometrica

   70(5): 1741-1779.

                                           30
[10] Eaton, J., S. Kortum, and F. Kramarz. 2011. "An Anatomy of International Trade:

    Evidence from French Firms." Econometrica 79(5): 1453-1498.

[11] Feenstra, R. 2010. "Measuring the Gains from Trade under Monopolistic Competition."

    Canadian Journal of Economics 43(1): 1-28.

[12] Fieler, C. 2011. "Non-Homotheticity and Bilateral Trade: Evidence and a Quantitative

    Explanation." Econometrica 79(4): 1069-1101.

[13] Hicks, J. 1953. "An Inaugural Lecture". Oxford Economic Papers 5(2): 117-135.

[14] Hsieh. C. and P. Klenow. 2009. "Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and

    India." Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(4): 1403-1448.

[15] Krugman, P. 1980. "Scale Economies, Product Di¤erentiation, and the Pattern of Trade."

    American Economic Review 70(5): 950-959.

[16] Levchenko, A. and Zhang, J. 2015. "The Evolution of Sectoral Productivity: Measure-

    ment and Implications." Manuscript, University of Michigan..

[17] Melitz, M. 2003. "The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate

    Industry Productivity." Econometrica 71(6): 1695-1725.

[18] Melitz, M., and S. Redding. Forthcoming. "New Trade Models, New Welfare Implica-

    tions." American Economic Review.

[19] Ricardo, D. 1817. "On the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation." London,

    United Kingdom: John Murray.

[20] Timmer, M., E. Dietzenbacher, B. Los, R. Stehrer, and G. de Vries. Forthcoming. "An

    Illustrated User Guide to the World Input–Output Database: the Case of Global Auto-

    motive Production", Review of International Economics

[21] Venables, A. 1987. "Trade and Trade Policy with Di¤erentiated Products:             A

    Chamberlinian-Ricardian Model." The Economic Journal 97(387): 700-717.

                                            31
6    Tables

    TABLE 1: Hypothetical E¤ect of Chinese Productivity Growth on Relative Wages and Entry

    b 
        b               c
                                              c
                                                                 c
                                                                                          c
                                                                                           
                             1                2                1                     2

       4.3%                21.5%              -21.5%              -22.4%                   22.4%


Notes: Entries are predicted growth rates in Chinese wage relative to US wage (column 1), Chinese number
of entrants in industry 1 and 2 (columns 2 and 3), and US number of entrants in industry 1 and 2 (columns
4 and 5) from 10% productivity growth in China in industry 1. Simulation assumes that nominal incomes
are the same in both countries, industry expenditure shares are 50% in both countries and industries, import
expenditure shares are 20% in both countries and industries, theta1=theta2=5, and sigma1=sigma2=3.




                                                    32
            TABLE 2: Hypothetical E¤ect of Chinese Productivity Growth on US Welfare

                              Terms-of-trade      +        Home market                  Total

           1  0              0.6%                       0.0%                      0.8%

           1 = 0              0.1%                       0.0%                      0.4%

           1  0             -0.4%                       0.0%                     -0.2%


Notes: Entries are predicted growth rates in US real income due to the terms-of-trade e¤ect (column 1) and the
home market e¤ect (column 2) from 10% productivity growth in China in industry 1 following equation (11).
Column 3 calculates net welfare gain following equation (10). Simulation assumes that nominal incomes are the
same in both countries, industry expenditure shares are 50% in both countries and industries, theta1=theta2=5,
and sigma1=sigma2=3. In the …rst row, China is assumed to have an import expenditure share of 10% in
industry 1 and an import expenditure share of 30% in industry 2 with the US being the mirror image so that
China is a net exporter in industry 1. In the second row, import expenditure shares are assumed to be 20% in
both countries and industries so that there is only intra-industry trade. In the third row, China is assumed to
have an import expenditure share of 30% in industry 1 and an import expenditure share of 10% in industry 2
with the US being the mirror image so that China is a net importer in industry 1.




                                                      33
            TABLE 3: Hypothetical E¤ect of Chinese Productivity Growth on US Welfare

                          Terms-of-trade        +      Home market                    Total

            1      2           -0.2%                      1.0%                       1.0%

            1   =   2           0.1%                       0.0%                       0.4%

            1      2           0.4%                       -0.9%                     -0.2%


Notes: Entries are predicted growth rates in US real income due to the terms-of-trade e¤ect (column 1) and the
home market e¤ect (column 2) from 10% productivity growth in China in industry 1 following equation (11).
Column 3 calculates net welfare gain following equation (10). Simulation assumes that nominal incomes are
the same in both countries, industry expenditure shares are 50% in both countries, import expenditure shares
are 20% in both countries and industries, and sigma1=sigma2=3. In the …rst row, theta1=7 and theta2=3. In
the second row, theta1=5 and theta2=5. In the third row, theta1=3 and theta2=7.




                                                     34
                           TABLE 4: Share of Imports in Total Expenditure

                                          w/o non-traded                    w/ non-traded

                                      1995      2001      2007         1995      2001      2007

           Brazil                    10.3%     15.5%     13.0%         4.9%      7.4%      6.4%

           Canada                    44.3%     49.1%     45.9%        18.2%     19.9%     17.2%

           Germany                   28.6%     38.7%     46.1%        11.2%     15.8%     19.4%

           Spain                     24.5%     33.3%     38.8%        10.5%     14.5%     15.0%

           France                    29.6%     35.2%     40.5%        10.1%     12.7%     13.2%

           United Kingdom            34.2%     41.7%     47.2%        13.1%     13.2%     13.6%

           India                      8.1%     12.5%     19.0%         5.7%      7.0%     11.1%

           Italy                     23.3%     27.7%     31.9%        10.5%     11.8%     13.3%

           Japan                      9.1%     12.6%     18.5%         3.7%      4.8%      7.6%

           South Korea               21.8%     25.0%     26.6%        12.7%     14.5%     16.0%

           Mexico                    25.4%     31.2%     34.7%        12.9%     14.6%     16.0%

           Russia                    20.9%     22.8%     23.7%        10.7%     11.5%     11.0%

           United States             17.6%     21.5%     26.1%         6.1%      6.5%      8.1%

           Rest of the World         21.4%     23.4%     26.8%        12.3%     13.4%     14.8%

           Median                    22.6%     26.3%     29.4%        10.6%     12.9%     13.5%


Notes: Entries are imports/total expenditure, either excluding or including non-traded goods.




                                                    35
                       TABLE 5: Share of Chinese Imports in Total Expenditure

                                            w/o non-traded               w/ non-traded

                                         1995     2001    2007        1995    2001     2007

              Brazil                     0.2%     0.4%    1.4%       0.1%     0.2%    0.6%

              Canada                     1.2%     1.6%    4.2%       0.5%     0.7%    1.5%

              Germany                    0.7%     1.1%    3.2%       0.2%     0.4%    1.2%

              Spain                      0.3%     0.6%    2.0%       0.1%     0.3%    0.9%

              France                     0.5%     0.8%    2.2%       0.1%     0.3%    0.7%

              United Kingdom             0.8%     1.5%    3.2%       0.3%     0.5%    0.8%

              India                      0.3%     0.7%    2.8%       0.2%     0.4%    1.5%

              Italy                      0.4%     0.6%    1.6%       0.2%     0.3%    0.6%

              Japan                      0.8%     1.6%    3.4%       0.3%     0.6%    1.3%

              South Korea                1.1%     2.4%    4.6%       0.7%     1.5%    2.8%

              Mexico                     0.2%     0.7%    3.4%       0.1%     0.3%    1.5%

              Russia                     0.5%     1.0%    2.8%       0.3%     0.5%    1.3%

              United States              1.0%     1.4%    3.9%       0.3%     0.4%    1.1%

              Rest of the World          0.8%     1.4%    4.0%       0.4%     0.8%    1.9%

              Median                     0.6%     1.1%    3.2%       0.3%     0.4%    1.3%


Notes: Entries are imports from China/total expenditure, either excluding or including non-traded goods.




                                                    36
                      TABLE 6: Estimated elasticities and productivity growth

                                                                                     4

            Other tradables                                      6.1       8.5      11.2%

            Food, beverages, and tobacco                         3.3       6.1      12.3%

            Textiles and leather                                 6.1       9.5       6.8%

            Wood and products of wood and cork                   4.6       7.1      10.8%

            Pulp, paper, printing and publishing                16.1      39.9       9.3%

            Coke, re…ned petroleum, and nuclear fuel             6.5       8.5       7.5%

            Chemicals and chemical products                     11.4      37.4      13.8%

            Rubber and plastics                                  6.3      11.5       9.6%

            Other non-metallic minerals                          3.5       6.7      12.0%

            Basic metals and fabricated metals                   3.1       4.9      12.3%

            Other machinery                                      8.0      22.3      12.5%

            Electrical and optical equipment                     3.5       5.6      12.8%

            Transport equipment                                  7.4      18.9      11.2%

            Other manufacturing and recycling                    3.1       3.0       5.0%

            Non-tradables                                        6.1       8.5      11.2%

            Median                                               6.1       8.5      11.2%


Notes: Entries are industry descriptions, estimated   , estimated  , and the geometric averages of the
          4 b
estimated  = ¬1. Since we only have data on Chinese manufacturing …rms, we cannot estimate  ,  ,
           
     4
and   for "Other tradables" and "Non-tradables" and simply use the average values for those.
      




                                                      37
                     TABLE 7: Welfare Gains from China’s Productivity Growth

                      China              World            Rest of World       Share Rest of World

         95-96       11.3%               0.70%              0.005%                    0.7%

         96-97       11.2%               0.81%              0.007%                    0.8%

         97-98       11.3%               0.90%              0.011%                    1.2%

         98-99       11.3%               0.97%              0.010%                    1.1%

         99-00       11.2%               0.97%              0.012%                    1.2%

         00-01       11.2%               1.01%              0.014%                    1.4%

         01-02       11.1%               1.14%              0.015%                    1.3%

         02-03       11.1%               1.01%              0.019%                    1.8%

         03-04       11.2%               1.15%              0.023%                    2.0%

         04-05       11.2%               1.38%              0.030%                    2.2%

         05-06       11.4%               1.54%              0.032%                    2.1%

         06-07       11.6%               1.79%              0.035%                    2.0%

         95-07       259.8%              14.2%              0.213%                    1.5%


Notes: Entries are predicted welfare changes from productivity growth in China. World welfare gain is average
welfare gain in the world weighted by each country’s output share. Rest of World refers to countries other
than China. 95-07 welfare gain (last row) is cumulative welfare gain from 1995 to 2007.




                                                     38
             TABLE 8: Decomposition of Welfare Gains from China’s Productivity Growth

                                Welfare         Terms-of-trade     +    Home market      =     Sum

     Brazil                      0.02%                0.05%                -0.07%             -0.02%

     Canada                      0.22%                -0.20%               0.27%              0.07%

     Germany                    -0.10%                -0.03%               -0.16%             -0.19%

     Spain                      -0.08%                -0.03%               -0.12%             -0.15%

     France                     -0.01%                0.00%                -0.10%             -0.10%

     United Kingdom             -0.08%                -0.07%               -0.14%             -0.21%

     India                       0.40%                0.28%                0.08%              0.36%

     Italy                       0.05%                -0.03%               0.00%              -0.03%

     Japan                       0.28%                -0.08%               0.24%              0.16%

     South Korea                 0.88%                0.32%                0.47%              0.79%

     Mexico                      0.08%                0.04%                0.00%              0.04%

     Russia                     -0.03%                -0.19%               0.02%              -0.17%

     United States               0.11%                -0.16%               0.09%              -0.07%

     Rest of the World           0.50%                -0.03%               0.43%              0.40%

     Median                      0.07%                -0.03%               0.01%              -0.02%


Notes: Entries are cumulative e¤ects from 1995 to 2007 from China’s productivity growth. Column 1 gives net
welfare gain following equation (10), columns 2-3 the terms-of-trade e¤ects and home market e¤ects following
equation (11), and column 4 the sum of columns 2-3.




                                                      39
                              TABLE 9: Welfare e¤ects in extended model

                                               Baseline model        Extended model

                     Brazil                         0.02%                 -0.05%

                     Canada                         0.22%                 -0.23%

                     Germany                       -0.10%                 -0.02%

                     Spain                         -0.08%                 -0.11%

                     France                        -0.01%                 -0.01%

                     United Kingdom                -0.08%                 -0.07%

                     India                          0.40%                 0.14%

                     Italy                          0.05%                 0.00%

                     Japan                          0.28%                 0.08%

                     South Korea                    0.88%                 0.23%

                     Mexico                         0.08%                 0.07%

                     Russia                        -0.03%                 -0.12%

                     United States                  0.11%                 0.00%

                     Rest of the World              0.50%                 -0.14%

                     Median                         0.07%                 -0.02%


Notes: Entries are cumulative e¤ects from 1995 to 2007 from China’s productivity growth. Column 1 gives the
welfare e¤ects from the baseline model. Column 2 shows the welfare e¤ects from the extended model, featuring
non-traded goods, intermediate goods, and multiple factors.




                                                    40
7     Figures


                     0.16



                     0.14



                     0.12



                      0.1
           Density




                     0.08



                     0.06



                     0.04



                     0.02



                       0
                            0   2   4   6       8        10   12       14    16      18      20
                                            Productivity growth in %

    Figure 1: Distribution of productivity growth across manufacturing industries in China


Notes: This is a kernel density plot of the geometric average of the estimated productivity growth rates from
1995 to 2007 across manufacturing industries in China.




                                                     41
                                           25




                                           20




                                           15
            Net exports/total trade in %




                                           10




                                            5




                                            0




                                            -5




                                           -10
                                                 4   5   6   7       8         9   10       11   12   13   14
                                                                 Productivity growth in %

          Figure 2: Industry productivity growth and industry net exports in China


Notes: This …gure plots the relationship between industry productivity growth and normalized industry net
exports in China. Productivity growth is computed as in Figure 1. Industry net exports are computed as the
simple average of industry net exports from 1995-2007. Total trade is computed as the simple average of the
sum of exports and imports from 1995-2007. The line is a linear regression line.




                                                                          42
                    40



                    35



                    30



                    25
            Theta




                    20



                    15



                    10



                     5



                     0
                         4   5   6       7       8         9   10       11     12     13      14
                                             Productivity growth in %

       Figure 3: Industry productivity growth and industry trade elasticities in China


Notes: This …gure plots the relationship between industry productivity growth and industry trade elasticities
in China. Productivity growth is computed as in Figure 1. The line is a linear regression line.




                                                      43
                      0.8



                      0.7



                      0.6



                      0.5
            Density




                      0.4



                      0.3



                      0.2



                      0.1



                        0
                       -12.5   -12    -11.5         -11        -10.5      -10      -9.5       -9
                                              Relative wage growth in %

         Figure 4: Distribution of predicted changes in wages relative to China’s wage


Notes: This is a kernel density plot of the simple average of the predicted annual changes in wages relative to
China’s wage from 1995 to 2007 across China’s trading partners.




                                                          44
                                  40



                                  30



                                  20
           Industry entry in %




                                  10



                                   0



                                  -10



                                  -20



                                  -30



                                  -40
                                        4   5   6     7      8         9    10     11     12   13   14
                                                    Annualized productivity growth in %

                                 Figure 5: Industry entry and industry productivity growth in China



Notes: This …gure plots the relationship between industry productivity growth and industry entry in China.
Productivity growth is computed as in Figure 1. Industry entry is computed as the simple average of the
predicted annual changes in the number of industry entrants from 1995-2007. The line is a linear regression
line.




                                                                  45
                                                    0.8
           Welfare effects in extended model in %




                                                    0.6




                                                    0.4




                                                                                                                                  KOR
                                                    0.2
                                                                                                          IND

                                                                                   MEX             JPN

                                                      0                 FRA IT A     USA
                                                                  DEU
                                                                             BRA
                                                                   GBR
                                                                   ESP RUS
                                                                                                                ROW

                                                    -0.2
                                                                                             CAN


                                                           -0.2         0                  0.2           0.4          0.6   0.8         1
                                                                             Welfare effects in baseline model in %

                                                    Figure 6: Welfare e¤ects in baseline model versus extended model



Notes: This …gure plots the entries from Table 9. The line is the 45 degree line.




                                                                                                    46
