NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHY ARE SAVING RATES SO HIGH IN CHINA?
Dennis Tao Yang
Junsen Zhang
Shaojie Zhou
Working Paper 16771
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16771

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2011

The authors would like thank Julan Du, Joseph Fan, Randall Morck, Leslie Young, and the participants
in the NBER Conference on Capitalizing China in Boston, CUHK International Conference on China,
and the Tsinghua Conference on Saving and Investment for their constructive comments and suggestions.
The authors would also like to thank Jessie Pan for her excellent research assistance. The authors would
like to acknowledge the financial support from the Research Grants Council of the Hong Kong Special
Administrative Region, China (Project No. CUHK 453008) and the¸˛National Natural Science Foundation
of China (Project No. 70903039), and the research support from the Hong Kong Institute of Asia-Pacific
Studies. Dennis T. Yang acknowledges the research support provided by the Hong Kong Institute
of Monetary Research, where he conducted research when he served as a research fellow. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Dennis Tao Yang, Junsen Zhang, and Shaojie Zhou. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Why Are Saving Rates so High in China?
Dennis Tao Yang, Junsen Zhang, and Shaojie Zhou
NBER Working Paper No. 16771
February 2011
JEL No. D91,E21,O53
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we define “The Chinese Saving Puzzle” as the persistently high national saving rate
at 34–53 percent of gross domestic product (GDP) in the past three decades and a surge in the saving
rate by 11 percentage points from 2000–2008. Using data from the Flow of Funds Accounts (FFA)
and Urban Household Surveys (UHS) supplemented by the findings from existing studies, we analyze
the sources and causes of China’s high and rising saving rates in the government, corporate, and household
sectors. Although the causes of China’s high saving are complex, we suggest that the evolving economic,
demographic, and policy trends in the internal and external environments of the Chinese economy
will likely lead to a decline in national saving in the foreseeable future.

Dennis Tao Yang
Chinese University of Hong Kong
deyang@cuhk.edu.hk
Junsen Zhang
Department of Economics
Chinese University of Hong Kong
Shatin, N.T.
Hong Kong
jszhang@cuhk.edu.hk

Shaojie Zhou
Tsinghua University
zhoushaojie@tsinghua.edu.cn

Why Are Saving Rates So High in China?
I. Introduction
The spectacular economic growth of China in the past three decades has been
associated with an equally remarkable high rate of saving. While the gross national
saving as a percentage of gross domestic product (GDP) hovered just a little above 35
percent in the 1980s, the average yearly rate climbed to 41 percent in the 1990s
(Figure 1). Since China’s entry into the World Trade Organization (WTO), the growth
in aggregate saving accelerated, surging from just below 38 percent in 2000 to an
unprecedented 53 percent in 2007. China’s national saving rates since 2000 have been
one of the highest worldwide, far surpassing the rates prevailing in Japan, South
Korea, and other East Asian economies during the years of their miracle growth.1
The high and rising aggregate saving and thus the low and declining share of
consumption in the GDP constitute a central feature of the Chinese economy. High
saving is not only closely related to domestic liquidity, investment, economic growth,
and income distributions among firms, households, and the government but also to
China’s international trade and capital flows. With the government’s concerted efforts
to stimulate consumption and economic growth amid the recent financial crisis,
increasing attention has been given on the issue of saving. Despite the bourgeoning
literature on the subject, debates continue among economists regarding the underlying
causes of China’s high rate of saving. Although some progress has been made to
1

These saving figures are based on information from the World Development Indicators (WDI). In
2008, the gross national saving rate of China ranked the 9th highest among 228 countries recorded in
the WDI database. The eight economies with higher saving rates than China are all very small. Saudi
Arabia and Singapore are the two economies of significant size with saving rates below that of China
but were nonetheless above 50 percent.
1

understand household saving behaviors, a significant void in research on corporate
and government saving still remains. The main objectives of this paper are to
document historical trends in Chinese aggregate saving using multiple data sources,
analyze the forces that contributed to the recent rise in government, corporate, and
household saving, and assess the prospects for Chinese national savings in the near
future.
We start with an overview of the major patterns in Chinese national saving in the
past three decades. Drawing data from the World Development Indicators (WDI),
China’s Flow of Funds Accounts (FFA), and other sources of aggregate statistics, we
analyze and compare the aggregate saving in China with that of representative
economies and major country groups. A breakdown of aggregate saving into the
components of corporate, household, and government reveals major changes and
sources of national saving over time. These analyses help define “The Chinese Saving
Puzzle,” a set of unique features still not well understood in the existing literature of
aggregate saving in the historical context of China and in light of international
comparisons.
We then proceed to examine the sources and causes of the rising saving of the
government, corporate, and household sectors in China, focusing on the period of
1999–2007. The sharp rise in government taxes on production and the collection of
social security fees and income taxes were the dominant factors that increased the
disposable income of the government. As the growth of income outpaced that of
government consumption, the saving rate rose rapidly. The analysis of enterprise

2

behavior opens the discussion on data-related issues pertaining to the FFA, the main
source of data for documenting aggregate saving in China. We examine the role of
firm profitability, labor compensation and dividend, imperfect capital markets, and
government policies in shaping corporate saving. Our analysis of household behavior
relies on data from the Urban Household Survey (UHS) from six provinces, covering
the period of 1992–2006. We summarize stylized facts on household saving and
explore the factors we believe have driven the recent upward trend in household
saving. The role played by unique institutions, policies, and reform processes in China
is assessed.
Lastly, based on the foregoing analysis of saving determinants, we argue that
systematic forces, such as slower economic growth, moderate export expansion, and
government plans to strengthen social welfare and population aging, are already set in
to induce a decline in aggregate saving. A saving rate of above 50 percent of the GDP
could already be a phenomenon of the past, and China would likely enter an era of a
more balanced growth.

II. Long-term Trends in Aggregate Saving

International Comparison
To document the special features of Chinese saving in light of international
experience, we make a cross-country comparison of national saving rates using the
WDI (World Bank, 2010). The WDI defines gross domestic saving as GDP less the
aggregate consumption expenditures based on data from national income accounts.
3

Using this standard definition, we compare China’s saving rates for the period of
1978–2008 with those of countries from different income groups, BRIC economies of
Brazil, Russia and India, and selected developed economies.
Figure 1A shows that the rate of aggregate saving in China has remained
persistently above 34 percent of the GDP since 1978, the year when systematic
economic reforms began. Therefore, high saving in China has been a long-term
phenomenon. Since 2000, there has been a surge in the saving rate, reaching a
startling 53.1 percent of the GDP in 2007. The saving rates of middle-income and
low-income groups have also increased but at a rate much slower than that of China.
In 2006, the latest year with available data on the saving rates of all country groups,
the saving rate of China (52.4%) was about 3.3 times higher than that of the low
income group (16.1%) and 2.4 times higher than the world average (22.1%).
China’s high saving also stands out among those of the BRIC economies, as
shown in Figure 1B. In 2008, the national saving rate in China was 49.2 percent,
whereas the rate for Russia was 36.3 percent, India 32.9 percent, and Brazil 19.1
percent. Despite two erratic spikes in Russia’s saving series, there has been a recent
upward trend in saving for all three countries. Between 1998 and 2008, the saving rate
of Brazil increased by 4.1percentage points, Russia by 14.6 percentage points, and
India by 11.9 percentage points
In contrast to the rising saving observed in the large and fast-growing developing
countries, the overall saving rates of industrialized economies have experienced a
gradual decline, as seen in Figure 1C. In the early 1990s, the level of saving in China

4

was comparable with that of its rich East Asian neighbors, Japan and South Korea.
However, the saving rate of Japan continually declined after reaching a peak of 34.4
percent in 1991 until it dropped to a three-decade low of 25.2 percent in 2006. The
saving rates of the US, France, and the UK have either stagnated or experienced
chronic decline in the past three decades. Since 2000, the disparity in gross domestic
saving rates between China and the major developed countries has widened. By 2006,
the saving rate of China was 27.2 percentage points higher than that of Japan and 38.6
percentage points higher than that of the US. By 2007, the gap in gross saving
between China and South Korea grew to 22.1 percentage points, whereas the gaps in
France and the UK increased to 29 and 35 percentage points, respectively.

Components of Aggregate Saving
The high and rising aggregate saving in China can be analyzed by source through the
three components: households, enterprises, and the government. Earlier studies that
analyzed by-sector saving include Qian (1988) for the period of 1978–1984, Kraay
(2000) for 1978–1995, Kujis (2005, 2006) for 1990–2005, and Chamon and Prasad
(2010) for 1990–2005.
At the inception of reforms in China in 1978, total household saving only
accounted for 6–7 percent of the GDP, whereas the government saving hovered
around 15–18 percent of the GDP (Qian, 1988; Kraay, 2000). Between 1978 and 1984,
the household saving continued to rise, and the government saving fell dramatically,
maintaining the aggregate saving rate at a stable level. The decline in government
savings persisted through the early 1990s.
5

In 1995, the National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) began to publish the FFA based
on the physical transitions of the national income accounting in the Statistical
Yearbook of China. With a three-year lag policy, the most recent data available for
this paper cover the period of 1992–2007.2 Whereas the WDI data cover a much
longer period, the FFA data have the advantage of reporting the composition of gross
domestic saving by household, business, and government, as well as information on
incomes and expenditures within each of the sectors. Figure 2 presents three
interesting observations.3 First, aggregate saving in China remained at a high level of
above 34.9 percent of the GDP for the entire period. Second, there was a recent surge
in saving rate by almost 17 percent from 1999 to 2007. Finally, all three sectors
contributed significantly to the upsurge of the gross national saving. Between 1999
and 2007, the share of corporate saving rose from 14.6–18.8 percent of the GDP, the
household saving from 16.7–22.2 percent, and the government from 2.6–10.8 percent.
Overall, the largest percentage increase, by 8.2 percent of the GDP, was the saving of

2

See He and Cao (2007) and Ma and Wang (2010) for the analyses of Chinese aggregate saving using
the FFA data.
3
Yearly saving rates based on the FFA data have noticeable differences from the rates based on the
WDI data as reported in Figure 1, although the long-term trends are generally consistent. Comparing
these two data series, we find that from 1992 to 1999, the WDI measure was 2.8–6 percentage points
higher than the FFA measure. In 1999, their difference amounted to 5 percentage points. Since 2000,
however, the difference has become much smaller, except for 2006 when the FFA measure exceeded
the WDI measure by 2.9 percentage points. Note that these two measures of domestic saving rates have
the same definition, that is, (1- final consumption expenditure/GDP), and the final consumption
includes household consumption and general government consumption expenditures. Although there is
little difference in the ratio of government consumption to the GDP in the two data sets, the FFA data
report a higher ratio of household consumption to GDP especially for the periods 1992–1999 and
2005–2006. Therefore, the disparity in domestic saving rates comes mainly from the differences in
household consumption expenditures to the GDP. This disparity reflects in part the content of
household consumption in the two datasets. According to FFA statistics, household final consumption
expenditure includes not only monetary spending but also in-kind consumption, which could result in
higher ratios of household consumption to GDP in the FFA data. In addition, the WDI measure of the
final consumption in the GDP also includes any statistical discrepancy in the use of resources relative
to the supply of resources, which could contribute to the disparity in domestic saving rates between
FFA and WDI data.
6

the government.

The Chinese Saving Puzzle
In light of the historical trends and international comparisons, we consider the
Chinese saving puzzle to have four interrelated aspects: (a) persistently high saving
rates between 34 and 53 percent of the GDP in the past 30 years; (b) an outlier in
international comparisons, that is, having one of the highest saving rates among all
nations since 2000, and an outlier in cross-country regressions of saving
determination;4 (c) surge in gross domestic saving by 11 percentage points between
2000 and 2008 based on the WDI data;5 and (d) household saving as a share of GDP
experiencing the highest growth among the three sectors since the inception of
reforms in 1978.6 These observations jointly define the Chinese saving puzzle. We
consider it a puzzle because the fundamental forces shaping these special saving
patterns are still not well understood.
In what follows, we use the FFA data to investigate the sources and causes of the
high and rising government and corporate saving in the period of 1992–2007 and use
UHS data to examine household saving in the period of 1988–2007. The time
coverage reflects data availability.

III. Corporate Saving
4

Kraay (2000) uses a large sample of countries to investigate the cross-country determinants of saving
and finds that economy-wide saving in China is nearly 10 percentage points higher than what would be
expected based on standard determinants of national savings.
5
Note that the FFA data reveal a generally consistent trend, although its data coverage ends in 2007.
6
According to Qian (1988) and Kraay (2000), household saving accounted for only 6–7 percent of the
GDP in the late 1970s. As Figure 2 shows, however, household saving as a share of the GDP climbed to
22.2 percent in 2007, implying an increase of about 16 percent. In contrast, the combined savings by
the government and enterprises stayed roughly the same at about 30 percent of the GDP in the
beginning and ending years of the analysis.
7

The high corporate and government saving during the earlier years of reform reflects
the high-investment and heavy industry-oriented development strategy adopted in the
central planning period. Between 1965 and 1977, the gross national saving of China
averaged 27 percent of the GDP and had a small component of household saving
(Kraay, 2000). As the state influence of enterprise accumulation diminished with the
introduction of reforms, aggregate corporate saving declined to only about 13 percent
of the GDP in the late 1990s. What forces drove up corporate saving by about 6
percentage points of the GDP in the period of 1999–2007?
The trend of rising enterprise saving is most commonly documented using the
FFA data from the national income accounts of China.7 As defined by FFA, enterprise
saving equals the value-added of both financial and non-financial companies minus
labor compensation, production taxes, net asset payments, and net transfer payments.8
In China, total enterprise saving is equivalent to the “total disposable income” of the
business sectors, but the concept is different from either net income or free cash flow
in the standard corporate finance literature. It is a concept very close to net income
plus depreciation and amortization. Thus, the formation of fixed capital, capital
transfers, changes in inventory, and equity investments are not included in the
calculation of enterprise saving.
Using this definition of corporate saving in Chinese statistics, the legacy of the
high-accumulation strategy from the central planning and incomplete institutional
7

An exception is Bayoumi, Tong and Wei (2010), who examine Chinese corporate saving behavior based on firm
level data.

8
More specifically, asset payments include interest payments, dividends, and land rentals, whereas
transfers include corporate income tax, social insurance fees, social subsidies, and social welfare
payments.

8

reforms can partially explain the high enterprise saving in the past three decades. For
instance, the suppression of wages, low interest payments on loans, and low land
rentals all tended to raise the disposable income of the enterprises, thus giving them
more opportunities to save.9 These forces of economic planning continued into the
reform era despite a gradual decline in the magnitude of the distortions over time.
However, aside from these institutional factors that influence the general level of
business saving, we argue that several factors have helped elevate enterprise saving in
the past decade.

Rising Profitability of Enterprises
The saving capacity of enterprises reflects their profitability. As shown in Figure 3,
the profitability of enterprises has generally improved since the early 1990s. While
the nominal firm profits increased more than 15 folds from 1992 to 2007, the ratio of
profits to industrial value added also improved remarkably from about 21 percent in
the late 1990s to close to 30 percent in 2007. Figure 4 provides corroborative
evidence that the share of enterprise income in the GDP rose from 13 percent in the
late 1990s to above 18 percent in 2007.
The rise in corporate profitability is an outcome of a series of socioeconomic and
institutional changes implemented in China throughout the reform period. For
instance, the privatization of state-owned enterprises (SOEs) and the growth of private
enterprises are found to have induced more innovative efforts and raised the labor and
total factor productivity of the corporate sector (Jefferson and Su, 2006; Bai et al.,
9

We are grateful to Leslie Young for making constructive suggestions on these arguments as well as
referring us to the related literature.
9

2009). Labor market reforms involving the use of labor-incentive schemes, the
relaxation of worker mobility restrictions, and especially the massive rural-urban
migration have all contributed to the efficient functioning of firms. In particular, the
large flow of rural labor to cities, which was estimated at around 135 million in 2007
(Meng et al., 2010), has helped maintain low labor costs for business, a major factor
behind China’s emergence as the workshop of the world (Yang et al., 2010). Moreover,
China began implementing a large-scale privatization of SOEs in 1998 with the
objectives of improving corporate governance and maintaining the competitiveness of
the state sector in the national economy. From 1997 to 2003, the share of SOE
workers in urban employment dropped from 54.6–26.8 percent as the result of
enterprise restructuring (NBS, 1998, 2004). The productivity of the state sector rose,
and the competitive pressure also spread to raise the productivity of the non-state
sector.
The rise in corporate saving, that is, 14.6–18.8 percent of the GDP from
1999–2007, was also attributable to China’s remarkable expansion in export
associated with its accession to the WTO. Beginning in the late 1990s, with the
anticipation of joining the WTO, China’s export growth accelerated. The momentum
of trade expansion continued after China’s accession to the WTO in 2001 as trade
barriers and tariffs continued to fall. Between 1999 and 2007, the export growth
reached an unprecedented 26 percent per annum (NBS, 2008). This expansion in
external demand handed China an opportunity to realize its potential comparative
advantage in trade. When exports were combined with equally remarkable FDI

10

inflows as well as the imports of sophisticated intermediate inputs, these factors
jointly created a powerful force to increase firm productivity and profits.
Trade expansion, and thus increases in corporate revenue, was facilitated by
trade policies in China. Since 1998, after the Asian financial crisis, China has initiated
a trade-promoting policy of rewarding tax rebates for exports (TRE). Since then, TRE
has become an important macroeconomic management policy. The value of the rebate
increased substantially after China’s accession to the WTO. Figure 5 shows that the
total volume of TRE increased from 115 billion Yuan in 2002 to 586.6 billion in 2008.
The size of these tax rebates was highly significant: in 2006, the total TRE received
by exporting firms was equivalent to 10 percent of aggregate corporate saving and
about 14 percent of government tax revenue in the same year. The TRE remained at
high levels throughout 2004–2008. Therefore, the expanded external demand and
favorable trade policies both helped raise the corporate earnings of Chinese firms with
the accession of China to the WTO.

Costs of Financing, Dividend Payments, and Labor Compensations
While export expansion and tax rebate added directly to the revenue of firms,
maintaining the low cost of production also contributed to the rise in the disposable
incomes of enterprises. Ma and Wang (2010) find that net interest payments as share
of the GDP by the non-financial corporate sector dropped by 50 percent between 1992
and 2007. In particular, SOEs financed their loans and paid their debts at interest rates
much lower than the prevailing market rates. If SOEs actually paid at market interest
rates, their existing profits, and thus their saving, would have been greatly reduced
11

(Ferri and Liu, 2009). Moreover, enterprises managed to control labor compensation
during the same period. As shown in Figure 6, the share of labor compensation of
employees in the total value added of enterprises declined from an average of 41.2
percent in the 1990s to 37.5 percent in the 2000s, helping raise the enterprise saving
capacity. Although some stockholders earn dividends, total dividend payments only
accounted for a small proportion of the enterprise value added. Despite an upward
trend in dividend payments, the ratio of dividend to value added was still less than 0.5
percent by 2007 (Figure 6). Part of the story is that the Chinese government did not
ask SOEs to pay dividends until 2008 even though they had enjoyed improved profits
since the state-sector restructuring in the late 1990s. These aggregate statistics appear
to be consistent with firm-level data reported in Zhang (2008) that for a large sample
of Chinese firms in the period of 1999–2003, the average and median dividends to
earnings ratios were 0.35 and 0.16, respectively. Lower dividends translate directly to
more retained corporate earnings based on the FFA statistics.

Imperfect Capital Markets
Weaknesses in China’s financial sector motivated the enterprises, especially small and
medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), to rely on their own saving to finance fixed-asset
investments. Despite the systematic financial reforms since the middle 1990s,
including the reconstruction of non-performance loans, banks in China still play a
limited role in channeling saving from frugal households to the enterprise sector (e.g.,
Hofman and Kuijs, 2006).
Table 1 reports the sources of funding for fixed-asset investments in the period of
12

1995–2007. Contrary to the conventional wisdom that bank credits are the main source
of financing, the share of domestic loans remained below 21 percent of the total
investments throughout the period. Instead, self-raised funds always accounted for the
largest share of contribution to investment. It is worth pointing out that the share of
self-raised funds in the total investment increased over time, rising from just below 50
percent in the middle 1990s to 64.8 percent in 2008. In other words, enterprise
investment relied more on self-retained earnings, whereas the importance of domestic
loans generally declined in the last decade. Therefore, the high saving of enterprises,
particularly among SMEs, can be interpreted as reflecting the difficulties in obtaining
financing from state banks because of the lack of collaterals required to secure loans.
By 2008, the state budget and FDI contributed to about 7 percent of the total
fixed-asset investment. Informal and private financing channels, as represented by the
“others” category, accounted for 13.5 percent of the total financing; this share is
comparable in size with domestic loans. Therefore, despite the development and
commercialization of capital markets in China, formal financing through bank loans is
still limited. The weak financial sector creates the incentives for enterprise saving.

IV. Government Saving
Government in the FFA data refers to all levels of administrative units and non-profit
institutions affiliated with the state and local governments. Table 2 presents the data
series on consumption, saving, and detailed components of government disposable
income. The figures are expressed in nominal terms because selecting price deflators
for different variables is prone to arbitrariness, and our primary interest is the changes
13

in yearly saving rates based on current prices. The share of government saving in
GDP fluctuated at a level below 4.4 percent in the period of 1992–1999, reaching the
lowest point at 2.6 percent in 1999. However, the figure had climbed since then,
reaching 10.8 percent in 2007.
The government’s disposable income, which mainly consists of value added from
government production, incomes from properties, taxes on all production, income
taxes, and social insurance revenue but minus labor compensations, rose from 1608.9
billion Yuan in 1999 to 6308.4 billion Yuan in 2007, as indicated in column (6) of
Table 1. The rise in tax revenues on production, as reported in column (3), was the
largest contributor to the growth in government income during this period. The net tax
increased by 3058.5 billion Yuan, accounting for 65 percent of the increase in the
disposable income of government. The institutional foundation behind the rise in tax
revenues can be traced back to the famous 1994 Fiscal Reform in China that managed
to reverse a declining trend in state revenues beginning in the mid-1980s. The reform
aimed to boost revenue collections and reclaim the majority of the total revenue by
the central government (Bahl, 1999; Wong and Bird, 2008). From having a low share
of net revenue in the GDP in the earlier 1990s, the effective tax system, when
combined with an average annual GDP growth of about 10 percent, resulted in
continued rise in government revenue from 1999 to 2007.
The second largest contributing factor to government disposable income is net
current transfers. According to more detailed FFA sources not reported in Table 1, the
government collected 1195.5 billion Yuan of income taxes and 1081.2 billion Yuan of

14

social insurance fees in 2007, but only spent 1028 billion Yuan on social welfare
payments, social insurance provisions, and other transfers. As a result, the government
had a net gain of 1248.9 billion Yuan in net transfers in 2007, which is an increase of
1157.1 billion Yuan from the 1992 level, accounting for 25 percent of the growth in
government disposable income during the same period. Overall, the combined
increase in taxes on production and transfers added to about 90 percent of the growth
in disposable income from 1992 to 2007.
Compared with the sharp increase in state income, the total growth of 2147.4
billion Yuan in consumption is still modest. As a result, government saving increased
by 2147.4 billion Yuan, translating to an 8.2 percentage-point increase in its share in
the GDP. This tally is consistent with the popular view of “Nation Rich, People Poor,”
which is now widely discussed in the public media in China. A piece of corroborative
evidence is that the share of household income in the GDP declined from 68.6 percent
in 1996 to 57.5 percent in 2007 (Figure 4). Although this view correctly describes the
changes in income positions of the government in the past two decades, China’s tax
revenue as a percentage of the GDP is still lower than that of major developed
economies, such as Japan, Germany, and the US.

V. Household Saving
Household saving in China rose substantially in the past three decades along with
economic reforms and fast income growth. As noted earlier, household saving only
accounted for 6–7 percent of the GDP in the late 1970s but grew to about 22 percent
in 2007 based on the FFA data (Figure 2). In what follows, we use more detailed UHS
15

data to document the major features of the Chinese household saving in the period of
1988–2007. In light of these stylized facts, we provide a critical overview of the
existing literature and present our views on the main factors behind the rise in
household saving in China.

Data and Stylized Facts
The data we use come from 20 consecutive years of the UHS conducted by China's
NBS. The computer usable form of data began in 1988; the latest data are from 2007
due to the NBS one-year-lag policy for releasing household surveys. The UHS data
record basic conditions of urban households and detailed information on income,
employment, demographic characteristics of all household members, and detailed
consumption information in each calendar year. Our sample comes from five large
provinces (i.e., Liaoning, Zhejiang, Guangdong, Sichuan, and Shannxi) and one
municipality (i.e., Beijing). These provinces are representatives of China both in
terms of income dispersions and geographical coverage.
Household saving is computed as the difference between disposable income and
consumption expenditures on food, clothing, housing services, transportation,
communication, entertainment, education, medical care, and other miscellaneous
items. We also make use of demographic variables, such as young dependency (i.e.,
the ratio of children below 16 to adults aged between 16 and 55 for women and 60 for
men) and old dependency (i.e., the ratio of the elderly above 55 for women and above
60 for men to the working age population), to determine whether saving varies with
demographic structures. We limit our analysis to households whose heads are aged
16

between 25 and 70, and exclude self-employed families due to difficulties in
computing family incomes.
Table 3 reports the basic summary of statistics on the urban household sample.
The average household income grew from 14,918 Yuan in 1988 to 49,061 Yuan in
2007, increasing by more than three folds during the 20-year period. Likewise, the
average household consumption increased substantially, although at a rate slower than
income growth. As a result, the rate of urban household saving increased from 5.6
percent in 1988 to 26.9 percent in 2007. These trends are generally consistent with the
documented rise in household saving based on aggregate data.

Household Saving by Region and Income Level
Figure 7 shows that the Chinese household saving is positively related to household
incomes. More specifically, the four lines in the graph indicate the saving rates of four
income groups defined by their income quantiles. The saving rates of the lowest
income group (0–25 percent) fluctuated between 5 and 10 percent in most years,
ending at 7 percent in 2007. In contrast, the saving rate of the highest income quantile
(75–100 percent) began at 10 percent in 1988 and increased steadily and rapidly to
above 34 percent in 2007, a level that is 27 percentage points higher than that of the
lowest income group in that year. This pattern of higher saving among richer families
appears to be consistent with the observations in developed economies (e.g., Dynan et
al., 2004). Therefore, for China, the rise in household saving appears to be related to
the growing income inequality during the process of economic transition. These
patterns imply that income transfers from the rich to the poor can raise the propensity
17

to consume in China today. We will revisit this point when discussing the effects of
proposed government policies on household saving in the concluding section of the
paper.
Saving rates by region are presented in Figure 8, where we take a three-year
moving average saving rate for each region to mitigate fluctuations in the measure
because of the small size of the sample. The figure reveals that richer provinces, such
as Zhejiang and Beijing, have much higher average saving rates than the poor
provinces of Liaoning, Sichuan, and Shannxi. The gap in saving rate was initially
small in the late 1980s and early 1990s but grew significantly to about 10 percentage
points across regions in 2007. Overall, these patterns are consistent with the
documented saving rates by income.

Demographic Structures and Life Cycle Saving Profiles
Household saving decisions are pertinently related to their demographic structures.
As revealed in Table 4, family structures in urban China experienced substantial
changes in the past two decades. The average size of the household dropped from 3.5
in 1988 to 2.9 in 2007,10 whereas the average age of the household head increased
from 43.2 to 47.3, suggesting the advent of an aging society. The most striking pattern
in the table is the sharp decline in child dependency, which is defined as the
percentage of households with children below 16, from 68 percent in 1988 to 37
percent in 2007. The decline in child dependency is an outcome of the strict

10

A household is defined as a residential unit where family members live and have meals together for an extended
period of time during the year of the survey. Therefore, family members who live outside the residential unit are
not counted as members of a household.

18

implementation of China’s one-child policy that began in earnest in 1979.
We plot the saving rates for households of different demographic structures in
Figure 9. Persistent increases in saving rates are shown across different types of
households, rising by about 21 percentage points in the 20-year period on average.
Since the late 1990s, households with elderly experienced faster growth in saving than
the whole sample. Later on, we will discuss that this trend is consistent with the
decline in pension incomes for the retired; thus, families with elderly tend to save
more to insure smooth consumption. In contrast, households with children tend to
save less. This observation is consistent with the fact that costs of children have risen
rapidly in recent years. Therefore, for households with middle-aged heads, the
increase in their expenditures on raising children appears to have more than offset
their higher earnings, thus dragging down their household saving relative to those of
other households.
Figure 10 presents the age-saving profiles by age of the household head for the
periods of 1988–1990 and 2005–2007. These profiles are perhaps the most important
empirical patterns we have documented for the household sector that shed light on the
changes in their saving over the two decades. As some age cells contain limited
number of observations, we deploy three-age and three-year moving average saving
rates to smooth the data series. The 1988–1990 age-saving profile reveals a relatively
flat “hump-shape,” which resembles the typical life cycle saving profiles observed in
other economies (e.g., Modigliani, 1970). However, the saving profile for 2007
exhibits a dramatic change: (a) saving rates for households of all ages increased

19

substantially, and (b) the profile turns into a “U-shape” over the life cycle; that is, the
young and the old saved relatively more than the middle aged. These patterns are
consistent with the observations made by Chamon and Prasad (2010) for selected
Chinese provinces in the period of 1995–2005 and those documented in Song and
Yang (2010) and Ge, Yang and Zhang (2010) using the national sample of UHS data
covering the period 1992–2007. The two features of increasing household saving and
the “U-shaped” age-earning profiles present a challenge for understanding the
determination of household saving in China.

Understanding China’s High Household Saving
Given the size of the Chinese economy and the importance of the household sector,
considerable research has been devoted to understanding family saving decisions. A
number of early studies applied classical models of saving, which originated from the
studies of saving behavior in the developed market economies, to the case of China.
Among the well-known models are the Keynesian absolute-income hypothesis,
Modigliani-Brumberg’s

life-cycle

theory,

and

Friedman’s

permanent-income

hypothesis. These studies, including Chow (1985), Qian (1998), Wang (1995), and
Modigliani and Cao (2004), tested alternative hypotheses but ended with inconclusive
findings for the saving behavior of the Chinese. One challenging fact that hardly
reconciles with theory is that, instead of consuming more to smoothen lifetime
consumption, Chinese households continued to save more in anticipation of higher
future incomes. Moreover, the age-saving profiles of Chinese households gradually

20

turned into a U-shaped pattern (Figure 10), which is inconsistent with the
hump-shaped profile implied by the life cycle hypothesis.
Habit formation is an alternative theory that can explain the rise in household
saving during a period of rapid income growth (Carroll and Weil, 1994). The notion of
consumption inertia is related to a culture-based explanation to saving behavior. As
the Chinese are known to be thrifty, their consumption growth could have lagged
behind their income growth during the reform period, thus leading to higher
household saving. This argument is supported by the empirical finding that
provincial-level variations in household saving over time and space are influenced by
the lagged saving rates, a result consistent with the existence of inertia or persistence
(Horioka and Wan, 2007). However, the empirical evidence is inconclusive. As
Modigliani and Cao (2004) argue, the traditional and commonsensical explanation
(e.g., why Chinese households are thrifty) counts little, if at all. Indeed, from the
1950s to the mid-1970s, household saving rates in China were below 5 percent, and
the sudden spurt occurred during the reform period. Studies based on household data
also could not find evidence showing that the current consumption growth is
positively correlated with the past consumption growth (Chamon and Prasad, 2010).
Given that older cohorts usually carry more cultural tradition than younger cohorts,
Zhou (2007) rejects the thrifty factor as an important determinant of Chinese
household saving. Using the 1988–2003 China Health and Nutrition Surveys, he finds
that younger Chinese cohorts actually have a higher propensity to save than older
cohorts after controlling for other saving determinants.

21

Demographic changes induced by China’s population-control policies could have
an effect on household saving through two channels. First, as the nonworking
population consisting of the young and the old consumes without producing an
income, a rise in their share in the population tends to reduce national household
saving. Second, in a developing country without a mature social security system,
children often provide old-age support to their parents, and thus children act as an
effective substitute for life-cycle saving. Motivated by these factors, Modigliani and
Cao (2004) use the ratio of employed population to the number of minors up to age 15
to approximate demographic change. They find that the decline in the young
population dependency for the period of 1953–2000 increased Chinese household
saving through both effects of “less mouths to feed” and old-age security. However,
this time series evidence is not confirmed by panel data studies. Neither aggregate
dependency ratio (e.g., Kraay, 2000) nor separate accounts of the young and the old
dependency ratios (Horioka and Wan, 2007) are found to have a significant effect on
the household saving rates across Chinese provinces. Applying cohort analysis to data
from the UHS, Chamon and Prasad (2010) reach a similar conclusion that
demographic structural shifts do not go very far in explaining saving behavior in
China.
Competitive saving motive is yet another demographic factor related to the
imbalanced sex ratio in China (Wei and Zhang, 2010). As the two authors argue, the
traditional preference for a son is widespread in China. With restrictive population
control policies, many families use the inexpensive type-B ultrasonic technology to

22

detect the gender of fetuses and engage in sex-selective abortion, leading to a severe
imbalance in the sex ratio. The intensified competition among men for potential wives
stimulates households with a son to spend thriftily to accumulate wealth in order to
gain a competitive edge in the marriage market. Building on this idea, Wei and Zhang
use provincial panel data (1978–2006) to test the effect of sex ratio imbalance on
household saving. They show that the imbalanced sex ratio significantly increases
household savings, with approximately 68 percent of the increase in rural saving rate
and 18 percent of that in the urban rate being attributed to the rise in the sex ratio.
Economic transitions in China not only involved a decline in the size of the state
sector but also made a transition from public provision of education, health care, and
housing services to private expenditures on these lumpy purchases. The uncertainty
associated with the transition could trigger precautionary motives to save. In
particular, by the mid-1990s, the Chinese government realized that its gradualist
reform policy could no longer manage the mounting losses of SOEs and decided to
take more aggressive steps, first allowing the privatization of small and medium SOEs
and then, beginning in 1997, moving forward with more aggressive restructuring. The
objective was to shut down losing SOEs, establish modern forms of corporate
governance, and de-link the provision of social services from individual employers.
This would be accomplished through the privatization of housing and the shifting of
the federal responsibility of health insurance, unemployment insurance, and pension
provisions to the local governments, employers, and employees themselves. These
aggressive reforms led to mass layoffs in SOEs. From 1996 to 2002, about 32 million

23

workers were laid off from the state sector. Based on the 2001 China Urban Labor
Survey and the 2000 Population Census, Giles et al. (2005) estimate that the
unemployment rate of urban permanent residents increased from 6.1 percent in 1996
to 11.1 percent in 2002. Using independent population data sources, Knight and Xue
(2006) arrive at almost similar estimates, showing that China’s urban unemployment
rate increased gradually from 7.7 percent in 1995 to 11.5 percent in 2000.
Given the earnings uncertainty and unemployment risk combined with liquidity
constraints and incomplete unemployment insurance, Chinese urban households that
experienced past income uncertainty appeared to have increased their propensity to
save in the period of 1995–1999 (Meng, 2003). Moreover, the predicted probability of
displacement had an even stronger effect on saving for households without
unemployed members. Although these findings are robust for the household sample
drawn from the specific period, reconciling the findings with the macroeconomic facts
is difficult. The reason is that, when the employment uncertainty associated with
state-sector restructuring continued to rise and reached its peak in the late 1990s,
household saving rate did not increase accordingly but rather fluctuated within a
narrow range of 16.2–18.1 percent during the second half of the 1990s (Table 3).
Therefore, the precautionary saving motive stemming from employment uncertainty
does not seem to explain well the surge in household saving since 2000.
Accompanied with the state sector reforms, budget allocations for education,
health care, and housing services declined substantially. For instance, expenditures on
health and education only accounted for 2 percent of household consumptions in 1995,

24

but this share rose to 14 percent by 2005. Chamon and Prasad (2010) argue that these
rising private financial burdens could induce higher household saving, as younger
families accumulate assets for future education spending, older families prepare for
uncertain health expenditures, and most people save to prepare for mortgage
payments or housing upgrades. Although these are plausible factors, their quantitative
effects on savings are difficult to assess. Conceptually, as most of the young adults
have already finished their own education, there is no need to save for that purpose;
they might have incentives to accumulate assets for their children’s education.
However, the increase in their saving could be offset by the reduced saving of older
families who have to incur higher education costs for their children who are already in
school. Similar compositional effects exist for health care and housing expenditures,
as higher costs tend to reduce the saving rates of those households that incur higher
expenditures in specific years. So far, existing studies have not yet systematically
assessed the combined effects on saving across different population groups.
The changes in age-saving profiles between the periods of 1988–1990 and
2005–2007 shown in Figure 10 reveal several key features of the saving behavior of
the Chinese households. A successful model that resolves the Chinese household
saving puzzle should explain not only the rise in household saving but also the
U-shaped age-saving profiles over the life cycle in recent years. Two recent studies,
Song and Yang (2010), and Ge, Yang, and Zhang (2010), are particularly motivated to
explain the stylized patterns of Chinese household savings as shown in Figure 10.
Using the comprehensive data from Chinese UHS covering the period of 1992–2007,

25

Song and Yang document three dramatic changes in the life cycle earnings in China’s
fast-growing environment that are new to the existing literature: (a) there are large
upward shifts in the earnings of successive younger worker cohorts, (b) individual
age-earning profiles have become flattened during the past two decades, and (c) the
aggregate pension replacement rate, which is defined as the ratio of average pension
per retiree to average wages per worker in specific years, declined from about 80
percent in the early 1990s to a range of 52–58 percent in 2007. Incorporating these
features of the Chinese economy into a dynamic optimization model of heterogeneous
agents, they show that an otherwise standard intertemporal choice model can account
well for the recent surge in household saving as well as the U-shaped age-saving
profiles over the life cycle.
Ge, Yang, and Zhang (2010) emphasize the interplay between China’s population
control policies and saving behavior based on an overlapping generation model. They
find that, among several intergenerational linkages, reduced fertility resulting from the
implementation of the one-child policy contributed significantly to the recent rise in
household saving. Their arguments, complementing the findings of Song and Yang
(2010), help explain several special features of household saving in China.

VI. Prospects of China’s High National Saving
The high and rising national saving is a critical component of China’s macroeconomic
imbalances and is believed by some to be an important contributor to the global
saving glut. Indeed, the high aggregate saving rate of about 50 percent of the GDP in

26

recent years not only surpassed the peak saving levels of Japan, Korea, and other East
Asian economies during the years of their miracle growth rates but also has been the
highest in the world among economies of significant size. This remarkably high
national saving has supported China’s high-investment, export-led growth model. As
national saving has exceeded the total investment in recent years, and exports have
exceeded imports, China’s large current account surplus has become an important part
of the global imbalances. We show in this paper that corporate, household, and
government sectors have all contributed significantly to the upsurge in national saving
in the past decade. The key causes include China’s fast economic growth, accession to
the WTO accession, rising corporate profits, changes in life cycle earnings, pension
system, other provisions of social services, and the demographic transition.
In the aftermath of the global financial crisis, the Chinese economy is facing a
series of challenges; responses to these challenges will likely evolve into systematic
structural adjustments. After more than a decade of heavy public investments in basic
infrastructure, the diminishing returns on similar projects will likely set in, and due to
external pressure, China is likely to experience relatively moderate export growth in
the future and has no choice but to pursue a more balanced current account. These
broad projections imply that China will have to rely increasingly on vigorous
domestic demands to assure sustained growth, structurally reforming the previous
high-investment, export-led growth strategy. Hence, the transition from a high-saving
to a high-consumption regime will be at the center of public attention and policy.
Based on the previous analysis of saving determinants and imminent

27

macroeconomic, demographic, and policy trends into the future, we assert that the
Chinese national saving may have already peaked at around 2007. A main reason
behind this judgment is the likely slowdown in China’s future growth, which is
projected at an average annual rate of 8.1 percent for 2011–2015 by the World Bank
(World Bank, 2010) and an even lower range of 5.37–7.27 percent for 2010–2020 by
the Asian Development Bank (Lee and Hong, 2010). The national saving is positively
correlated with economic growth (e.g., Carroll and Summers, 1991; Deaton and
Paxson, 2000). Using 2.52 as the growth elasticity of national saving for China for
1978–2000 (Modigliani and Cao, 2004), the decline in average GDP growth from 9.8
percent in the past decade to 8.1 percent as forecast by the World Bank for the next
five years would reduce China’s aggregate saving rate by about 4.3 percentage points.
Our previous analysis is suggestive of the channels of the effect. Slower GDP growth
will mean reduced growth in value-added production tax and reduced income tax for
the government, and therefore a lower saving rate if the government’s consumption
growth is held stable. Our foregoing analysis of corporate earnings suggests that
slower GDP growth will also imply reduced capacity for corporate saving.
The corporate sector will likely have a lower saving/GDP ratio in the foreseeable
future because of the gradual decline over time in China’s gains resulting from its
accession to the WTO, the initiation of dividend payments for the state sector, and the
pending increase in labor costs. As the largest shareholder, the state did not require
SOEs to pay dividends in the past. However, with rising profits after the state-sector
restructuring in the late 1990s, the Chinese government started to require dividend

28

payments in 2008. This policy could squeeze corporate saving.
Moreover, reports of labor unrest in China are increasing, including news on
labor strikes in Toyota and Honda joint-venture plants and the string of worker
suicides at the Foxconn facilities in early 2010. Sentiments favoring the protection of
the rights of workers have grown in China as revealed by both media and government
sources. By July 2010, 18 provinces had announced increases in minimum wages by
an average of 20 percent. Nationwide increases in the minimum wage will likely
spread to nine more provinces by the end of the year. Given the decline in the share of
labor income in the GDP (Figure 4), there have been reports that the Chinese
government plans to raise the wages of production workers systematically as a way to
boost domestic production and move the economy away from the reliance on exports
for growth (Ho, 2010). The National Development and Reform Commission, which
formulates and coordinates national economic policies, have been developing an
income redistribution reform plan that is likely to be incorporated into the 12th
five-year plan for the period of 2011–2015. Although we do not intend to analyze the
efficiency loss and welfare consequences of implementing such policies, transferring
income from high-income to low-income groups under Chinese conditions, ceteris
paribus, may indeed lower the average household saving rate because low-income
families have higher propensity to consume (Figure 7). In addition, higher labor costs
may suppress the profits of enterprises, thus reducing the capacity of corporate
entities to save.
Other evolving forces are also likely to reduce household saving in the

29

foreseeable future. The inevitable slowdown in the growth of labor earnings will
likely occur across all age groups in conjunction with a gradual steepening of
age-earning profiles, a reversal of what is observed during the period of extraordinary
income growth (Song and Yang, 2010). Over time, the life cycle earnings in China
will converge gradually to the typical earnings profiles observed in more advanced
economies. The combined effects of slower earnings growth and the steepening of
age-earnings profiles will reduce household saving. As Song and Yang point out, the
existing pension contributions under the three-pillared system have fallen far behind
the targeted levels. However, in the coming years, the pension system is likely to be
improved to meet the targeted provisions better. A more robust retirement system will
lead to two consequences. First, with a higher level of pension replacement and thus
less retirement risk, individuals will have less pressure to save during their working
time. Second, a more complete implementation of the three-pillared pension system
will gradually raise the contribution of employers from the current 5 percent of
average wages to the policy target of 17 percent wage taxes. This change will again
reduce the capacity of enterprises to save.
Population aging in the next several decades will have an effect on aggregate
saving as well. According to projections made by the United Nations Population
Council, China’s dependency ratio, which is defined as the sum of the young aged 14
or below and the old aged 65 or above divided by the working population aged
between 15 and 64, has reached the lowest level at 38.5 percent in 2010 (Figure 11).
However, this ratio will rise dramatically to 64.7 percent in 2050, a level comparable

30

to the US figure of 67.7 percent in that year. What drives this rising trend is age
dependency: the percentage of population aged 65 or above will increase from the
current 11.5 percent to an astounding 38.9 percent in 2050, a level higher than that of
Japan (37.8 percent) and the US (21.6 percent) projected for that year. Rising
dependency ratio, especially for the old, will likely reduce aggregate household
saving through not only the more mouths to feed effects but also the fact that old
dependency is generally associated with lower personal saving in high-income
economies. This demographic trend has already set in to influence saving, labor
markets, and other aspects of the Chinese economy.
The reasons behind the high and rising national saving in China in the last
decade are complex. Our medium-term outlook suggests a declining trend in Chinese
saving that will help facilitate the transition from an investment-driven growth model
to a growth paradigm that increasingly relies on the role of domestic consumption.
Radical policy interventions that aim to stimulate consumption, such as the proposed
dramatic increases in minimum wage and income-doubling plan for production
workers in five years, would be risky and unwise. Our view is that reliance on the
momentum of market and demographic forces, when combined with policies such as
building a robust social security system, can help China achieve a successful
transition towards a more balanced growth.

31

References
Bai, Chong-En, Lu, Jiangyong and Tao, Zhigang. 2009. “How Does Privatization
Work in China?” Journal of Comparative Economics, 37(3): 453-470.
Bahl, Roy W. 1999. Fiscal Policy in China: Taxation and Inter-governmental Fiscal
Relations. South San Francisco: The 1990 Institute, University of Michigan Press.
Bayoumi, Tam, Tong, Hui and Wei, Shang-Jin. 2010. “The Chinese Corporate Savings
Puzzle: A Firm-level Cross-country Perspective.” Manuscript.
Carroll, Christopher D. and Summers, Lawrence H. 1991. “Consumption Growth
Parallels Income Growth: Some New Evidence,” National Saving and Economic
Performance, eds. B.D. Bernheim and J.B. Shoven, Chicago: Chicago University
Press.
Carroll, Christopher D. and David N. Weil. 1994. “Saving and growth: A
Reinterpretation,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 40:
133-192.
Chamon, Marcos D. and Prasad, Eswar S. 2010. “Why Are Saving Rates of Urban
Households in China Rising?” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
2(1): 93-130.
Chow, Gregory (1985): “A Model of Chinese National Income Determination.”
Journal of Political Economy 93 (4): 782-92.
Deaton, A. and Christina H. Paxson. 2000. “Growth, Demographic Structure, and
National

Saving

in

Taiwan,”

Population

26(Supplement): 141-73.

32

and

Development

Review

Dynan, Karen E., Skinner, Jonathan and Zeldes, Stephen P. 2004. “Do the Rich Save
0RUH"´Journal of Political Economy 112(2): 397-444.
Ferri, Giovanni and Liu, Li-Gang. 2009. “Honor Thy Creditors Beforan Thy
Shareholders: Are the Profits of Chinese State-Owned Enterprises Real?”
HKIMR Working Paper No.16.
Ge, Suqin, Yang, Dennis Tao and Zhang, Junsen. 2010. “One-Child Policy and the
Chinese Household Saving Puzzle: A Cohort Analysis,” Working Paper, The
Chinese University of Hong Kong.
Giles, John, Park, Albert and Zhang, Juwei. 2005. “What Is China’s True
Unemployment Rate?” China Economic Review 16: 149-170.
He, Xinhua and Cao, Yongfu. 2007. “Understanding High Saving Rates in China,”
China & World Economy 15(1): 1-13.
Ho, Chua K. 2010. “Salary Gains to Damp Capital Spending,” China Daily (June 8).
Hofman, Bert and Louis Kujis, 2006. “Profits Drive China’s Boom,” Far Eastern
Economic Review 169(8): 39-43.
Horioka, Charles Yuji and Junmin Wan. “The Determinants of Household Saving in
China: A Dynamic Panel Analysis of Provincial Data,” Journal of Money, Credit
and Banking 39(8): 2077-2096.
Jefferson, Gary and Su, Jian. 2006. “Privatization and Restructuring in China:
Evidence from Shareholding Ownership, 1995-2001,” Journal of Comparative
Economics, 34(1): 146-166.

33

Knight, John and Jinjun Xue (2006) ‘How High is Urban Unemployment in China?’
Journal of Chinese Economic and Business Studies 4 (2), 91-107.
Kraay, Aart. 2000. “Household Saving in China,” World Bank Economic Review 14(3):
545-70.
Kuijs, Louis. 2005. “Investment and Saving in China,” World Bank Policy Research
Working Paper No. 3633.
Kuijs, Louis. 2006. “How Will China’s Saving-Investment Balance Evolve?” World
Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 3958.
Lee, Jong-Wha and Hong, Kiseok. 2010. “Economic Growth in Asia: Determinants
and Prospects,” Presented at Finalization Workshop: Long-Term Projections of
Asian GDP and Trade, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, July 8-9, 2010.
Ma, Guonan and Wang, Yi. 2010. “China’s High Saving Rate: Myth and Reality,” BIS
Working Papers No. 312.
Meng, Xin. 2003. “Unemployment, Consumption Smoothing, and Precautionary
Saving in Urban China,” Journal of Comparative Economics 31(3): 465-85.
Meng, Xin, Manning, Chris, Li, Shi and Effendi, Tadjuddin Noer. 2010. The Great
Migration: Rural-Urban Migration in China and Indonesia. Northampton:
Edward Elgar Publishing.
Modigliani, Franco. 1970. “The Life Cycle Hypothesis of Saving and Intercountry
Differences in the Saving Ratio,” in Induction, Growth and Trade, eds. W. A.
Eltis, M. FG. Scott, and J. N. Wolfe. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 197-225

34

Modigliani, Franco and Shi Larry Cao. 2004. "The Chinese Saving Puzzle and the
Life-Cycle Hypothesis," Journal of Economic Literature 42(1): 145-170.
NBS, National Bureau of Statistics of China (various years) China Statistical
Yearbook. Beijing: China Statistics Press.
Qian, Yingyi. 1988. “Urban and Rural Household Saving in China,” International
Monetary Fund Staff Papers 35(4): 592-627.
Qin Duo. 2003. “Determinants of household saving in China and their role in
quasi-money supply,” Economics of Transition 11(3): 513–537.
Song, Zheng Michael and Yang, Dennis Tao. 2010. “Life Cycle Earnings and Saving
in a Fast-Growing Economy.” Working Paper, Chinese University of Hong Kong.
United Nations, Population Division. 2009. World Population Prospects: The 2008
Revision Population Database, China (http://esa.un.org/unpp).
Wang, Yan. 1995. “Permanent Income and Wealth Accumulation: A Cross-Sectional
Study of Chinese Urban and Rural Households,” Economic Development and
Cultural Change 43 (3): 522-550.
Wei, Shang-Jin and Zhang, Xiaobo. 2009. “The Competitive Saving Motive:
Evidence from Rising Sex Ratios and Savings Rates in China,” NBER Working
Paper No. 15093.
Wong Christine and Bird, Richard. 2008. “China’s fiscal system: a work in progress,”
in Loren Brandt and Thomas Rawski edits China’s Great Economic
Transformation, Cambridge University Press: 429-466.

35

World Bank. 2010. World Development Indicators 2010, Washington, D.C.
World Bank. 2010. China Quarterly Update. Beijing: World Bank Office.
Yang, Dennis Tao, Chen, Vivian Weijia and Monarch, Ryan. 2010. “Rising Wages:
Has China Lost Its Global Labor Advantage?” Pacific Economic Review 15 (4):
482-504.
Zhang, Haiyan. “Corporate Governance and Dividend Policy: A Comparison of
Chinese Firms Listed in Hong Kong and in the Mainland,” China Economic
Review 19: 437-459.
Zhou, Shaojie. 2007. Essays on Household Consumption and Household Saving
Behavior of Chinese Urban Residents, Ph.D. Dissertation, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong.

36

Figure 1: Gross National Saving Rates of China and Other Economies, 1978-2008
A. China vs. Major Country Groups by Income
0.6

0.6

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0.0

0.0
78

80

82

China

84

86

88

90

High income

92

94

96

98

Middle income

00

02

04

06

08

Low income

World

Saving Rate

B. China vs. the BRIC Countries
0.6

0.6

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0.0

0.0
78

80

82

84

86

China

88

90

92

94

Brazil

96

98

00

02

04

Russian Federation

06

08

India

C. China vs. Developed Economies
0.6

0.6

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0.0

0.0
78

80

82

84

China
United Kingdom

86

88

90

92

94

96

98

Japan
France

Source: World Development Indictors (World Bank, 2009)

37

00

02

04

06

08

United States
South Korea

Figure 2. Household, Enterprise and Government Saving
as Percentage of GDP, 1992-2007
0.6

0.6

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1
0.0

0.0
1992

1995
Enterprises

1997

1999

2001

Government

2003

2005

Households

2007
Total

Source: NBS (1995-2009).

Figure 3. Enterpriese Profit and Value Added, 1992-2007
0.40

60,000

0.35

50,000

0.30
40,000

0.25

30,000

0.20
0.15

20,000

0.10
10,000

0.05

0

0.00
1992

1995

1997

1999

2001

Enterprise profit (100 million), LHS

2003

2005

2007

Enterprise profit/Value-added, RHS

Source: NBS (1995-2009).

38

Figure 4. Income Distribution among Households, Enterprises
and Government, 1992-2007
0.8

0.8

0.7

0.7

0.6

0.6

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0.0

0.0
1992

1995

1997

Enterprise

1999

2001

Government

2003

2005

2007

Households

Source: NBS (1995-2009).

Figure 5. Tax Rebate for Export in China, 2002-2008
7,000

0.16

6,000

0.14
0.12

5,000

0.10
4,000
0.08
3,000
0.06
2,000

0.04

1,000

0.02

0

0.00
2002

2003

2004

2005

Tax rebate for export (100 million, LHS)
Tax rebate/Enterpise saving (RHS)

2006

2007

2008

Tax rebate/Tax revenue (RHS)

Source: NBS (2003-2009).

39

Figure 6. Labor Compensation and Dividend
Distributed to Households, 1992-2007
44

0.60

43
0.50
42
41

0.40

40
0.30
39
38

0.20

37
0.10
36
35

0.00
1992

1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

2007

Labor compansation/Added value of enterprises (LHS)
Household dividend income/Value added of enterprise (RHS)

Source: NBS (1995-2009).

Figure 7. Saving Rates by Income Levels, 1988-2007
0.35

0.35

0.30

0.30

0.25

0.25

0.20

0.20

0.15

0.15

0.10

0.10

0.05

0.05

0.00

0.00
1988

1991

1993

0-25%

1995

1997

1999

25-50%

2001

50-75%

Source: UHS data, 1988-2007.

40

2003

2005

75-100%

2007

Figure 8. 3-year Moving Average Saving Rates by Region, 1988-2007
0.35

0.35

0.30

0.30

0.25

0.25

0.20

0.20

0.15

0.15

0.10

0.10

0.05

0.05

0.00

0.00
1988

1990

Beijing

1992

1994

Liaoning

1996

1998

Zhejiang

2000

2002

Guangdong

2004

2006

Sichuan

Shanxi

Figure 9. Household Saving Rates and Demographic Structure, 1988-2007
0.35

0.35

0.30

0.30

0.25

0.25

0.20

0.20

0.15

0.15

0.10

0.10

0.05

0.05

0.00

0.00
1988

1991

1993

Average saving rate

1995

1997

1999

Family with elderly

Source: UHS data, 1988-2007.

41

2001

2003

2005

2007

Family with children

Figure 10. Age Saving Profiles by Age of Household Head
3-age Moving Average Saving Rates for 1988-1990 and
2005-2007
0.35

0.35

0.30

0.30

0.25

0.25

0.20

0.20

0.15

0.15

0.10

0.10

0.05

0.05

0.00

0.00

25 27 29 31 33 35 37 39 41 43 45 47 49 51 53 55 57 59 61 63 65 67 69
1988-1990

2005-2007

Source: UHS data, 1988-2007.

Figure 11. China's Long-Term Population Trends (percentage): 1950-2050
80

80

70

70

60

60

50

50

40

40

30

30

20

20

10

10
0

0
1950

1960

1970

1980

Aged 14 or below (%), RHS

1990

2000

2010

2020

Aged 15-64 (%), LHS

Source: United Nations (2009).

42

2030

2040

2050

Aged 65 or over (%), R

Table 1. Sources of Funds for Fixed Assets Investment (%)
Year

State Budget Domestic Loans

FDI

Self-raising Funds

Others

1995

3.03

20.46

11.19

51.88

13.45

1996

2.68

19.58

11.76

47.74

18.24

1997

2.76

18.93

10.63

49.71

17.97

1998

4.17

19.30

9.11

48.81

18.61

1999

6.22

19.24

6.74

49.20

18.59

2000

6.37

20.32

5.12

49.28

18.91

2001

6.70

19.06

4.56

49.79

19.89

2002

7.02

19.67

4.63

50.65

18.04

2003

4.59

20.55

4.43

53.65

16.78

2004

4.37

18.49

4.41

55.35

17.39

2005

4.39

17.25

4.21

58.26

15.89

2006

3.93

16.47

3.64

59.75

16.21

2007

3.88

15.28

3.40

60.59

16.84

2008

4.35

14.46

2.90

64.79

13.50

Source: China Statistical Yearbook 2009.

43

Table 2. Sources of Government Disposable Income and Saving
year

Value added
Labor
Net taxes on
Net income
in production compensation production from properties

Net current
transfers

Total disposable
Consumption
income

Saving

Saving as
share of GDP

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998

303.7
352.3
422.8
477.8
517.6
582.1
678.9

230.8
271.3
317.1
372.7
364.8
427.8
534.3

385.5
546.0
742.5
842.5
1061.6
1222.1
1375.4

-12.2
-17.3
-26.5
-37.3
-48.4
-43.0
-47.1

92.7
84.5
71.0
81.3
91.0
102.9
39.1

538.9
694.3
892.7
991.6
1257.0
1436.3
1512.0

420.3
548.8
739.8
837.9
996.4
1121.9
1235.9

118.6
145.6
152.9
153.8
260.7
314.4
276.1

4.4
4.1
3.2
2.5
3.7
4.0
3.3

1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007

735.1
780.9
911.1
1138.9
1341.9
1420.2
1564.3
1817.3
2116.4

615.2
637.2
719.7
876.3
999.5
1107.4
1276.4
1369.7
1596.6

1449.8
1607.5
1836.1
2052.4
2330.5
2364.1
2954.2
3521.8
4508.2

-52.7
-21.5
-28.2
-35.1
-54.6
-69.8
-25.0
-7.9
31.6

91.8
161.9
230.1
243.8
387.7
445.0
608.1
940.6
1248.9

1608.9
1891.6
2229.8
2523.6
3006.0
3052.2
3825.1
4902.1
6308.4

1371.7
1566.1
1766.5
1912.0
2061.5
2319.9
2660.6
3011.8
3519.1

237.2
325.5
463.3
611.6
944.5
732.3
1164.6
1890.3
2789.4

2.6
3.3
4.2
5.1
7.0
4.6
6.4
8.9
10.8

Note: All figures are in nominal billion Yuan. Total disposable income in column (6)=(1)+(3)+(4)+(5)-(2). Saving in column (8)=(6)-(7).

44

Table 3. Summary Statistics of the Urban Household Sample, 1988-2007
Income

Consumption

Saving Rate

(2007 Yuan)

(2007 Yuan)

(%)

2,869

14,918

14,083

5.6

1989

2,683

14,521

12,905

11.1

1990

2,977

15,456

13,093

15.3

1991

2,998

16,453

14,178

13.8

1992

3,673

18,904

15,885

16.0

1993

3,698

20,208

16,973

16.0

1994

3,713

22,308

18,584

16.7

1995

3,727

22,914

19,212

16.2

1996

3,717

23,651

19,473

17.7

1997

3,704

24,472

20,363

16.8

1998

3,782

25,707

21,430

16.6

1999

3,680

26,364

21,648

17.9

2000

4,077

29,124

23,849

18.1

2001

3,656

31,668

25,090

20.8

2002

9,813

30,166

24,295

19.5

2003

10,906

32,281

25,670

20.5

2004

12,748

36,196

28,377

21.6

2005

14,459

40,312

31,124

22.8

2006

14,204

44,184

33,338

24.5

2007

15,260

49,061

35,862

26.9

Year

No. of Observations

1988

Source: CHUS data, 1988-2007.

45

Table 4. Demographic Structures of the Household, 1988-2007
Age of household Schooling of Child dependence Old dependence
head
household head
ratio
ratio
43.2
10.1
0.68
0.11

Year

Household size

1988

3.5

1989

3.5

43.8

10.3

0.66

0.12

1990

3.4

44.5

10.3

0.63

0.11

1991

3.3

43.9

10.6

0.64

0.10

1992

3.3

44.7

10.9

0.62

0.10

1993

3.2

45.2

10.9

0.60

0.10

1994

3.2

45.7

11.0

0.58

0.12

1995

3.2

45.5

11.1

0.57

0.12

1996

3.2

46.1

11.2

0.54

0.12

1997

3.2

45.7

11.2

0.53

0.12

1998

3.2

46.0

11.3

0.50

0.13

1999

3.1

46.4

11.3

0.47

0.12

2000

3.1

47.2

11.4

0.44

0.14

2001

3.1

47.3

11.4

0.43

0.13

2002

3.0

47.9

11.4

0.39

0.12

2003

3.0

47.8

11.5

0.38

0.11

2004

2.9

48.2

11.6

0.35

0.12

2005

2.9

48.2

11.6

0.36

0.13

2006

2.9

48.3

11.7

0.34

0.12

2007

2.9

47.3

11.9

0.37

0.11

Source: CHUS data, 1988-2007.

46

