                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   UNIONS, PENSION WEALTH, AND
                    AGE-COMPENSATION PROFILES


                         Steven G. Allen

                         Robert L. Clark



                      Working Paper No. 1677




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                           August 1985




This project was partially funded under Contract J-9—P—1OO74 from
Pension and Welfare Benefit Programs, U.S. Department of Labor.
Opinions stated in this document do not necessarily reflect the
official position or policy of the Department of Labor. We are
greatly indebted to Jim Corner and Ellen Berry for providing com-
puting assistance above and beyond the call of duty. We wish to
thank Richard Ippolito, Richard Freeman, Gregg Lewis, Charles
Brown, Tom Kniesner, Olivia Mitchell, and workshop participants at
Duke University and the National Bureau of Economic Research for
helpful comments. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research programs in Labor Studies and Pensions. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                    NBER Working Paper #1677
                                                    August 1985




                          Unions, Pension Wealth, and
                           Age-Compensation Profiles


                                    ABSTRACT




     This paper examines the effect of unions on both the magnitude and

distribution of pension benefits. Our empirical results show that beneficiaries

in collectively bargained plans receive larger benefits when they retire,

receive larger increases in their benefits after they retire, and retire at

an earlier age than beneficiaries in other pension plans. As a result, the

pension wealth of union beneficiaries is 50 to 109 percent greater than that of

nonunion beneficiaries.

     Just as wage differentials within and across establishments are smaller

among union workers, benefit differentials within and across cohorts of retirees

are smaller among union beneficiaries. This results from the smaller weight

given to salary average in determining initial benefits and the larger percentage

increases given to those who have been retired the longest under post-retirement

increases. The more compressed benefit structure under unionism causes the

union-nonunion compensation (wages plus pension contributions) differential to

decline more quickly than the union-nonunion wage differential over the life cycle.




Steven G. Allen                             Robert L. Clark
Department of Economics                     Department of Economics
and Business                                and Business
Box 8110                                    Box 8110
North Carolina State University             North Carolina State University
Raleigh, NC 27695—8110                      Raleigh, NC 27695—8110
                                   I.   Introduction


      Studies of the rationale for pensions and analyses of their economic

 effects have been one of the growth sectors in the field of labor economics

 over the last five years. Reasons for this surge of interest are fairly

 obvious--pensions are now a major component of emnloyer expenditures for

 compensation and have important effects on work effort and labor mobility.

 Much of the initial impetus toward the growth of pension plans in the 1940s

 and 1950s came from organized labor. Although pension olans have also become

 increasingly widespread in the nonunion sector, union membershiD remains one

 of the dominant factors in determining pension coverage. Accordinq to Kotlikoff

 and Smith (1983), 76 percent of private waqe and salary workers belonqing to

 unions or employee associations are covered by pension plans compared to only

 35 percent of nonunion workers.

     This paper examines the effect of unions on both the maqnitude and dis-

tribution of pension benefits. Previous studies have dealt with the former

in two different ways. First, Freeman (1983) has estimated the difference

in employer contributions to pension plans between union and nonunion establish-

ments over two different periods. Across all establishments, Freeman found

contributions were four cents per payroll hour hiqher between 1967 and 1972

and eight cents higher between 1973 and 1977 when 50 oercent or more of the

employees were covered by a collective bargaining aqreement. Almost all of the

difference can be attributed to the greater likelihood of union emoloyees

participating in a pension plan. Among only those establishments making contri-

butions to pension plans, contributions were estimated to be onl.y 0.3 cents higher

between 1967 and 1972 and 0.2 cents higher between 1973 and 1977 in unionized

establishments. Neither of these latter two noint estimates was larqer than its

standard error.
                                          2

     On the surface, Freeman's results suggest there should be little difference

in pension benefits between union and nonunion beneficiaries. Such a conclusion

depends, however, on whether there are any differences in (1) hours worked and

the probability of receiving pension benefits between union and nonunion workers

and (2) rates of return and funding ratios between plans administered for union

and nonunion establishments. Since there are good reasons to doubt there are no

union—nonunion differences in these factors, the effect of unions on pension

benefits actually received cannot be deduced from the finding of no difference

in hourly contribution rates. This is not to suqqest differences in employer

contributions are not an important issue; for analyses of labor demand and the

effect of unions on cost and profitability, it is the issue. But to understand

the sorting of workers between union and nonunion jobs and the role of unions as

"voice' institutions., a second approach is required--examination of actual

benefit data.

     Leigh (1981) attempted to do this by analyzing responses in the National

Longitudinal Survey for older men to the question "How much income per month

will you get from your pension plan?'    Leigh's OLS results showed that, among

workers expecting to receive benefits, the expected pension benefit for union

workers is $72 per month lower than that of nonunion workers .      Correctinn    for

selectivity bias in provision of pension plans, he found that expected monthly

benefits are $52 lower for union workers .    Interpretation   of these results

hinges on whether expectations of pension benefits are equally accurate for

union and nonunion workers.' The "voice" model predicts union workers will have

more accurate expectations which is consistent with Leigh's findincis of (1) a laroer

oronortion of nonunion workers who said they did not know how much their pension benefits

would be and (2) a larger coefficient of variation of expected monthly pension

income for nonunion workers who thought they knew the magnitude of their benefits.

Although this does not necessarily imply that nonunion workers either over—

or under-estimate their benefits ,   data on actual benefits clearly are free
                                          3


 of any such bias.   In addition, Leigh did not take into account possible

 increases in benefits after retirement. As we have shown elsewhere (Allen,

 Clark, and Sumner, 1984b), these increases are much larger in plans covered by

 collective bargaining agreements.

      The issue of how unions affect the distribution of benefits amonq retirees has

 not been addressed in previous studies. One of the 'stylized facts" about the

 effect of unions on wages is that they reduce wage differentials within and

 across establishments. This paper examines whether they have a similar compressing

 effect on the distribution of pension benefits.

      This question has important implications for our understanding of the

union-nonunion compensation differential over the life cycle. Union wage policies

raise the intercept and flatten the slope of wage functions, which implies that

the compensation differential falls with experience. Freeman has shown how the

greater pension coverage of union workers works in the opposite direction by

causing the compensation differential to widen with experience, a consequence of

the greater rate of accrual of benefits in the later staqes of the life cycle.

A complicating factor ignored by Freeman but addressed here is whether, among

those eligible for benefits, the increment in pension wealth from an additional

year of experience varies by union status.

     This issue also has direct implications for retirement incentives. If

the growth of pension wealth with experience is, say, smaller in union plans,

union workers wifl have a smaller incentive to continue working. The

effect of unionism on retirement aqe also depends on the union-nonunion differential

in the stock of pension wealth.

     The ways in which unionism is likely to affect pension benefits are

examined in the next section. After briefly describing the data set, we report

our main empirical results. They show beneficiaries in collectively bargained

plans receive larger initial benefits, retire earlier, and get larger
                                       4


post-retirement increases in benefits. The regression results also point out

important differences in the determinants of initial benefits and post-

retirement increases by union status. The paper concludes by calculatinq and

interpreting the effect of unions on pension wealth and examining the implications

of the results for life cycle compensation profiles.


                     IT. How Unions Affect Pension Benefits

     The likely effect of unions on pension benefits is discussed in Freeman

(1981 and 1983) and Leigh (1981), so we will provide only a brief summary of

their arguments. Since our data set is restricted to a sample of beneficiaries,

we focus on arguments dealing with the magnitude of benefits rather than on

those that focus only on the question of which firms have pension plans. The

standard monopoly model predicts both higher pensions and higher wages under

unionism, but makes no prediction about how the share of pensions in total

compensation differs between union and nonunion plans.   Freeman (1981)

argues the share of all fringe benefits will be higher under collective bargaining

because preferences of older workers receive qreater weight and older workers

have greater demand for benefits. Older workers are especially likely to

have greater demand for pensions. Also, when there is a divergence between what

workers want and what management thinks they want with respect to the magnitude

of Dension benefits, this information will flow more rapidly to management

under collective bargaining because of the voice' aspects of union behavior.

The market "exit" mechanism in nonunion settings will be less effective because

the younger and more mobile marginal worker will put much less weight on

pensions than will the older, inframarginal worker. Thus, because of greater

demand for pensions and the mechanisms for revealing information under unionism,

we expect retirees from collectively bargained plans to receive larger

benefits.
                                          5



      Another consequence of this model is that the sortinq of workers with

 heterogeneous tastes between union and nonunion establishments results in

 the marginal union worker having a higher suprly price of frincies'.   Young
 workers who have little use for pensions will avoid jobs in the union sector

 because they know their preferences will be dominated by those of older workers.

 If the marginal worker exDects longer tenure in a union setting, this will, by

 increasing the likelihood he will receive a pension, make him even more willing

 to sacrifice wages in return for future benefits before he is vested.     Finally,
 the abflity of unions to monitor the firm and the pension fund is an additional

 factor leading to higher benefits under unionism. The complexity of benefit

 formulas and pension plan provisions for such factors as participation,

 vesting, and portability makes it very difficult for workers to evaluate

 their plan or compare it to plans at other establishments. Unions hire experts

 to examine pension plan provisions and pension fund performance, giving

workers both more information about their plan and, in all likelihood if expert

opinion is translated into bargaining objectives, a more desirable plan.        If

this additional information results in greater worker confidence in the Dlan,

it will increase demand for pension benefits.


     The effect of unionism on pension wealth cannot be estimated accurately

in a simple cross section benefit equation for two reasons.   First, union

participants are more likely to be eligible for early retirement and disability

benefits. Kotlikoff and Smith (1983) report 86 percent of the participants of

union plans are covered by early retirement orovisions and 79 percent are covered

by disability provisions. The corresponding figures for nonunion plans are 79

and 70 percent. Of course, greater eligibility for early retirement need not

translate into an earlier average retirement age, depending on how the benefit
                                        6




formula is adjusted for early retirees. Nonetheless, we expect earlier retirement

in union plans because if union participants receive larger benefits, the

resulting wealth effect leads them to spend part of those benefits on more

leisure.2 If union participants retire at an earlier age, the union coefficient

in the benefit equation underestimates the true impact of unionism on benefits.

To adjust for this, we estimate the impact of union status on age of retirement

in a separate equation. (There also may be longevity differences between union

and nonunion beneficiaries, but we have no information on the direction of this

potential source of bias.)3

     The second complicating factor is post-retirement increases in benefits.

Such increases can be provided only if participants accept lower wages or lower

initial benefits or if they result in more efficient separation decisions.    In


practice, there is usually no formal pension plan orovision for post-retirement

increases, leaving the nonunion firm a tremendous incentive to renege on any

imolicit contract to provide such increases. This also makes such implicit

contracts less likely among nonunion plans.4

     Potentially, unions can act as enforcement agents to prevent cheating by

the plan and increase the likelihood of post-retirement adjustments. Even

though such adjustments are not a mandatory bargaining topic, unions have ample

means to pressure employers to discuss the matter.   Whether this is in the


union's interest is an empirical question. Many workers have the same incentive

as the firm to violate arrangements made with retirees because they can use

the strike threat to obtain a share of the capital gains. On the other hand,

other workers will not want to forfeit the option of using' post-retirement
                                         7


 adjustments as a risk-sharing device when they retire, especially if they already

 have accepted lower wages in expectation of receiving future benefit increases.

 This is especially likely to be true for older workers. The median voter

model predicts and Freeman's (1983) findings on pension plan provisions imply

 that preferences of older workers receive much more weight in forminq union

objectives. This makes it more likely that unions will act in their interest.

     Another factor encouraging unions to act in this fashion is the activity

of retirees in union political affairs. In some unions retirees can vote for

officers and attend conventions.   In the United Mine Workers they even vote on

contract ratification. This means distributinn to retirees a portion of any

rents obtained in negotiations can yield a political payoff to union officers.

In contrast, retiree preferences receive zero weight in a nonunion setting,

making an intergenerational transfer from workers to retirees unlikely.

     We have shown elsewhere (Allen, Clark, and Sumner, l984b) that union

beneficiaries are much more likely to receive post-retirement increases,

controlling for other factors such as olan size, salary average, initial

benefits, and years of service. At the sample means, the average union

participant received a 33 percent increase between 1973 and 1979; the average

nonunion participant, a 17 percent increase. Empirically, this calls for a

distinction to be made between initial benefits and the rate of chanoe in

benefits after retirement to get an accurate reading on the impact of unionism.

     In addition to changing the size of the pension package, unions also are

likely to change the manner in which benefits are allocated. Many studies

have shown that unions compress occunational and life cycle wage differentials.

One reason frequently offered for this practice is tha,t it promotes solidarity

among union members. A wide dispersion can lead to the creation of dissident
                                        8


groups at either tail or in the middle of the wage distribution. By collapsing

the distribution toward the middle, the odds of beinq able to achieve further

redistribution for any particular group become quite small. To examine whether

this argument has equal validity When applied to the distribution of pension

benefits, we will estimate separate initial benefit and post-retirement increase

equations for union and nonunion beneficiaries.


                             III. Data Description

     This analysis uses data from the Pension Benefit Master File (PBMF),

made available to the authors through a contract with the Department of Labor.

This is a survey based on a stratified random sample of oension plans filinq

series 5500 and 5500C forms in 1975. The PBMF contained firm-reported information

on individuals receiving benefits in December 1978. Plan sponsors were asked to

indicate the size and method of all post-retirement increases in benefits

between 1973 and 1978. Using this information we were able to construct a

benefit series that indicated the annual pension benefits from 1973 to 1979 for

all persons retired prior to 1973. In addition, we were able to determine the

benefit at retirement for persons retiring between 1973 and 1978 and any post-

retirement increases for these more recent retirees between their year of

retirement and 1979.

     Although the PBMF included defined contribution plans as well as defined

benefit plans, this analysis concentrates exclusively on the defined benefit

plans. The defined contribution plans were excluded because of limitations in

the survey that make it impossible to determine benefit increases between 1973

or the year of retirement and 1979. As a result, we could not calculate

initial benefits or post-retirement adjustments for individuals covered by the

defined contribution plans. Weights provided by the Department of Labor

enabled us to construct weighted samples of individuals and plans representative
                                         9


 of the set of defined benefit plans that existed in 1975. For a more detailed

 description of this sample and our data construction techniques, see Clark,

 Allen, and Sumner (1983) and Allen, Clark and Sumner (l984a, b).

      Some plans did not report collective bargaining status on the PBMF. To

 reduce the number of cases for which collective bargaining status was unknown,

we matched the PBMF with a file of the EBS-1 reports obtained from the National

Bureau of Economic Research. For the few cases in which these sources differed

on collective bargaining status, the data on the EBS—l reports were, on the advice

of the Department of Labor, assumed to be correct. Even with the addition of

the EBS-1 data, the collective bargaining status of some plans remained unspecified.

Rather than deleting these observations entirely, we use two union status variables

in the pooled samples. The first indicates whether the plan was collectively

bargained; the second, whether collective bargaining status was unreported.

This allows the coefficient of the first variable to be interpreted as a

union—nonunion difference. When separate equations are estimated on the basis

of union status, we do not examine the plans that have union status unreported.

     Although the size of the samples used in the empirical work reported below

is quite larqe in terms of numbers of individuals (about 100,000), only

about 200 pension plans are represented. As a result, the precision of the union

coefficients will be overstated to some extent. The magnitude of this over-

statement cannot be determined, as most of the other variables in the model vary

across individuals rather than pension plans. Aqgregatinq the observations by

plan does not solve the problem because this eliminates most of the variation

between union status and the other independent variables, thus biasing the

union coefficient. Even though our approach is not completely satisfactory, keep

in mind that the precision of union coefficients in wage equations is overstated

in exactly the same way. A relatively small number of union contracts and

large nonunion companies will account for a disprooortionate share of the

observations in most data files commonly used by labor economists today.
                                         10



     The PBMF contains data sufficient to examine the relationship among

different types of compensation that include salary average, initial pension

benefits, and post-retirement adjustments. This paper focuses on the effect of

unions on each of these forms of compensation. First, we examine a sample of

persons who retired between 1973 and 1977. Using this sample, we examine the

effect of unions on benefit levels and union-nonunion differences in factors

that determine benefit levels at retirement. Post-retirement adjustments are

also estimated for these retirees. Second, we examine a sample of persons who

retired between 1950 and 1972 for differences in post-retirement adjustments

attributable to union status.


                                IV. Empirical Results

     In this section, we report the findings from a statistical analysis of

union effects on pension benefits. The results indicate that union retirees

receive higher initial benefits and greater post-retirement adjustments than

nonunion retirees.

Initial Benefits, 1973-77 Retirees.

     Benefits at retirement are determined by plan formulas that generally are

of three types: (1) a flat dollar amount for all eligible beneficiaries,

(2) a flat dollar amount times years of service, or (3) a percentage of final

salary average times years of service. Kotlikoff and Smith report the largest

(47 oercent) proportion of participants in collectively bargained plans have

their benefits determined by the second type of formula, with 12 and 21 Dercent

covered by the first and third types of formulas.   In nonunion plans 71 percent

have their benefits determined by the third type of formula, with 0.2 and

20 nercent covered by the first and second types of formulas. Because the

formulas are so different between union and nonunion plans, it is impossible to

determine the impact of unions on benefits simply by comparinq the formulas.

Also, formula comparisons require arbitrary assumptions about union-nonunion
                                         11



 differences in years of service, earnings, and age of retirement. Accordingly,

 we estimate initial benefit equations as a function of years of service, age at

 retirement, and average earnings over the last five years of service.5 In

addition to these formula variables, we include in our specification dichotomous

variables for race, sex, year of retirement, industry, and union status. A

plan size variable that represents the number of beneficiaries in 1979 also is

included in the specification to control for positive correlation between size

and union status. After experimenting with a number of functional forms, we

decided to specify both initial benefits and salary average in logarithmic form.

     Columns 1 and 2 of Table 1 show results of the initial benefit equations

when the logarithm of average salary during the last five years of work is excluded

(column 1) and included (column 2). Initial benefits clearly are influenced

by earnings. First, there is the direct positive relationship noted above in

which benefits are calculated as a percentage of final earnings. Second, there

is a positive relationship that stems from high-wage workers desiring larger

pensions because the after-tax price in the form of wage reductions will be lower.

Also, there is the simple positive correlation that results if fringe benefits

have a positive income or total compensation elasticity. Finally, there is an

inverse relationship stemming from a compensating differential, i.e., higher

pension benefits are paid for by lower wages. These simultaneous relationships

are not directly addressed by our empirical model.6

     When the log of average earnings is included as an independent variable, the

estimated coefficients indicate that a 10 percent increase in averacie final

earnings raises initial benefits by approximately 3 percent. As for the

other coefficients, a 10,000-person increase in the number of 1979 beneficiaries

is associated with a 6 percent rise in initial benefits. An extra year of

service adds 5 percent to the benefit level. A somewhat puzzling result is the
                                        12



finding that delaying retirement by one year reduces benefits by 1 percent.

This may be attributable to the fact that more generous pension plans usually

allow earlier retirement.

     The key result in Table 1 is that initial benefits are larger for union

beneficiaries.7 Without controlling for earnings in column 1, we find that

union beneficiaries receive 4 percent larger initial benefits. The difference

widens to 6 percent when the earnings average variable is added to the model in

column 2. The coefficients imply that a white male beneficiary previously

employed in manufacturing who retired in 1977 with the sample mean values of

earnings average, plan size, age at retirement, and years of service would

receive an initial benefit of $2411 from a nonunion plan and $2568 from a

union plan.

     There are two puzzling aspects about these results. First, why is the

effect of unions on pension benefits so much smaller than almost all estimates

of their effect on wages? Second, why doesn't the union—nonunion difference in

benefits shrink in column 2 when earnings are added to the model? Assuminq

positive correlations between (1) unionism and wages and (2) wages and benefits,

the union coefficient in column 1 should have been larger than that in column 2.

These apparently contradictory results could be attributed to the sample selection

rule from which they are generated. This is a sample of workers who received

pensions from defined benefit plans; workers who were not covered by Dension plans,

rkers covered by defined contribution plans, and workers who were covered by

defined benefit plans but did not qualify for benefits are omitted.

     To get a better feeling for how to interpret our results, we estimated an

earnings average equation. The results in column 3 of Table 1 show beneficiaries

in collectively bargained plans had a 7 percent lower earnings average in their

last five years of employment. At first glance, this seems to contradict years

of research on union wage effects. Several factors relating to our data set
Table   1   .   Benefit   at retirement, earnings average and age at retirement
                                                                                equations, 1973—77 retirees


                                                                        ln(Earnings average
Dependent                             ln(Bertefit at   ln(Benefit at       over last five          Age at
   variable                            retirement)      retirement)    years before retirement)   retirement
 Independent
— variable                    Mean         (1)              (2)                  (3)                  (4)
Union                          .680         .040             .063              - .067               - .840
                                           (.006)           (.006)              (.004)               (.034)
ln(earnings average)         8.971                           .345                                     .410
                                                            (.005)                                   (.027)
ln(benefit at                7.677                                                                  -.306
  retirement)
                                                                                                    (.018)
1979 recipients/lU5            .138         .627            .576                 .148              —2.910
                                           (.013)           (.012)              (.008)              (.069)
Years of service/l02           .245       5.547            5.230                 .920               4.724      -J
                                          (.030)            (.030)             (.020)               (.188)
                                                                                                               ()
Age at retirement/102          .622       - .835           —.986                 .438
                                           (.058)           (.057)             (.038)
White                          .918         .008           -.022                 .087                 .182
                                           (.009)           (.009)             (.006)               (.048)
Male                           .779         .323            .195                 .370               -.149
                                          (.006)            (.006)             (.004)               (.036)
R2                                          .408            .438                .170                  .094

Mote:   Each equation also contains an intercept and dummy variables
                                                                     indicating                    of
        retirement (4), whether union status is unreported, and whether sex is industry (6), year
                                                                                unreported. The sample
        size is 99680 in each equation. Since large plans were
                                                                intentionally overrepresented in the
        survey, each observation is weighted by plan weights representing the incidence of similar
        in the pension universe.                                                                   plans
                                        14



account for this apparent contradiction. First, the sample selection criteria

exclude many low—wage nonunion workers. Second, the PBMF does not contain any

human capital variables except years of service. Thus, we are unable to

account for differences in earnings due to education or occupational differences.

The sample selection criteria and lack of human capital measures suggest that

we are comparing blue collar union workers with white collar nonunion workers

who have more years of schooling. These factors are less important in the

benefit equations because of the inclusion of earnings as an independent variable.

The union-nonunion wage differential also may be understated because of using

only the last five years of earnings to derive the earnings average variable.

Other studies have shown that the wage differential narrows with age, so we are

estimating the union effect at a point in the life cycle at which it is expected

to be relatively small.

     An extra year of service raises final earnings by 0.9 percent, indicating

that earnings rise until retirement in this sample. Consistent with this

response is the finding that later retirement increases final earnings.

Delaying retirement by one year increases final earnings by 0.4 percent.

Increases in plan size raise final earnings. This conforms to expectations if

plan size is a proxy for the size of the firm. The point estimate indicates

that an additional 10,000 beneficiaries increases final earnings by 1.5 oercent.

     To estimate the effect of unions on pension wealth, we must also determine

whether unionism has any effect on age of retirement. To get a rough estimate

of this effect, we regressed age at retirement on union status, earnings average,

initial benefits (a proxy for pension wealth), and the other independent

variables used in the benefit and earnings average equation. We find that

union beneficiaries retire almost one year earlier than nonunion beneficiaries.

At the sample means of all independent variables, the average union beneficiary

retires at age 61.9; the nonunion beneficiary, at age 62.7.
                                           15


      Although our model in column 4 is much less econometrically elaborate

 than most retirement models, results for the earnings average and pension

 benefit coefficients are comparable to previous results. We find persons with

 higher earnings in their last years of work and smaller initial benefits more

 likely to work longer. However, the magnitude of both coefficients is rather

 small. A one-unit increase in log earnings average (equivalent to thousands of

 dollars) is associated with only a 0.4-year delay in retirement; a one-unit

decrease in log initial benefits corresponds to a 0.3-year delay.

      Differences in benefit formulas used in collectively bargained plans suggest

that determinants of pension benefits vary greatly by union status. Table 2

reports the results of benefit at retirement equations when the sample is sorted

by union status. Recalling differences in the benefit formulas, we expect

that increases in. earnings will have a larger effect in nonunion Dlans. This

prediction is confirmed by the results shown in Table 2. In addition, the

plan size effect is twice as large for the nonunion sample. The only qualitative

difference between the two equations concerns the age of retirement variable.

Nonunion plans have the expected relationship of higher benefits for delayed

retirement, whereas members of union plans have lower benefits with delayed

retirement.

     A final relationship is shown below when type of retirement (normal ,   early,
postponed or disability) variables are included in the regression equations. This

does not produce any major changes in the other independent variables (including

age at retirement), so they are not repeated here. Union retirees who retire

early receive 10 percent more in benefits than those retiring at the normal age

whereas nonunion retirees receive 10 percent less. Union members taking a

disability retirement receive 6 percent more than those retiring at the normal age,

but nonunion disability retirees receive 18 percent less. Postponed retirement

for both groups leads to lower benefits.
                                      16

Table 2. Benefit at retirement equations, all 1973-77 retirees by union status


                               Union                       Nonunion
Sample
Independent                       Coefficient                  Coefficient
variable                Mean   (Standard error)    Mean     (Standard error)

                                   4.308                           .272
Intercept
                                    (.046)                        (.192)


ln(earnings            8.989         .280         8.930            .546
  average)                          (.004)                        (.014)

                        .191         .567           .028         1 .072
1979 recipients/105
                                    (.009)                        (.131)

Years of service/102    .254       4.550            .227         6.018
                                   (.027)                         (.080)

                        .616      —1 .338           .633           .579
Age               2
  at retirement/lO                  (.046)                        (.204)

White                   .901         .053           .952         -.122
                                    (.007)                       (.033)

Male                    .853         .152           .613           .284
                                    (.006)                        (.016)

                                     .543                          .420
R2

N                                  81828                         17725

Mean of dependent                   7.794                         7.460
  variable


Note: The dependent variable is in logarithmic form. Each equation also
       contains an intercept and dummy variables indicating industry (6),
       year of retirement (4), and whether sex is unreported. The same
       weighting procedure is used here as in Table 1
                                            17




 Type of                                        at retirement equation
 retirement                            Union                       Nonunion

 Early                                  .098                         - .103
                                       (.005)                        (.016)

 Postponed                             - .430                       - .053
                                       (.021)                       (.028)

 Disability                             .062                        -.181
                                       (.009)                       (.029)



 Post-Retirement Increases

      Until recently, it was widely believed that private pension benefits were

 fixed in nominal terms. Allen, Clark, and Sumner (1984a,b) present evidence that

 this has not been true. Instead there were sizable increases in benefits after

 retirement during the mid—l970s. Column 1 of Table 3 reproduces a post-

retirement adjustment equation (Allen, Clark, and Sumner (1984b)) for persons

retiring between 1950 and 1972. The second column shows the results from a

similar equation for persons retiring between 1973 and 1977. Because there are

fewer years for potential increases for the second sample, and because increases

tend to be larger in percentage terms for those retired the longest, we expect

the coefficients to be smaller for this sample of more recent retirees.

     The union coefficient indicates that the 1950-72 retirees in collectively

bargained plans received increases which were 16.9 percentage points larger than

their nonunion counterparts. For the 1973-77 retirees, the union differential is

only 5 percentage points. A large plan size effect is found for both samples,

with a 10,000 beneficiary increase resulting in a 4 percentage point increase

for the older retirees and a 1 percentage point increase for the more recent

retirees.     For the older sample, additional years of service increase
                                      18

Table 3. Post-retirement increase equations, 1950-72 and 1973-77 retirees


                              1950—72                      1973—77
                              retirees                     retirees
Sample
Independent                      Coefficients                 Coefficients
variable              Mean    (Standard errors)    Mean   jStandard errors)


Union                  .724          .169          .681           .050
                                    (.006)                       (.002)

1979 recipients/105    .170          .439          .136           .121
                                    (.011)                       (.004)

Years                  .247          .360          .245          —.038
               2
  of service/lO                     (.026)                       (.011)

Age                    .625        - .023          .622           .221
                  2
  at retirement/lU                  (.050)                       (.021)

White                  .930        - .054          .919           .007
                                    (.008)                       (.003)

Male                   .756        -.211           .764          -.049
                                   (.005)                        (.002)

R2                                   .069                         .052


N                                  137038                        103579

Mean of dependent
  variable                           .308                         .075



Note: The dependent variable is the ratio of the change in benefits between
       1973 and 1979 to 1973 benefit for 1950-72 retirees; the ratio of the
       change of benefits between the year of retirement and 1979 to benefits
       at retirement for 1973-77 retirees. Each equation also contains
        intercept and dummy variables indicating industry (6) , year of retire-
       ment (22 in column 1, 4 in column 2). whether union status is unreported,
       and whether ex is unreported. The same weighting procedure is used here
       as tn Table 1.
                                         19


 post-retirement adJustments whereas for those that retire at younger aqes,

 larger increases are provided. The relationships for years of service and age

 at retirement did not hold for the more recent retirees.

      How were benefit increases distributed to retirees by union and nonunion

 plans? The frequency distribution of benefit increase formulas is reported in

 Table 4. A few plans did not use the same type of benefit increase formula

 each time they gave an increase. For instance, a firm may have given the

 same percentage increase to all retirees in 1974, but larger percentage

 increases to those retired the longest in 1977. As a result, the columns in

Table 4 are non-additive. There is only one entry per plan per type of benefit

increase formula in the table. A plan will be represented more than once

only if it uses more than one type of benefit increase formula.

     Only 16.9 percent of the plans gave straight percentage increases.

Both union and nonunion plans tended to favor other approaches. Half the

nonunion plans increased benefits by a percentage, with the percentage increasing

with the amount of time the person had been retired. Most union plans gave

either the same dollar amount increase to all retirees or gave a fixed dollar

amount per year of service. The former method is parallel to compressed

occupational wage differentials in the union sector. The latter reflects the

political dominance of senior workers in union decision making. These two

approaches also produce larger percentage increases for those who have been

retired the longest, as long as their benefits are lower than those of more

recent retirees.

     The net effect of union-nonunion differences in benefit increase formulas

can be gauged by estimating separate benefit increase equations by union

status over 1950-72 retirees receiving at least one increase between 1973

and 1979. These are reported in the appendix. The most interesting difference

between the union and nonunion benefit equations is the pattern of the year
                                                   20




Table 4. Benefit increase formulas, by union status



                                                        Percent    Percent     Pe rcent
                           Total   Union   Nonunion     of total   of union   of nonunion
Formula                    plans   plans     plans        plans      plans        plans

Percent increase             13       8       5           16.9       17.8         15.6

Percent increase,
  percentage increasing
  with time retired          27      11      16          35.1        24.4         50.0
                                               .
Percent increase,
  percentage increasing
  with CPI                    6       2       4           7.8         4.4         12.5

Flat dollar increase         14      13       1           18.2       28.9         3.1

Flat dollar increase
  per year of service        22      16       6           28.6       35.6         18.8

Flat dollar increase,
  amount increasing
  with time retired           3       2       1           3.9         4.4         3.1


Flat dollar increase
  per year of service,
  amount increasing with
  time retired                3       2       1            3.9        44          3,1


Other                         4       3       1            5.2        6.7         3.1


Total                        77       5      32          100.0      100.0       100.0


Note: Some plans used more than one benefit increase technique over this
       period, making the columns non-additive. Only plans with persons
       retired before 1973 are included in the sample.
                                           21

  of retirement dummies, presented in Figure 1.      These dummies indicate that the
  increases awarded to longer term retirees
                                                are relatively much greater for union
  than for nonunion beneficiaries, a possible response to union efforts to compress

  the compensation and/or benefit distribution.     Union beneficiaries retiring in
 the 1950s received benefit increases 47
                                           percentaqe points larger than those
 received by union beneficiaries retiring in 1972.      This difference was only 18
 percentage points for nonunion beneficiaries. A similar pattern holds for those

 retiring in the 1960s, as union beneficiaries received increases 27 percentage

 points larger than those of 1972 retirees, whereas nonunion beneficiaries who

 retired in the l960s received benefit increases
                                                     only 9 percentage points
 larger. In contrast, 1970 and 1971 retirees in both union and nonunion plans

 received increases only slightly larger than those of 1972 retirees. The smoother

 time pattern of increases in benefits seems attributable to a larqer and more

even distribution of beneficiaries across the years of retirement in the union

sample.


                           V. Unions and Pension Wealth

     Empirical results in the last section show union beneficiaries retire

earlier and receive both larger initial benefits and post-retirement increases

in benefits. To compare pension wealth for union and nonunion retirees, two

sets of calculations were performed. In the first set, we used mean values from

the union (nonunion) sample of years of service and salary average to calculate

initial pension benefits for union (nonunion) workers.      To isolate the effect

of unionism on pension benefit formulas, we performed a second set of calculations

using the mean values of years of service and salary average for the entire

sample to obtain initial benefits for both union and nonunion beneficiaries.

In both sets of calculations, the initial benefits for union (nonunion) bene-

ficiaries are derived from the coefficients of the equation estimated over the
                                                              22




    0.70



    0.65



    0.60



    0.55



    0.50


    0.5

C   0.0
0
E
F
F   0.35
I
C
I
E   0.30
N
T

    0.25



    0.20
                                                        $

    0.15



    0.10                                     I!
                                             2
    0.05                 Ii                                                             2
                         h



    0,00

           1950   1952        195'f   1956       1958       j960   1962   1964   1966       1968   1970

                                                  YEFR OF RETIREMENT


             Figure 1.        Coefficients of year of retirement dummies in post-retirement
                              increase equations: ee74 line, union beneficiaries dos2ed line,
                              nonunion beneficiaries
                                       23

 union (nonunion) sample. We assume union beneficiaries live for 18 years after

 retirement in converting this initial benefit estimate into a pension wealth

 estimate. When retirement ages of union and nonunion beneficiaries are held

constant, this same assumption is used for nonunion beneficiaries. We use a

discount rate of 3 percent. For age of retirement we assume that either (1) it

 is identical for union and nonunion beneficiaries or (2) it is .84 years later for

nonunion beneficiaries, reducing the time in which benefits are received by an

equal amount. The latter assumption is based on the age at retirement reqression

results in Table 1.

     For post-retirement increases we examine four cases: (1) none are

given; (2) only union beneficiaries receive them; (3) all union and nonunion

beneficiaries receive them; and (4) increases are given by union and nonunion

plans with an adjustment for the greater proportion of union beneficiaries

receiving increases.8 The magnitudes of the post-retirement increases are derived

from the results in Appendix Table 1. For the first seven years after retire-

ment, we use the predicted value for a person retiring in 1972 (.249 for union

retirees; .190, nonunion). For the next five- and six-year periods, we use

the predicted values for persons retiring in 1967 and 1961   ,   respectively
(.435 and .688 for union; .235 and .275, nonunion). The underlying assumption is

that both the magnitude of increases (in percentage terms) and the distribution

of increases across cohorts of retirees are constant over time. Based on

our examination of a sample of union contract histories reported in BLS Wage

Chronologies, this does not seem to be an unreasonable assumption for union

beneficiaries. Under these assumptions, benefits increase by 202.5 percent over

an 18-year period for union beneficiaries receiving increases; 87.4 percent

over 18 years for nonunion beneficiaries. This is equivalent to an annual

increase of 6.34 percent for union beneficiaries, 3.55 percent for nonunion

beneficiaries.

     Let's turn now to the pension wealth comparisons in Table 5. The first

row examines the case in which there are no post-retirement adjustments.
                                        24


Pension wealth is 50 percent greater for union beneficiaries when we allow

years of service and salary history to vary by union status. If we set

years of service and salary history to be equal for union and nonunion bene-

ficiaries, the effect of unionism on pension wealth falls to 8 percent. The

latter figure is slightly larger than the amount implied by the union coefficient

in the initial benefit equations in Table 1 because it is derived from the

specification with complete union status interactions in Table 2.

     The effect of unionism on pension wealth becomes much larger when we

take into account post-retirement adjustments. The most reliable comparisons of

pension wealth are reported in the last row of Table 5. Allowing for post-

retirement increases in benefits raises the effect of unionism from 50 to 98

percent, allowing for union-nonunion differences in years of service and salary

average; from 8 to 43 percent, controlling for these differences.   Many

nonunion beneficiaries (42 percent) received no increases. When we compare

pension wealth for nonunion beneficiaries who do not receive post-retirement

increases with that of union beneficiaries who do, these gaps widen further to

162 percent allowing for union nonunion differences in years of service and

salary average; 89 percent, controlling for these differences.

     Allowing for differences in retirement age results in a modest increase in

our estimates of the effect of unionism on pension wealth. The difference

increases by 6 to 17 percentage points when retirement for nonunion beneficiaries

is delayed by .84 years.

     Considering all three effects simultaneously and adjusting for the greater

proportion of union beneficiaries receiving increases, pension wealth is 50 to

109 percent higher for beneficiaries in plans covered by collective bargaining.

This range is well above all reasonable estimates of the effect of unions on

wages, implying wage differences vastly understate the effect of unions on

total compensation among persons eligible for benefits.
Table   5.   Estimated pension wealth ratios for union and nonunion retirees, by assumptions about post-retirement
             benefit increases and age of retirement


                                                  Means of independent                        Samole means
Assumption                                   variables vary by union status            of independent variables
about post-                                Assumption about age of retirement     Assumption about age of retirement
retirement                                  No difference   Nonunion retirement    No difference   Nonunion retirement
increases                                  by union status   .84 years later      by union status   .84 years later

                       Union                    $39706           $39706              $36502             $36502
No post-
  retirement           Nonunion                  26379            24768               33627              31573
  increases
                       Ratio of union
                       to nonunion               1.50             1.60                1.08               1.16

post-retirement         Ratio of union
  increases             to nonunion              2,62             2.79                1.89               2.01
  Qiven only by
  union plans
                                                                                                                         01

Post-retirement      Ratio of union
  increases given    to nonunion                 1.91             2.00                1.38               1.44
  by union and
  nonunion plans
  without adjustment
  for qreater oro-
  portion of union
  benefic i aries
  receiving
  increases

Post-retirement
  increases given       Ratio of union
  by union and          to nonunion              1.98             2.09                1.43               1.50
  nonunion plans,
  with diustment
  f0r 'reater pro-
  portion of union
  beneficiaries
  receiving
  i ncreases
                                       26



     These results are especially puzzling once we reconsider Freeman's (1983)

finding of no union-nonunion difference in employer contributions to pension

plans per hour among establishments making such contributions. If union

employers contribute no more than nonunion employers, where does the money to

finance larger benefits come from? There are four possibilities: (a) larqer

total contributions in union plans (in contrast to employer contributions per

hour), (b) the smaller percentage of employees receiving pensions in union plans;

(c) higher rates of return in union plans; and (d) lower funding ratios for union

plans.

a. Contributions. There is no evidence that union members work more hours than

nonunion workers. Although we know of no data about how the magnitude of employee

contributions varies by union status, Freeman has examined whether union or

nonunion plans are more likely to allow such contributions. Controlling for a

number of plan characteristics, he found union plans are 21 percent less likely to

involve voluntary employee contributions. The greater incidence of employee

contributions in nonunion plans implies larger benefits in nonunion plans.

b. Percentage receiving pensions. This depends upon turnover rates and vesting

requirements in union and nonunion establishemnts with pension plans. Mitchell

(1982) found much lower quit probabilities for union workers, even with controls

for pension coverage. Freeman (1980) indirectly controls for the effect of all

fringe benefits on tenure (which depends on layoff, discharge, and quit rates)

by using the omitted variable bias formula. Ignoring fringes, he finds tenure

is 1.06 years higher for union workers. The difference narrows to 0.79 years once

fringes are controlled for. This sugaests contributions per eventual beneficiary

are higher in nonunion plans because participants are less likely to stay long

enough to collect benefits. Offsetting this are the stricter vesting requirements

in union plans. However, almost all persons receiving benefits have much more

than the minimum years of service required for vesting. Kotlikoff and Smith

report 9.7 years are required for full vesting in union plans; 9.0 years, in
                                         27



nonunion plans. Both figures are well below the mean years of credited service in

our sample.

C. Rates of return. There has been a great deal of controversy for some time about

whether union plans earn the highest possible rates of return. One source of

concern has been corruption among trustees appointed by union officials in

Taft-Hartley plans, which are jointly administered by labor and management.

Cases in which pension fund assets have been invested in very speculative ventures

(frequently associated with organized crime) or used for personal gain by union

officials have been widely publicized.

     More recently union officials have become interested in using pension funds

to advance a variety of social causes, including the organization of union workers.

By refusing to invest in certain comoanies because they do business in South Africa

or have violated labor laws, some union plans may be unable to out together the

most desirable portfolio of assets. Whether this is actually the case is

an empirical question. So far no one, to our knowledge, has produced any evidence

that such restrictions on possible portfolios result in lowerrates of return.

     Some plans knowingly have invested in projects offering lower returns

to increase the utilization of their members, and possibly, add new members.

This practice generates additional contributions to the fund, but it also may

create additional future liabilities, depending on the benefit formula, rules

for vesting, and whether the project increases employment or hours of union

workers. The net effect of such practices on the amount of funds available in

future years thus is unclear.

     Despite all of these possible sources of lower returns to collectively

bargained plans, available evidence indicates that returns to union and nonunion

plans are not very different. Munnell (1983) reDorts the results of a comparison

made by the A. G. Becker Co. of the median rate of return for Taft-Hartley plans

to all plans between 1973 and 1982. Over the entire period, a plan earning the

median rate of return of the Taft-Hartley plans would have grown by 69 percent,
                                       28


equivalent to an annual return of 5.4 percent. A plan earning the median rate for

all plans would have grown by 64 percent, equivalent to a 5.1 percent annual return.

Although Taft-Hartley plans fared better on average, the difference is very small

and seems to be primarily attributable to smaller holdings of equities in union

plan portfolios in 1973 and 1974, two especially disastrous years for the

stock market.

d. Funding ratios. If the larger pension wealth for union beneficiaries does

not come from greater contributions per eventual beneficiary or from a higher

rate of return, we are left with a final possibility--the funding status of

collectively bargained plans. Despite the tax advantage of full funding described

by Black (1980) and Tepper (1981), many plans are not fully funded.9 One reason

for this, Sharpe (1976) argues, is that fully funded plans lose the option

of allowing the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation to assume the liability

for unfunded benefits not covered by 30 percent of the sponsor's net worth.

     A recent study by Richard Ippolito (1983) of the U.S. Department of Labor

produces strong evidence that plans covered by collective bargaining agreements have

much lower funding ratios than nonunion plans. Using a smaple of 826 defined

benefit plans filing reports with the Department of Labor in 1978, Ippolito

found the funding level of union plans (with respect to vested labilities) 31

percentage points below that of nonunion plans. Based on Ippolitos estimate of

a 60 percent funding ratio in 1978, the results suggest, holding plan size,

industry, year created, and employment growth in industry constant, the average

nonunion plan is 78 percent funded, whereas the average union plan is only 47

percent funded.

     There is good reason to doubt the accuracy of the absolute magnitudes of

these figures because they are based on an interest rate assumption of 2 percent.

At least among the large firms represented on the COMPUSTAT data files, most

plans are overfunded, especially when vested liabilities are evaluated at the same
                                        29


interest rate and that interest rate is at a reasonable level, currently about

6 or 7 percent (see Feldstein and .Morck, 1983).

     Although we are not currently prepared either to explain or to estimate

the average funding ratios of union and nonunion plans, consider two possible

scenarios, both of which are consistent with Ippolito's regression results:

(1) union plans tend to be fully funded whereas nonunion plans are over funded and

(2) union plans are underfunded, whereas nonunion plans are fully funded. Under

the first scenario, the seeming contradiction between higher pension wealth for

union beneficiaries despite identical or lower contributions per eventual beneficiary

is easily resolved-—part of the nonunion contributions is being used to maintain

the overfunded status of the plan. In other words, nonunion plans are contributing

more than necessary to fund current and future benefits, presumably because of

the resulting tax advantages. Why aren't managers for collectively bargained plans

following the same strategy, especially those in which none of the trustees are

appointed by labor? The reason is that unions have the ability at regular intervals

to push contract negotiations for higher initial benefits and increases in

benefits for those already retired. The strike threat gives the union power to

convert an overfunded plan to a fully funded or underfunded one. (Unions cannot

bargain directly over funding ratios.) Knowing this, managers of collectively

bargained plans put no more money than necessary into the fund. According

to this scenario, then, unions are able to constrain the behavior of fund

managers so that all contributions eventually end up in the hands of beneficiaries

instead of the stockholders or management.

     In the second scenario, union plans are underfunded and the burden of higher

benefits falls on younger workers. Identical contributions per hour can provide

larger benefits for union beneficiaries under this scenario as lonq as the

ratio of participants to beneficiaries is sufficiently high. Younger workers are

willing to participate in an unfunded plan as long as (1) they receive rents and
                                       30


(2) they expect another generation of workers to pay for their benefits when they

retire. Such an arrangement is not viable for nonunion plans. The nonunion firm

always has an incentive to terminate an underfunded plan. By doing so, it can

avoid paying the difference between vested and funded benefits. There is one

catch, however, pointed out by Bulow (1982) that keeps nonunion plans fully

funded--workers will not stay with a firm when the plan is not fully funded

unless the firm offers a compensating wage differential. A questionable aspect of

this scenario is whether the participant-beneficiary ratio has been or will

remain high enough to guarantee survival of the system. Ippolito accounts for

greater underfundirig in the union sector via an entirely different mechanism-—

employers intentionally underfund union plans to discourage the union from threatening

the firm's financial health, If union behavior causes the firm to qo out of

business, employees then lose a substantial proportion of their pensions.

However, the threat of job loss seems to be equally credible in this regard.

Further empirical work will be needed to establish which of these scenarios and

interpretations are consistent with the data.


                   VI. Unions and Age-Conpensation Profiles

     Many studies have shown that tenure-earnings profiles for union workers

have higher intercepts and flatter slopes. Do pension accruals imply that the

total compensation profile also has this pattern? Freeman shows how the greater

coverage of union workers by pension plans and the larger increments in pension

wealth in the last years of the life cycle in defined benefit plans widens the

wage difference among older workers. This partially but not totally reverses the

flattening of the profile. Here we go one step further and compare tenure-earnings

profiles and tenure-compensation profiles for union and nonunion workers covered

by pension plans where compensation equals earnings plus pension contributions.
                                           31



     We use earnings functions of the form

            w(t) =   w(0)(l+g)t,
where w(0) equals $10,000 for union workers and $8,000 for nonunion workers,

g equals .03 for union workers and .033 for nonunion workers, and t represents tenure

and is allowed to be as long as 30 or 40 years. The pension benefit formulas

are derived from the coefficients in Table 2 using the means for the pooled union

and nonunion sample of plan size, industry, year of retirement, race, sex, and

age at retirement. These formulas are:

     log B = 4.257 + .0455t + .280 log (E)

     log BN =    1.429 + .0602t + .546 log (c),

where B =    initial   benefit for union workers, BN =   initial   benefit for nonunion

workers, and E   = earnings average over the last five years. We assume workers
are fully vested in their tenth year and have zero vesting beforehand. Pension

wealth estimates are based upon 18 years of retirement and a 3 percent discount

rate. The pension contribution for each year equals the increase in pension wealth

minus the return (also 3 percent) on last period's pension wealth. The latter

figure must be subtracted because it would have accrued even if the participant did

not work.

     Results for 40-year life cycles are reported in the first seven columns of

Table 6. By construction, the percentage difference in earnings between union

and nonunion workers falls from 25 percent in the first year to 12 percent in the

fortieth year. This pattern is similar to those of previous studies (summarized

in Lewis, Ch. 7). Pension contributions begin in the tenth year. The contribution

for union workers is 33 percent larger in that year because the union benefit

formula has a larger intercept. This figure is much larger than the union—

nonunion earnings diffential in the tenth year (22 percent). The total compen-

sation differential based on both earnings and pension contributions, is 26

percent. This is considerably larger than the total compensation differential

(based on earnings only) of 22 percent in the year preceding vesting.
Table    6.   Earnings and pension contribution profiles, by union status and length of profile



                                        40-year profile                                     30-year profile
                                                                  Earnings                               Larnings
                                                                 and pension                            and pension
                  Earnings              Pension contribution     contribution    Pension contribution contribution
Tenure    Union    Nonunion   Ratio     Union Nonunion Ratio        Ratio        Union Nonunion Ratio      Ratio

  1       10000     8000      1   .25                               1   .25                              1   .25

  5       11255     9109      1.24                                  1.24                                 1.24

  9       12668    10373      1.22                                  1.22                                 1.22

10        13048    10715      1.22       8553    6423     1.33       1.26       11495   8632    1.33     1.27

11        13439    11069      1.21        487     536      .91      1.20         654     720      .91    1.20
                                                                                                                      C...)
15        15126    12604      1.20        679     824      .82      1.18          913   1108      .82    1.17

20        17535    14825      1.18       1030    1411      .73       1.14        1385   1896      .73    1.13

25        20328    17438      1.16       1563    2414      .65       1.10        2100   3245      .65    1.08

 30       23566    20512      1.15       2371    4133      .57       1.05        3186   5554      .57    1.03

 35       27319    24127      1.13       3596    7073      .51          .99

 40       31670     28379      1.12      5456   12107      .45          .92


Note:    The simulations assume firms fund only vested liabilities.           These are fully funded each year
         and are included as a part of total compensation.
                                        33




      In all following periods, larger contributions are required for nonunion

 workers. This happens because increases in average earnings and years of service

 have larger effects on pension benefits for nonunion workers and because earnings

 grow more rapidly for nonunion workers. Even though union workers have higher

 earnings, the increment in pension wealth resulting from rising earnings over the

 life cycle is rather small because of the compressed benefit structure. As a

result, after the tenth year, the union-nonunion compensation differential is

smaller than the earnings differential. In the 35th year and thereafter,

total compensation is greater for nonunion workers. The figures for the 30-year

life cycle case in the last four columns tell basically the same story-—among those

receiving pension benefits, the pension benefit structure under unionism causes

the compensation differential to decline more quickly than the earnings differential

over the life cycle.


                                VII. Conclusion

     The main finding of this paper is that pension wealth for beneficiaries

in plans covered by collective bargaining agreements is significantly larger

than pension wealth for other beneficiaries. Three factors contribute to this

union-nonunion pension wealth differential: higher initial benefits, larcier

post-retirement increases in benefits, and earlier receipt of benefits for those in

collectively bargained plans.

     This finding is somewhat surprising, given the earlier results of Freeman and

Leigh on union-nonunion differences in the magnitude of pension contributions and

expected pension benefits. The key factor in reconciling Freeman's results with

ours seems to be the lower funding ratios in plans covered by collective bargaininq

agreements. Except in the case of Taft-Hartley multiemployer plans, unions

are unable to control directly a plan's financial management. Funding ratios and

investment decisions generally are not subject to collective bargaining; unions

can influence these decisions only indirectly through bargaining for changes in
                                       34



the benefit formula. The question of whether and why collective bargaining status

seems to have an important effect on plan financial decisions should be investigated

further.

     The contrast between Leigh's findings on expected benefits and our results

on benefits actually received suggests that either union workers are more likely

to underestimate their benefits or nonunion workers are more likely to overestimate

theirs. The best way to determine which of these two explanations is correct would

be to compare questionnaire responses of employees to actual pension plan records.

Lacking this, some insight can still be obtained by comparing expected benefits in

1971 in Leigh's sample of men between the ages of 50 and 64 with. initial benefits

for our sample of persons retiring between 1973 and 1977. Controlling for

other factors, Leigh found the expected monthly benefit for union beneficiaries to

be $306; nonunion, $358. The initial benefit for a union retiree, based on the

results in column 2 of Table 1 is $2568; for a nonunion retiree with the same

characteristics, $2411. Converting Leigh's figures to annual amounts, we find

that both the mean union and nonunion expectations of benefits are well above the

respective means of benefits actually received, but the estimates of union

workers are closer to the mark. The degree of overestimation amounts to $1104

annually for the union workers, compared to the $1885 overestimate of annual

benefits for nonunion workers. This is consistent with the prediction of the

"voice" model that unions have important effects on the flow of information within

establishments.

     The other important result in this paper is our finding that among employees

participating in a pension plan, the union-nonunion compensation differential

narrows more rapidly over the life cycle than the union-nonunion earninQs differ-

ential. This results from the more compressed pension benefit structure under

unionism. Benefits increase with earnings and tenure at a slower rate in collectively

bargained plans. This effect is accentuated by the slower growth of earnings

in the union sector.
                                       35



     This finding, combined with Freeman's examination of earnings profiles, shows

that pension coverage is an important conditioning factor for understandinq how

the union-nonunion compensation differential changes over the life cycle.     It would

be interesting to see whether the observed patterns of union-nonunion earnings

differentials are a function of pension coveraqe.

     Implications of our results on the effect of retirement age on initial

benefits and the effect of union status on retirement age are less clear

because of unresolved biases. The tremendous difference in the retirement age

coefficients in the initial benefit equations for union and nonunion workers

does suggest that future attempts to model the pension contract or to explain

retirement decisions pay more attention to how incentives for separation and

retention of older employees vary by union status.
                                        36



 Footnotes

      1A complicating factor in this regard is the difference in benefit formulas

between union and nonunion plans. Most nonunion plans calculate benefits as a

percentage of the product of final earnings and year of service. These formulas

partially index benefits to earnings growth, reducing the likelihood of frequent

adjustments in the formula. This is not the case for union plans, where benefits

equal so many dollars per year of service. Thus, to predict benefits accurately,

nonunion employees need to predict future earnings, whereas union employees have

to predict future revisions of the benefit formula. This assumes, of course,

that both sets of employees know what type of formula is actually being used.

     2The results reported below also show that the increment in pension wealth

resulting from working an additional year is smaller in union plans, qivinq initial

impetus to earlier retirement of union workers.

     3One reason to believe that this bias is unimportant is that there are no

pronounced union-nonunion differences in the distribution of year of retirement in

Appendix Table 1.

     4The economic rationale for such contracts is explored in Allen, Clark,

and Sumner (l984b).

     5The earnings average variable is derived from the individual's Social

Security earnings history. The Fox algorithm is used to estimate annual earninqs

for those with earnings not subject to the Social Security payroll tax.

     6Two additional possible sources of bias are the endogeneity of pension

coveraqe and union status. Our data set does not include retirees not receiving

pension benefits or establishments that do not provide pensions, which prevents

us from attempting to correct for the former type of bias. As for the latter type

of bias, there is no concensus within the profession about how to deal with it.
                                            37



     7Percent union among the beneficiaries of our sample is much larger than percent

     union among workers. Three factors account for this. First, pension coverage is

     qreater among union workers. Kotlikoff and Smith report from the May 1979

 Current Population Survey that 76 percent of union workers are covered versus only

 35 percent of nonunion workers. Although percent union amonq all workers is 24

 oercent, percent union among those covered by pension plans is 40 oercent. A

 separate breakdown by Kotlikoff and Smith of plan participant data from EBS-l

 files shows 47 percent are in union plans. The second factor is that a higher

proportion of nonunion participants are in defined contribution plans. The EBS-l

files show 54 percent of the participants in defined benefit plans are in

union plans. The third factor is that the average union plan has been in existence

longer than the average nonunion plan. We cannot account for the magnitude of

the effect of this latter factor.
 •


         8Thjs adjustment is made by using the result from Allen, Clark, and

Sumner (l984b) that union beneficiaries are 23 percent more likely to receive

post—retirement increases. With 75 percent of all beneficiaries receiving increases

and 73 percent of the beneficiaries being in collectively bargained plans, this

means that 81 percent of the union beneficiaries and 58 percent of the nonunion

beneficiaries receive benefit increases. These latter two figures are used to

obtain estimated pension wealth for union and nonunion beneficiaries, the

ratio of which is reported in the last row of Table 5.

        9Full funding results in lower taxation because assets in the pension fund

accumulate at a pre-tax rate, whereas assets held outside the fund accumulate at

an after-tax rate.
                                         38



                                    References


Steven Allen, Robert Clark, and Dan Sumner, "A Comparison of Pension Benefit

     Increases and Inflation, 1973—79," Monthly Labor Review, May 1984a, pp. 42-46.

Steven Allen, Robert Clark, and Dan Sumner, "Post-Retirement Adjustments

     of Pension Benefits," NBER Working Paper No. 1364, June 1984b.

Fischer Black, "The Tax Consequences of Long-Run Pension Policy," Financial

     Analysts Journal, July/August 1980, pp. 3-10.

Jeremy Bulow, "What Are Corporate Pension Liabilities?" Quarterly Journal of

     Economics, August 1982, pp. 435-452.

Robert Clark, Steven Allen, and Dan Sumner, "Inflation and Pension Benefits,"

     final report under U.S. Department of Labor Contract No. J-9-P-1-0074,

     August 1983.

Martin Feldstein and Randall Morck, "Pension Funding Decisions, Interest Rate

     Assumptions, and Share Prices," in Zvi Bodie and John Shoven (eds.),

     Financial Aspects of the United States Pension System, Chicago: University

     of Chicago Press, 1983.

Richard Freeman, "The Exit-Voice Tradeoff in the Labor Market: Unionism, Job

     Tenure, Quits, and Separations," Quarterly Journal of Economics, June 1980,

     pp. 643-673.

________________    "The Effect of Unionism on Fringe Benefits," Industrial and

     Labor Relations Review, July 1981, pp. 489-509.

________________    "Unions, Pensions, and Union Pension Funds," NBER Working
     Paper No. 1226, November 1983.

Richard Ippolito, "The Economic Function of Underfunded Pehsion Plans,"

    manuscript, U.S. Department of Labor, May 1983.
                                          39



Laurence Kotlikoff and Daniel Smith, Pensions in the American Economy, Chicago:

     University of Chicago Press, 1983.

Duane Leigh, 'The Effect of Unionism on Workers1 Valuation of Future Pension

     Benefits," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, July 1981, pp. 510-521.

H. Gregg Lewis, Union Relative Wage Effects: A Survey, forthcoming.

Olivia Mitchell, "Fringe Benefits and Labor Mobility," Journal of Human Resources,

     Spring 1982, pp. 286-298.

Alicia Munnell, "Who Should Manage the Assets of Collectively Bargained Pension

     Plans?" New England Economic Review, July/August 1983, pp. 18-30.

William Sharpe, "Corporate Pension Funding Policy," Journal of Financial

     Economics, June 1976, pp. 183-193.

Irwin Tepper, "Taxation and Corporate Pension Policy," Journal of Finance,

    March 1981, pp. 1-13.
                                                      40




Appendix Table 1. Post—retirement increase equations, 1950—72 retirees receiving benefit increaseB,
                      by union status

Sample                                      lkiion                             Nonunion

                                    Coefficient      Standard error   Mean   Coefficient   Standard error

1979 recipients/105         .261          .193             .014       .048      .785            .054

Years of aervice/102        .258          .404             .037       .241      .195            .039

Age at retirement/102       .626        —.187              .072       .614      .046            .075

White                       .921        —.081              .011       .959    —.072             .016

Male                        .789        —.340              .008       .567    —.066             .006

Year of retirement

   1950                     .001          .392             .101       .001      .270            .078

   1951                     .001          .421             .080       .002      .244            .068

   1952                     .002          .660             .060       .002      .230            .068

   1953                     .003          .569             .057       .036      .035            .019

   1954                     .004          .495             .047       .003      .226            .053

   1955                     .006          .458             .040       .004      .215            .048

   1956                     .008          .539             .034       .004      .185            .048

   1957                     .011          .396             .030       .051      .057            .016

   1958                     .015          .386             .026       .010      .163            .030

   1959                     .021          .384             .022       .011      .186            .029

   1960                     .023          .356             .021       .016      .168            .024

   1961                     .026          .439             .020       .061      .085            .015

   1962                     .034          .389             .018       .025      .106            .020

   1963                     .037          .363             .018       .034      .103            .018

   1964                     .033          .276             .018       .034      .115            .018

   1965                     .065          .287             .014       .108      .052            .013

   1966                     .069          .222             .014       .054      .149            .015

   1967                     .070          .186             .014       .058      .041            .015

   1968                     .081          .106             .013       .063      .051            .014

   1969                     .099          .043             .012       .128      .053            .012

   1970                     .102          .031             .012       .087      .041            .013

   1971                     .133          .039             .011       .096      .025            .013

   R2                                     .053                                  .104

   N                                    107352                                 16117

   Mean of dependent
     variable                             .455                                  .240

Note: The dependent variable is the ratio of the increase in benefits between 1973 and 1979 to 1973
       benefits. The sample is restricted to those receiving benefit increases. Each equation also
       includes an intercept and dummy variables indicating industry (6) and whether sex is unreported.
