                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      COUNTERFEITERS: FOES OR FRIENDS? HOW DO COUNTERFEITS AFFECT
                   DIFFERENT PRODUCT QUALITY TIERS?

                                                 Yi Qian

                                         Working Paper 16785
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16785


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2011




I warmly acknowledge support from Kauffman Foundation grants. I am grateful to Josh Lerner, Eric
Anderson, Philippe Aghion, Meghan Busse, Shane Greenstein, Angela Lee, Jin Li, Keith Maskus,
Ivan Png, Scott Stern, Catherine Tucker, K. Sudhir, and Florian Zettlemeyer for helpful discussions;
and to seminar participants at the Kellogg School of Management, Yale School of Management, University
of Colorado, and Quantitative Marketing and Economics conference for comments. I thank Dr. Ting
Zhu for sharing eBay data. I thank Gina Buonaguro, Maja Kos, and Sachin Waikar for copy-editing.
Cooperation from the Chinese Quality and Technology Supervision Bureau (QTSB) and the companies
I interviewed and surveyed is gratefully acknowledged. The results in this paper do not necessarily
represent the views of QTSB or NBER.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Yi Qian. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Counterfeiters: Foes or Friends? How Do Counterfeits Affect Different Product Quality Tiers?
Yi Qian
NBER Working Paper No. 16785
February 2011, Revised September 2013
JEL No. L25,L26,L6

                                              ABSTRACT

A key concern about counterfeits and weak intellectual property protection is that they may hamper
innovation by displacing legitimate sales. This paper combines a natural policy experiment with
randomized lab experiments to estimate the heterogeneous impacts of counterfeiting on the sales
and consumer purchase intent related to branded products of various quality levels. I collect new
product-line-level panel data (1993-2004) on Chinese shoe companies. I identify heterogeneous
effects of counterfeit entry on sales of authentic products of three quality tiers, finding that counterfeits
have both advertising effects for a brand and substitution effects for authentic products, additionally
the effects linger for some years. The advertising effect dominates the substitution effect for high-
end authentic-product sales, and the substitution effect outweighs the advertising effect for low-end
product sales. The positive effect of counterfeits is most pronounced for high-fashion products (such
as women’s high-leg boots and dress shoes), for shoes tailored to young customers, and for high-end
products of brands not yet well-known at the time of counterfeiter entry.


Yi Qian
Department of Marketing
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
yiqian@kellogg.northwestern.edu
                                     Imitation is the sincerest flattery.
                                     – C. C. Colton (Lacon, 1780-1832)


1         INTRODUCTION
        Counterfeits are illegal products that infringe upon others’ brands. They affect many industries
and, by impacting the sales of authentic products, can have a large influence on incentives for brand
owners to innovate. While counterfeits worry firms in general, the effects of counterfeit products may be
heterogeneous, especially for different product types and quality tiers, as well as for brands at different
life stages. Very few studies have examined the impacts of counterfeits directly. Grossman and Shapiro
(1988a,b), for example, theorize about the implications of counterfeits for international trade. Qian
(2008) offers the first econometric study of the average treatment effects of counterfeiting on authentic-
product differentiation and self-enforcement expenditures. While this small body of research is helpful,
in order to effectively guide priorities for and directions of innovation and enforcement strategies, it
is crucial to understand the sales impacts of counterfeits on authentic products of different types and
quality tiers and on brands of different natures and life stages. However, the extant literature has left
this topic largely unexplored, due in part to insufficient data. This study fills the void by investigating
the specific sales impacts of counterfeits through field and experimental methods, including how prod-
uct quality, product type, brand age, and brand famousness mediate these effects. Such sales-related
findings go well beyond the general impacts of counterfeiting on brands’ marketing norms, shedding
much-needed light on potential incentives and directions for innovation and enforcement, including
academic, managerial, and policy-related implications.
           As compared to the previous paper, this study tackles a new research question, collects new
data, and combines field studies with experiments.1 Its findings that counterfeits could have positive
spillover effects on authentic sales are surprising at first sight yet shed new light on the literature. In
the academic and managerial domains, this paper contributes to the growing literature that debates the
assumed negative impact of counterfeits on authentic-product sales. While conventional wisdom sug-
gests counterfeits will damage sales of authentic products through a substitution effect, Gosline (2009,
2010) shows through ethnographic research that some consumers use counterfeits as “trial versions”
of high-end products and that more than 40% of those who purchased counterfeit purses eventually
bought the real branded handbags. A stream of literature on online piracy has debated the effect of
filesharing on original music sales in recent years; Liebowitz (2006) and Oberholzer-Gee and Strumpf
    1
    The consistent results from the lab experiments in the U.S. demonstrate that the findings in the field panel
data have implications beyond China.



                                                       2
(2009) provide excellent surveys of this topic. While several empirical studies point to a negative effect
of piracy and filesharing (Hui and Png 2003, Liebowitz 2006, Hong 2008), Oberholzer-Gee and Strumpf
conclude that these activities actually have a positive effect, based on a uniquely matched dataset of
music downloads and purchases. Along the same lines, Mortimer et al. (2010) find that illegitimate
redistribution of digital goods increases revenue from non-digital complementary products, notably
live performances. At the consumer level, Rob and Waldfogel (2006) conduct surveys of undergraduate
students and find that although the average drop in album purchases due to downloading was $0.2,
consumer surplus increased due to the lower prices.
       Illegal imitation also can have other positive effects on authentic-product sales. A commonly
cited mechanism is network effects, where the consumer utility of a product is an increasing function
in the size of the user base. This argument has been made frequently for software and book copyright
cases (Takeyama 1991, Conner and Rumelt 1991, Khan 2004). Others suggest that imitation could
serve as a signal for the original product’s or idea’s high quality (Castro et al. 2008, Biais and Perotti
2008), driving positive consumer attention. Such mechanisms speak to the positive, advertising effect
of counterfeits. Yet existing studies collectively have not provided generalizable guidance for address-
ing the sales effects of counterfeits. Thus, understanding the heterogeneous effects of counterfeits on
product and brand types will help to paint a more complete picture of counterfeits’ impact as well as
provide more specific direction for guidance.
       Evidence for heterogeneous impacts of counterfeiting across product and brand attributes also
will help guide priorities for intellectual property rights (IPR) enforcement policy. As the authors of a
recent World Intellectual Property Organization study comment, “Governments are invariably resource
constrained and completely eradicating violations of IPR law - like violations of other types of law - is
out of reach for even the best-resourced states” (Fink et al. 2010). Moreover, while advocates of IPR
promote its innovation-stimulating effects and their subsequent positive economic implications, these
effects have been shown to be rather limited (Lerner 2009), with a generalizable conditional importance
of patents only in countries with advanced education and development (Qian 2007, Kyle and McGahan
2011). The debate over IPR resulted in the TRIPs (Trade-Related Intellectual Property) negotiations,
which were motivated largely by the desire to reduce trade in counterfeit goods. This study therefore
contributes to the broader literature on how firm responses to their legal environment could have im-
portant moderating effects on the impact of IPR protection (Zhao 2006, Mortimer 2010).
       One major methodological constraint for any empirical study of counterfeits (and of under-
ground economics in general) is the illicit nature of the items or activities of focus (Thursby et al.
1991), which can make them difficult to observe at any level of detail in most settings. Footwear is

                                                    3
a common target for counterfeiters. Of the $260 million in counterfeit goods seized by U.S. Customs
and Border Protection in 2009, footwear accounted for 40%. In fact, counterfeit footwear has topped
the seizure list for four years (Schmidle 2010). Due to severe counterfeiting infringements, the Chi-
nese footwear sector in particular has had strong incentive to investigate the impacts of counterfeiters.
In this study, I gather internal and external data on Chinese shoe brands to analyze the effects of
counterfeiting on sales of products representing different quality tiers. I extend the brand-level panel
data significantly to include footwear product-line details within each of 31 brands (including Chi-
nese national brands and multinational brands operating in China),2 and, for the first time, obtain
product-line-level sales data from 1993-2004. I also introduce a new IV (instrumental variable) to
address the endogeneity of counterfeiting: the preexisting ties between brand and product-line man-
agers and enforcement officials based on their biographic matches. This work accordingly identifies the
heterogeneous effects of counterfeits on sales of authentic products of different types and at different
quality tiers, as well as of brands at different life stages, along with charting the longer-term effects
of counterfeits by quality tier. Detection of these heterogeneous effects sheds light on the mechanisms
underlying counterfeiting effects and generates implications for the multiple domains discussed above.
       With regard to the methodology, I disentangle the separate effects of counterfeiting by quality
tier within a brand portfolio and by life stage of a brand. Within each type of brand and each type
of class of products, I separately identify the counterfeiting effects at the quality-tier level through the
difference-in-difference-in-difference simultaneous equation estimations. Moreover, combining field and
experimental data generates insights at both the aggregated market level and the individual sampled
consumer level. I leverage IV strategy to identify occasions in which counterfeiters enter the market
because of exogenous policy shocks that are unrelated to the brand’s sales prospects - “randomized”
entry - to infer entry impacts. Analysis of the field data shows that counterfeits have both nega-
tive substitution and positive spillover effects on authentic-product sales: The net effect is positive
for high-end authentic products and negative for low-end authentic products, even within the same
brand. Furthermore, the positive marginal effects of counterfeits on authentic-product sales is more
pronounced for high-fashion products (including dress shoes for men and women and women’s high-leg
boots), for shoes tailored to young customers, and for high-end shoes of newer brands that are not
well-known at the time of counterfeiter entry or that do not own multiple sub-brands.
       The findings suggest that counterfeiters can be both friends with and foes of authentic pro-
   2
    Most footwear brands in China are concentrated in the leather and sports shoe subsector, which has annual
sales of approximately US$6 billion. Some Chinese brands (e.g., Li-ning, Anta) hold Chinese market shares
nearly as large as that of Nike.




                                                     4
ducers and that brands could optimize their self-enforcement efforts using insights from this study,
including those related to the timing of counterfeit-related enforcement. This was exactly Microsoft’s
strategy in China, as Bill Gates told an audience at the University of Washington: “Although about
3 million computers get sold every year in China, people don’t pay for the software. Someday they
will, though. And as long as they’re going to steal it, we want them to steal ours. They get sort
of addicted, and then we’ll somehow figure out how to collect sometime in the next decade” (Piller
2006). Only after the majority of Chinese consumers were “locked into” Microsoft products did the
company engage in strict enforcement campaigns with the government to crack down on piracy and
force the Chinese market to adopt legitimate Microsoft software. By that point, Linux was far less of a
competitor for Microsoft in China than in the U.S. As discussed later, the heterogeneous sales impacts
of counterfeits on different product lines yield additional managerial insights related to the optimal
level of enforcement across the product lines within each brand, including the implications of coun-
terfeits far inferior in quality to their authentic counterparts. For instance, brands need not concern
themselves too much with counterfeits that have a wide quality gap below their authentic counterparts,
as these counterparts capture a very different customer segment that would not purchase the authentic
product anyway. Brands can also devote relatively fewer enforcement resources to high-fashion prod-
uct lines and the high-end product lines designed for younger customers, since counterfeits can help
set fashion trends and diffuse authentic innovation. This further promotes the product-innovation cycle.




2     Natural Experiment
    The ideal experiment to test the sales impact of counterfeits would randomly assign a set of brands
for infringement by counterfeiters and keep the others immune from counterfeiting. Counterfeit entry,
however, is unlikely to be exogenous in practice because entry is more likely to occur for brands with
larger sales or a less strict trademark management team. Although the fixed effects in panel economet-
ric models capture unobserved time-invariant firm and product-line characteristics, they do not absorb
unobserved time-variant characteristics, resulting in a correlation between counterfeit entry and the
error term. Thus, a simple OLS would result in biased effect estimates. To account for endogene-
ity concerns, I locate appropriate instruments to identify the effects of the counterfeit-entry variable.
While I explain the IV strategy in the Appendix, I outline the necessary institutional details here for
completeness.
       The Chinese shoe industry provides a convenient laboratory for studying counterfeit effects



                                                   5
because of an unexpected enforcement change around 1995. The policy shift was motivated by shocks
external to the shoe sector, specifically an outburst of accidents in the food, drug, agriculture, cot-
ton, and gas sectors due to sub-quality products. The Chinese General Administration of Quality
Supervision, Inspection, and Quarantine (AQSIQ, previously called the Quality and Technology Su-
pervision Bureau, or QTSB) issued two notifications to concentrate resources on enhancing quality
quarantine and combating counterfeits in the main sectors prone to hazardous materials. However,
this left loopholes in the fashion industry for massive counterfeiting. For instance, the AQSIQ devoted
approximately 10-12% of its resources to monitoring footwear products in the early 1990s, and only 2%
after 1995 (AQSIQ Yearbooks). Data show that shoe brands experienced significant waves of counter-
feit entry after the policy shift. The peak in entries came as early as 1996.
       The authentic producers were caught by surprise by the influx of counterfeits. The victimized
brands quickly organized internal “brand-protection offices” to compensate for the loosened government
monitoring. These internal offices were placed in charge of activities that included identifying coun-
terfeits of their own brands in the marketplace, reporting to the AQSIQ, and collaborating with that
organization to trace and outlaw fake enterprises. This is where the relationship between a branded
company and the AQSIQ has played an important role. I use the number of workdays between a
brand’s ISO certification and application dates nationwide as the most suitable proxy. In addition, I
match the education and experience backgrounds of the brand and product-line managers with those
of the AQSIQ officials based on their biographies to generate alternative IVs. The results are robust.
       There were two waves of ISO standards with which the sampled companies had to comply. The
first wave was established in 1994 and the other in 2000. For each wave of ISO standards, I collect
each company’s first-application and final-grant dates for the corresponding certificate and calculate
the number of workdays between these two dates (henceforth called “elapsed days”). I then construct a
variable that equals the elapsed days for the ISO-1994 certificate for the years 1993-2000 and a variable
that equals the ISO-2000 elapsed days from 2001 onwards. I code and match the biographies based
on a detailed codebook created by a political scientist and me (Qian and Shih 2011), posted as an
online Appendix. I then reverse-code the experience-match variable so that larger values correspond
to a worse relationship, keeping the same direction as the ISO proxy.
       The ISO-processing days are largely driven by relationships instead of brand or product char-
acteristics. In particular, I confirm this by correlating the ISO variable with the experience-match
variables to show that the ISO certification time highly correlates with the preexisting relationship
between the managers and QTSB officials because of their overlapping schooling and work experi-
ences (correlation coefficients are 0.79 with the brand-level experience-match variable and 0.63 with

                                                   6
the product-line-level experience-match variable). When tabulating bivariate correlations between this
relationship proxy and the key brand attributes (e.g., size, sales, product quality, or production costs)
in my data, I find the largest one to be only 0.08. Similarly, the experience-match variables do not
correlate with the company characteristics significantly. ISO and experience-matches are therefore un-
likely to affect sales through mechanisms other than their effects on counterfeit entry.3
           Table 1 shows that a greater number of days spent by a branded company undergoing ISO ap-
plication correlates positively with the average quantity of counterfeits of that company’s brand after
1995. This correlation remains significant in company- and year-fixed-effects regressions. Section 4.1
reports the first-stage results to support IV validity. In robustness checks, I adopt alternative relation-
ship proxies and find qualitatively similar results. Appendix B further documents these alternative
relationship proxies.
                                          Insert Table 1 about here


3         DATA
3.1         Data Collection and Description
        My research design requires obtaining data on each brand’s product sales, as well as information on
counterfeit infringements. Due to the underground nature of counterfeits, I have gathered data through
both secondary databases and primary research. The Chinese Industrial Census (CIC) conducted by
the National Bureau of Statistics includes detailed financial data and basic firm characteristics (e.g.,
size, year of incorporation) for the entire population of Chinese manufacturing firms with sales in ex-
cess of five million yuan (roughly US$600,000) for each of the census years. Several waves of data are
available for the years 1995 and 1998-2005. While the CIC lists the company’s main products, it has no
further product-level details. Systematic data on counterfeits are not found in existing sources. Thus
it is necessary to conduct primary research to acquire brands’ financial statements and counterfeit
confiscations.
           I gather additional detailed information on sale quantities, transaction prices, and unit produc-
tion costs at each quality tier for each general type of product, and on the corresponding counterfeits
for each of the 31 branded companies in my stratified random sample. I extract the data from the
brands’ year-end financial statements and other internal records. I specifically have requested brands’
    3
    The footwear sector has been privatized in China. All of the sampled companies are private, and sales are
of market-equilibrium quantity.




                                                       7
databases.4 The company data corroborate those in the CIC for the shared variables and years. For
instance, the sales, sales costs, profits, and export aggregates of my sample mirror the trends in the
census of shoe companies (Table A1). My sample’s price data also reflect the same shoe-price trends
in the eBay dataset collected by researchers at the University of Chicago (Li et al. 2011).5 While the
eBay shoe-price data provide useful validation, I used the original company price records in the main
analyses. Appendix B details all data diagnostics and sampling methods.
        I next obtain the detailed sales quantity, price, and cost data for a more detailed categorization
of products than in Qian (2008). For instance, if a company produces six types of products, includ-
ing high-leg, medium-leg, and regular leather shoes for both women and men, and if there are three
quality/cost levels within each type, then I disaggregate data on sales into each of the 18 quality-type
combinations. The data thus approach a product-level panel. The input and production costs for the
products within each quality-type combination are very similar, although there are variations in color
and style (e.g., a decorative button on the side or front) that the current data cannot fully capture. The
life cycle of each style is one to two years; however, the product lines remain active over the sampled
years. That is, the machinery and organization of each product line do not change for any existing
quality tier.
        Brands offer a range of products, and each brand classifies its products into three quality tiers
when reporting to the government. The low-tier product lines produce shoes with prices averaging
around 17 USD (SD=8), the medium-tier lines produce shoes averaging 27 USD (SD=10), and the
high-tier lines offer an average price of 43 USD (SD=19). New product lines added in later years are
also clearly captured in the data; I analyze them separately from existing product lines. Such fine-level
aggregations are appropriate for the analyses at hand, since I am interested specifically in the differen-
tial sales impacts by quality-tier level. As detailed in Section 4.4, I conduct additional cluster analyses
where I form natural clusters of quality tiers based on the unit production costs in the full sample of
existing product lines across brands.
        I collect data on the year that counterfeits entered the market for each quality tier of each
brand, whenever that existed, from each authentic firm’s brand-protection offices. Because these of-
fices and the AQSIQ work together to combat counterfeits, the AQSIQ has offered feedback to each
brand, including statistics on its confiscated counterfeits. I therefore obtain records of the counterfeits
   4
      The company contacts were very responsible, and they were cautious about not providing casual estimates
in interviews. Instead, they emailed or faxed me after checking with their sources.
    5
      The researchers collect transaction-level data on eBay for several product categories. For each transaction,
the data include the shoe brand and type, final transaction price, shipping cost, seller and buyer IDs, product
condition, starting bid, and number of bids.



                                                        8
that the brands discovered and reported to the government, as well as the counterfeits from the market
and manufacturing sources raided by the AQSIQ. The AQSIQ also has kindly provided me with some
of the internal financial records on the counterfeit entities and statistics on the characteristics of the
counterfeit shoes confiscated. Data show that counterfeiters usually imitate all quality levels of authen-
tic products of a given brand, even though they use similarly inferior materials (e.g., synthetic leather
or rubber) to produce shoes that mimic the different appearances of these products. Counterfeiters’
prices can be as low as a quarter of the authentic product price.
       Table 1 provides descriptive statistics for the 31 companies over the 12-year panel. The branded
companies report that their records represent the majority of their counterfeits. “There were prob-
ably other [counterfeits],” a representative of a brand comments, “but we did not feel threatened by
them, so we didn’t care too much to track them down.” I creat an indicator variable for noticeable
counterfeiting equal to 1 if a branded product of a particular quality tier had been infringed upon, and
zero otherwise. I probe into the impacts of an unexpected, massive presence of counterfeiters on the
sales of each quality tier within an authentic brand. I thus analyze different quality tiers separately, so
that brand-level and quality-tier-level variations upon counterfeit entry are more relevant than minor
variations at the product level within a brand.
       To control for the overarching macro-environment and consumption patterns, I obtained data
on a common set of macro-indicators: GDP growth, GDP per capita PPP, the Consumer Price Index
(CPI) from the World Development Indicator (WDI) database, and the economic inequality measures
(Gini coefficients) from the UN Human Development Reports. All these data are available at annual
levels in the sample period.



3.2     Descriptive Evidence: Sales Shares Shift to High Tiers
   Table 2 tabulates the summary statistics of the analyzed variables before and after 1995, the new-
policy year. As Table 2 shows, AQSIQ on average spent 11% of total resources in monitoring the shoe
sector pre-1995, and only 2% afterward. This drop was accompanied by an influx of counterfeiting.
While the median quantity of counterfeits across brands was zero before 1995, counterfeits surged to
857,100 pairs per year, on average, in the sampled years after 1995. The product costs and prices of
counterfeits were on average only a fraction of those of authentic products.
                                        Insert Table 2 about here
       Figure 1a plots the sales of shoes at the three broad quality tiers, as classified by the companies,
as percentages of total domestic sales. It is interesting to note that the quality lines moved upward


                                                    9
after entry by counterfeiters. That is, the higher-end shoes occupied larger shares in total sales post
entry, and the low-end shoes saw their shares decline dramatically. While I will present more rigorous
analyses in the next sections, these summary statistics paint a general picture of the differential effects
of counterfeit entry on sales of authentic products at different quality levels.
        Part of the increase in sales was due to the introduction of new products. I therefore separately
compile the sales shares for products of fixed quality pre- and post-entry by counterfeiters and those
for the new products introduced after the infringements (See Figure 1b). Among the fixed quality tiers,
the percentage of sales of high-end shoes increased post-entry, but those of medium-quality and low-end
shoes declined. However, the decline in sales of medium-quality shoes tended to be overcompensated
for by the sales of new products in the same quality tier, whereas the sales of new products in the
low-end tier were not sufficient to make up for the category percentage drop.
                                  Insert Figures 1a and 1b about here


3.3     OLS
   The increases in the sales share of high-end products as shown in Figure 1 could be due in part
to the spillover effects of counterfeiting and also be a direct consequence of new-product introduction
after entry. To disentangle these two parts, I match products of similar quality tiers before and after
entry by counterfeiters throughout the sample period, based on their similar price and costs. I compile
this sample of existing product lines separately from the rest of the sample of new product lines. I then
investigate entry effects on the sales of these existing product lines according to three quality tiers:
low, medium, and high. I analyze both sales quantity and sales value but use the former in the main
specifications. As Gosline (2009) shows, based on a U.S. sample, that some people are willing to pay
twice as much for an item when they think they can use it to send cues about wealth and taste (likely
the case for high-end products), sales quantity is the most appropriate measure that does not conflate
with price differences.

      ln(Salesajt ) = β0 + β1T Entryajt ∗ Tierajt + β2 lnPajt + β3T TierDumaj + β4T BrandDuma

                    + β5T Xajt + β6T YearDumt + β7T ProdDumaj + β8T YearDumt TierDumaj + ǫajt , (1)

where Entryajt is an indicator variable that takes on a value of 1 if there is a positive presence of
counterfeits in the market for brand a’s product type j in year t. Tierajt is a vector of dummies
indicating the three levels of quality. With this parametrization, β1 is a vector of parameters denoting
the tier-specific entry effects. lnPajt is the log price of the product, and Xajt is a vector of control
characteristics, such as company a’s age and size and product j’s shoe orientation (male or female)

                                                    10
or usage (winter boots, sandals, dress shoes, etc.) in year t. The fixed effects for the panel year (12
years) and product lines within the quality tier of the 31 brands control for year-specific factors and
time-invariant product-line characteristics.
       A simple OLS regression shows that counterfeit entry has a very significant correlation with
authentic sales, implying that after entry, authentic sales went up by 35%. This effect is partly an
artifact of the endogeneous counterfeiting treatment. The omitted variable bias potentially enters
OLS in two directions: an upward bias because brands with larger sales are more likely to experience
counterfeiting, and a downward bias due to internal management effects, which are positively correlated
with the sales outcome but negatively correlated with the entry of counterfeits. In particular, a brand
with good internal management may ward off counterfeits effectively and maintain high sales. In fact,
when simply regressing log sales quantities on the fake entry dummy and a year trend, the entry
coefficient is very large. While the company-fixed effects help control for the omitted brand effects,
they do not control for the time-variant management effects, resulting in a downward bias in the OLS
estimates. I therefore adopt a new IV to address this endogeneity concern in Section 4.


3.4     Institutional Data to Preclude Alternative Explanations
   The econometric model presented in the next section formally addresses the endogeneity concerns.
As explained in Section 2.1, confounding factors will not lead to bias in the treatment-effect estimate as
long as they are orthogonal to the treatment variable. The natural experiment and the instrumental-
variable approach therefore would identify the effects of entry by counterfeiters. Nonetheless, for the
interested reader, I discuss several more institutional details here to preclude alternative explanations
before moving on to the formal models.
       China entered an incredible economic boom in the late 1980s, which continued through the
1990s. Easy credit conditions prevailed there primarily in the 1980s (Naughton 2002). An unsustain-
able credit expansion drove demand well beyond supply, and prices began to rise rapidly. At the peak,
the CPI was growing at around 25% per year, and China was taking in a massive quantity of imports,
running a substantial current-account deficit. China had to tighten credit conditions in the early 1990s,
in the hope of slowing the acceleration of non-performing loans (Gabriel 1998). The prime minister
Zhu Rongji took strong steps to slow down the growth. Investments and growth dropped sharply, as
did the rate of price increases. By the late 1990s, China experienced deflation. Given the negative
macroeconomic trends in the mid- to late-1990s, the positive coefficients on instrumented counterfeit
entry (controlling for year and company dummies), as reported in Section 3, provide rather convincing
evidence that the higher sales of authentic products were due to counterfeits rather than macroeco-


                                                   11
nomic factors.
          The regional-level macroeconomic environment data reveal a drastic increase in inequality in
the late 1980s and early 1990s, instead of the late 1990s, when spikes in the high-end authentic sales
were most pronounced. Thus, the increases in high-end shoe sales are not likely to be attributable
to inequality. I also gathered data on CPI specifically for the shoes and garments sector from the
Yearbooks, and find this price index to follow the overall CPI quite closely (correlation coefficient =
0.89). I control for all these macroeconomic variables in my analyses. The sales increase is also not an
artifact of inflation.
          Chinese laws granted import licenses only to registered companies. The counterfeiters had no
access to advanced shoe-making technology, which was primarily imported from Italy. It is possible
that China’s accession to the WTO broadened technology imports, which in turn enabled high-quality
counterfeits. Yet this aftermath of the WTO was not until the mid-to-late 2000s (Cogitamus Consulting
2009), which is at the tail end of the time period I examine. The jumps in my brand-related sales data
took place immediately upon entry by the counterfeiters of the brands. Nonetheless, I control for this
timeline in regressions, and the results are robust. I perform additional institutional research and data
analyses to rule out confounding factors. I detail them in Appendix B, along with other robustness
checks.




4     EMPIRICAL IDENTIFICATIONS
    A richer database at the product-line level, as compared to that of my earlier study with firm-
level data, yields greater identification power at the product-quality level. Specifically, each brand has
several quality levels, with different sales quantities and values of products at each level. Therefore,
the loosening of Chinese government enforcement for footwear essentially created dozens of “mini-
experiments,” which I exploit to identify the entry effects of counterfeiters on authentic product sales.



4.1       First Stage IV Estimations
    I instrument for the entry of counterfeiters using the plausibly exogenous enforcement shift away
from the footwear industry and its interactions with the relationship between each brand and the
AQSIQ. I construct an indicator variable, Loose, to benchmark the years with loosened public enforce-
ment for shoes (Loose=0 before 1995 and 1 since 1995). This enforcement diversion and its interaction



                                                   12
with the relationship between a brand and the AQSIQ served as the main instrumental variables for
counterfeit entry. Because the enforcement diversion arose from a series of accidents in other industries,
it is plausibly exogenous to the shoe sector. This IV also satisfies the exclusion restriction, because
tightened public enforcement in other sectors is not supposed to affect shoe sales directly. Because the
number of workdays it took each brand to obtain ISO certification from the AQSIQ (averaged across
its subsidiaries in various regions) proxies for the brand’s acquaintance only with the AQSIQ, this ISO
proxy does not affect sales directly.
       I identify the entry by counterfeiters with the equation below:

        Entryajt = α0 + α1 (Relation*Loose)at + α2 Looset + α3 Relationat + α4 BioMatchajt

                        +α5 (Biomatch*Loose)ajt + α6T YearDumt + α7T BrandDuma + ψajt                    (2)

where Entryajt is an indicator variable for the existence of counterfeits of brand a’s product type j in the
market at time t, and it equals 1 if there are counterfeit infringements for brand a in year t. Relationat is
the ISO time proxying for the relationship between brand a and the AQSIQ, and (Relation*Loose)at is
the interaction variable between this ISO proxy and the legislation dummy. BioMatchajt is the variable
based on matching the education and experience background of the manager of brand a’s product-line
j and that of the AQSIQ officials, and (Biomatch*Loose)ajt is its interaction variable with the policy
shift dummy.
       I bring in additional product-line-level exogenous variations in relationships by compiling the
product managers’ experience matches with AQSIQ officials. With an additional level of random
variation due to this alternative IV, the rationale for the added effort is to increase the amount of
random variation in counterfeit sales and thus increase the efficiency of the IV estimation. About a
third of the bios could not be found or matched, creating a missing-data problem. I therefore use
the nonparametric approach of Qian and Xie (2011) to impute these unobserved missing values. An
important assumption in a missing-data approach is the missing-at-random (MAR) assumption, which
requires the “missingness” to be independent of unobserved values, given other observables. Even
though this is a plausible assumption when a rich set of observables (e.g., observables at the firm
level, counterfeit sales, cost, price) is conditioned on, it is typically untestable. I therefore report
this analysis as a robustness check and use the brand-level relationship for the main specifications.
Combating counterfeits primarily involves brand-level collaboration with the AQSIQ, so the brand-
level relationship is the most relevant in any case.
       In addition to the potential endogeneity of the entry variable, product price may be endogenous
to sales. In robustness analyses, I adopt the traditional IV of product cost for that, and the results on

                                                     13
counterfeiting effects remain qualitatively unchanged (Tables A2-A6). The model is as follows:

                                   ln Pajt = γ0 + γ1 ∗ ln Cajt + ζajt                                    (3)

where ln Pajt denotes the log price of brand a’s product j at the year t, and ln Cajt similarly denotes
the corresponding product cost in logs.
       Table 3 displays the estimates from alternative first-stage specifications. As shown in Columns 1
and 2, the loose-policy indicator and the interaction IV predict counterfeit entry, statistically significant
at the 1% level. These robust estimation results across alternative specifications tell a clear and
consistent story: the public enforcement diversion encouraged counterfeit entry (positive and significant
coefficient on “Loose”), and that encouragement was stronger for counterfeiters of brands that had a
worse relationship with the AQSIQ than for those of other brands (positive and significant coefficient on
“Relation*Loose,” using two alternative proxies for relationship). Column 3 illustrates the relevance of
the experience-match variable and counterfeiter entry. Column 4 shows a specification where I employ
all instruments with year- and brand-fixed effects, as I also do in the estimations underlying the results
in Column 5 of Table 5.
                                        Insert Table 3 about here


4.2     IV Regressions for Sales of Fixed Quality Levels
   To test the counterfeiting effect on the branded product sales of the three existing quality tiers
(low, medium, and high), I simultaneously estimate equations (1) in Section 3.3 and (2) in Section 4.1.
Using the log sales quantity and values as alternative dependent variables, I arrive at robust results.
For brevity, I report the specifications with the log sale quantity as dependent variables and detail the
others in the online Appendix. Table 4 presents the results and reveals interesting patterns. Results
show that the entry of counterfeiters has a positive effect on high-end shoe sales but a negative one on
low-end sales, statistically significant at the 5% level (Column 2 in Table 4). The magnitudes of the
entry coefficients are larger than the OLS estimates, as discussed in Section 3.3 (coefficient = 0.49 for
the high-end sales and -0.75 for the low-end sales), implying that counterfeiter entry increased high-
end authentic sales by 63.23% and decreased low-end sales by 52.76%. I also execute the IV regression
within each quality-tier stratum of shoes separately. The results are robust (Columns 3-5 in Table 4).
       Counterfeit entry hurts low-end products but helps high-end ones within a brand. This is
because counterfeits are closer substitutes for low-end shoes than for high-end ones. Counterfeiters
entered for different quality tiers for each infringed brand, yet it is harder and more costly to imitate
the high-tier products due to both technology and incentive constraints. It is intuitive that the low-


                                                     14
end product lines suffered more business-stealing effects due to counterfeits. The sales of the high-end
authentic products increased significantly after counterfeiters entered, controlling for year- and product-
line fixed effects and other time-varying company and shoe characteristics, such as company age and
size. This reflects the potential advertising effect of counterfeits on the brand. Counterfeits could
serve as a form of mass advertising, increasing brand awareness, especially for customers who would
not have been captured by the brand otherwise. Qian and Xie (2013) provide survey results in which
Chinese consumers learned about their favorite brands initially through counterfeits.6 In China, brand
awareness has definitely been an increasing function of the number of people using the brand.
        This relates to the “diseconomies of scope” theory proposed by Bresnahan et al. (2010) and
to the finding in Godes and Mayzlin (2009) that the word of mouth that is most effective at driving
sales is created by less loyal customers. Counterfeits could in that sense serve as “buzz agents” by
providing “independent” affirmations of the brand. The advertising effect is more pronounced when
new customers who learn the brand name, and who value quality and authenticity, subsequently choose
the high-end authentic products. These new customers recruited by the counterfeits are then acquired
by the authentic company. Thus the potential spillover effect of counterfeits may be considered an
“externality” to the branded firm. Since the authentic branded companies do not internalize such
advertising costs in their own optimizations, the advertising hype can lead to heterogeneous sales
impacts for authentic products of different quality tiers. It can both shift and rotate demand functions
for products of different quality levels. Notably, because counterfeits impose less competitive pressure
on a high-end authentic product due to a wider quality gap, the equilibrium sale quantity of the
high-end authentic product primarily increases when counterfeits enter the market and boost brand
awareness. The equilibrium sales quantity of the low-end authentic product declines in net as the
business-stealing effect of counterfeits outweighs the advertising effect.
        Benchmarking against the overall observed change in sales (Figure 1), the point estimate of the
entry coefficient in the high-end sales sample (Table A2) implies that 29% of the increase in the sales
of high-quality-tier shoes can be attributed to the net positive spillover effects of counterfeits.7 The
   6
     Since the Cultural Revolution in 1976 and the opening up of the market economy, there has been unleashed
energy from both the supply and demand sides. Chinese consumers have been delighted and overwhelmed by
the boom in brand and product varieties. The general lack of information about different brands does not
match consumers’ eagerness to use and associate with brands. Therefore, they often look to others or look for
marketplace “trends” to learn about popular brands (Lin 2011).
   7
     The coefficients translate to a 63.23% increase in quantity and a 50% increase in the value of high-end sales,
converting from the log scale. Drawing relevant summary statistics on the sale quantities, prices, and percentages
of total sales pre- and post-entry by counterfeiters in Figure 1, the overall observed percentage change in sales
is 558.28∗32.24∗17.0%−309.38∗26.21∗13.9%
             309.38∗26.21∗13.9%          = 172%. Similarly, the fraction of change due to the spillover effect of
                  50%
counterfeits is 172% = 29%.



                                                        15
medium-quality authentic products did not witness significant changes in sales due to counterfeiting,
although the sign of the coefficient on the instrumented entry variable is negative. However, the sales of
the low-end authentic products dipped significantly upon the entry of counterfeits, both in quantity and
value. The coefficients on the instrumented entry dummy are -0.75 in the pooled regression (Column
2 of Table 4) for low-end sales quantity and values (Table A2), implying a 53% drop in sales for the
low-end shoes. A similar back-of-the-envelope calculation reveals that 86% of the decline in low-end
sales after counterfeiters’ entry comes from the net negative substitution effect.8 This is indicative of
the moderate advertising and fierce competitive effects of counterfeits; in net, the counterfeiting effect
on high-end sales is positive and of moderate magnitude while that on low-end sales is largely negative.
         In robustness checks, I repeat the simultaneous equations model estimations by adding a control
for the log average price of counterfeits of each quality tier, as instrumented by the log unit production
cost of counterfeits. The estimation results do not change qualitatively. That is, the entry coefficients
remain positive and significant for the high-end sales quantity and values, and negative and significant
for the low-end sales quantity and values. Because the data for counterfeit prices are less systematic,
I keep my main specifications as described earlier. I also conduct robustness analyses with controls
for the time-variant brand-advertising expenditure and the number of company stores of the brand in
alternative specifications. The results are qualitatively similar. Qian (2008) shows that the authentic
brands’ advertising expenditure did not change significantly after entry by counterfeits, so this control
is not collinear with the main treatment variable. I control for advertisement (Tables 4-6). However,
because the number of stores is endogenous to sales and counterfeiter entry, I do not include it in the
main regression specifications. To the extent that the IV teases out the plausibly exogenous parts of
counterfeit entry, the sales responses are less susceptible to omitted variable bias, especially in the time
period immediately following entry.
                                         Insert Table 4 about here


4.3       Robustness Analyses
      In addition to the manufacturer’s own classifications of the three quality levels, I conduct a cluster
analysis of all the fixed-quality (from existing product lines) shoe products in the sample based on
the unit production costs of the products. Notably, it is not meaningful to examine the distribution
of raw unit cost across different quality tiers because the cost is also related to the product type and
therefore it is not of value to compare the cost across product lines from different quality tiers. As for
  8                                                   309.38∗26.21∗32.1%−558.28∗32.24∗5.6%
    The overall percentage drop in low-end sales is             309.38∗26.21∗32.1%           = −61%, of which the
                                   −61% = 86%.
counterfeiting effect accounts for −53%



                                                      16
the other analyses in this study, the product lines (types) need to be controlled for in this compari-
son. I therefore regress the deflated unit production cost on the product line dummies and obtain the
regression residuals. Boxplots of the cost residuals of the three quality tiers show that the manufactur-
ers’ classifications of quality tiers are rather clear, in that the majority of sampled data across quality
tiers do not overlap across the three quality tiers (Figure 2a). In particular, the high-end and low-end
shoe distributions include completely distinct unit production costs because the minimum line of the
high-end distribution is above the maximum line of the low-end distribution.
                                       Insert Figure 2 about here
       I then apply standard cluster analysis using the K-means method on the unit production cost
residuals. This procedure forms three natural clusters. Figure 2b plots the distributions of quality
(proxied by the unit production cost residuals) of the three quality clusters. It appears that the three
clusters are further separated from each other as compared to those defined by the manufacturers. I
then repeat the simultaneous equation estimations on these three natural clusters instead of the three
tiers based on manufacturers’ classifications (Column 1 of Table 5). I also repeat the IV regressions
on the three clusters separately (Columns 2-4 of Table 5) and report the formal regression results on
these sets of products in Table 5. Results are again consistent and robust: the entry effect for the sale
quantity of the cluster of high-quality shoes remains positive and significant, implying a 51% increase in
sale quantity. However, I estimate the effect to be negative for the cluster with the lowest quality shoes,
statistically significant at the 1% level. The coefficient magnitudes become larger because the natural
clustering results in more distinct quality tiers, hence revealing the net positive effects on high-end
sales and negative effects on low-end sales as more salient.
       As a final robustness check with these naturally clustered data based on costs, I estimated
Equations (1)-(2) with additional interaction variables between the year trend and each of the brand
dummies. This allows for a different time trend for each brand in the sample. Results are qualitatively
unchanged. I also employ the full set of IVs, as listed in Column 4 of Table 3, including the main ISO
relationship proxy and the variable based on experience-matches between the product-line managers
and the AQSIQ officials. Results are again robust (Column 5 of Table 5).
       I then perform alternative clustering based on the unit production price instead of cost, repeat-
ing the same steps as described in the cost case. The results are qualitatively similar (Column 6 of
Table 5). However, price may be an inferior proxy for quality because pricing can be based partly on
brand premium, which has little to do with the actual quality that went into producing a particular
pair of shoes.
       The IVs provide exogenous identification of the counterfeiting effects such that the effect es-

                                                    17
timates do not suffer from omitted variable bias due to confounding trends. In addition, the panel
structure and the presence of the control group of brands that were never infringed upon by coun-
terfeits serve as solid benchmarks for comparison, which helps net out the macroeconomic trends. I
further conduct robustness analyses, including the interaction variables between the year trend and
brand- and tier-fixed effects. The results are again robust with this model, which thoroughly controls
for potential confounding trends that may be heterogeneous to different brands and quality tiers.
                                         Insert Table 5 about here

4.4     Effects of Counterfeits on Product-Level Sales Over Time
While Section 4.2 tests the overall impacts of counterfeit entry, this section attempts to trace the sales
effects over a longer time horizon. For the samples of shoes at each quality tier, I regress the log sales
quantity on the set of dummies indicating different years relative to counterfeiter entry, controlling for
the time-varying company attributes, macro conditions, and company-fixed effects.
                              X
                              5
      ln(Salesajt ) = β0 +          β1k ∗ YearToEntrya,j,k + β2 ∗ lnP̂ajt
                             k=−5
                        +β3T ∗ Xajt + β4T ∗ YearDumt + β5T ∗ ProdDumaj + β6T BrandDumaj + ǫajt

where I regress the log sales quantity of brand a, product j in year t on the set of dummies indicat-
ing years (k) relative to entry from five years pre-entry to five years post-entry, controlling for the
instrumented log product price and other characteristics. I plot the regression coefficients on the year
indicators against the corresponding years relative to entry for the sample of existing product lines
and the sample of new product lines in Figures 3 and 4, respectively. Because the new products were
introduced only after facing competition from counterfeiting, the coefficients for the years prior to the
infringements were not plotted in Figure 4.
   Figure 3 demonstrates the positive effects of counterfeits on high-end shoes. This advertising effect
was felt immediately upon the entry of counterfeits and lasted for several years before it dwindled.
It is possible that counterfeits first served to improve consumer awarenesses of the brand and later
contributed negatively to brand equity because some consumers misattributed the inferior counterfeit
quality to the brand itself. The negative impacts on the other two quality tiers are quite large and
long-lasting. Some of the dips in these sales are offset by the sales of new products in these two tiers,
as indicated in Figure 4. The regression underlying Figure 3 uses the year of entry by counterfeits as
the benchmark, so all the coefficients plotted indicate the relative change in the log sales quantity of
a particular quality tier in the respective year relative to entry. Because almost all the new products
were introduced at least a year after the counterfeits entered the market, Figure 4 uses the first year

                                                     18
of observation, or one year after entry, as the benchmark for comparison. These two figures are most
suitable for demonstrating the changes in the log sales quantity in the years relative to entry within
each quality tier.
   The trend that the positive effect on the high-end shoes was largest in the year immediately fol-
lowing the massive entry of counterfeits again rules out the alternative explanation that the authentic
companies’ own self-enforcement was the driving force. These firms invested in self-enforcement with
some lags, and the number of company stores grew in the later years of the sample period, which is
the opposite of the trend for high-end sales increases.
                                   Insert Figures 3 and 4 about here


4.5     Mechanisms of the Spillover Effect of Counterfeits
   While the negative effect of entry by counterfeiters on the sales of low-end shoes is consistent with
traditional intuitions about business-stealing, the positive effect on the sales of high-end shoes is at
first surprising. Yet positive effects of IPR infringement have been termed the “piracy paradox” by
Raustiala and Sprigman (2009), who study historical incidences of fashion innovation and find that
imitation could turn a formerly innovative design into a nonexclusive feature and stimulate further
product differentiation.
       A strand of literature proposes that copyists create barriers to entry for competitors (Givon and
Muller 1995) and help the originator establish its technology as an industry standard, with switching
costs further cementing the originator’s competitive position (Katz and Shapiro 1994). Unlike software
and other high-tech industries, there is very little standard-claiming behavior in the Chinese shoe
sector. In addition, the shoe industry’s size has been stable since the late 1980s, and national statistics
show that the number of employees in the footwear and garment industry was approximately 1,750,000
throughout the 1990s (Tables 12-2 and 13-2 in each YearBook, Chinese National Bureau of Statistics).
According to the Basic Unit Census of China (National Bureau of Statistics 1996), most legal shoe
companies were established in the late 1980s. This evidence suggests that the positive spillover effect
of counterfeits is not likely to work through the entry-barriers argument in this context.
       In this subsection, I present a set of analyses that demonstrate the potential advertising effect
of counterfeiting due mainly to increased brand awareness. Specifically, I implement a difference-in-




                                                    19
difference-in-difference model with simultaneous equation estimations:

       ln(Salesajt ) = β0 + β1T Entryajt ∗ Majt ∗ Tierajt + β2T Entryajt ∗ Tierajt

                         +β3 Majt ∗ Tierajt + β4T Xajt + β5 lnPajt

                         +β6T TierDumaj + β7T YearDumt + β8T ProdDumaj + β9T BrandDumaj + ǫajt             (4)

where Majt is a set of moderating factors as detailed in the following paragraphs, Majt ={High fashion,
non-renowned, single-brand, non-famous, young brand, young cohort}. I define all the other variables
as before. The model is equivalent to one that includes the first-order terms of Majt , one at a time,
as well as the two-way and three-way interactions with the entry dummy and the set of dummies on
quality tiers. A benefit of the current model setup is that it is easily interpretable: β1 , β2 , and β3 all
correspond to the tier-specific effects. I again implement IVs to address the endogeneity concerns, and
compile the results in Table 6.
        The first piece of evidence in the data that points to the advertising effect is that the positive
sales impact of counterfeits is most pronounced in the product lines for dress shoes and women’s high-
leg boots (henceforth “high fashion”). This is expected because people buy these products not just
out of necessity but to keep up with the latest style. Column 1 of Table 6 reports the IV regression
results on the log sales quantities of the three quality tiers of these fashion boots, and the entry effects
on the high-end fashion boots are estimated to be as high as 0.76 (0.37+0.39 in Column 1 of Table 6)
for the log sales quantities, statistically significant at the 1% level. The demand-enlarging effects for
the less fashionable products are much more moderate (coefficients are estimated to be 0.39 in Column
1). Further, I conduct the IV regression on the stratified sample of “high fashion” shoes and the rest
of the sample separately, with log sale quantities and values as alternative outcomes, respectively. I
display the complete tabulations of the coefficients in these estimations in Tables A3-A4, and again the
results are robust.
                                         Insert Table 6 about here
        The second piece of evidence that speaks to the advertising effect is that the sales impact of
counterfeits is more positive for the high-end shoes of brands that were less famous at the time of in-
fringement. The Chinese Trademark Office grants the “well-known (renowned) brands” designation to
national and international brands according to the Chinese Trademark Law and the Paris Convention.9
I repeat the IV regression estimations for the three tiers of shoes, testing the moderation effect of the
variable “non-renowned” which indicates the set of brands not listed as “renowned” at the time of in-
   9
     The modern concept of the “renowned” trademark is codified in Article 6bis of the International Convention
for the Protection of Intellectual Property (the Paris Convention). It uses the French expression “notoirement
connue,” literally “notoriously known”, or in better English, “well known.”


                                                      20
fringement by counterfeits. As shown in Column 2 of Table 6, the average effect of counterfeiting on the
sales quantities of high-end shoes of renowned brands is 0.23, and on that of the non-renowned brands
is 0.69 (0.23+0.46), statistically significant at the 5% level. The positive effects on the non-renowned
brands are apparently much higher than the corresponding effect sizes for the renowned brands. For
these non-famous brands, the entry effect on medium-tiered shoe sales is also positive. While the effect
on low-tiered shoes is still negative and statistically significant, the point estimates are less negative
than those in the renowned-brands sample. Results are again robust when executing the regressions
separately for the samples of renowned and non-renowned brands. The demand-enlarging effects for
the renowned brands are much smaller, with 12% of the increase in sales for the high-tiered shoes
attributable to the spillover effects (Table A6). The effect on the low-tiered shoes is again significantly
negative.
       Along the same line of thought, I use three other indicators for how established the brands are
and stratify accordingly. First, I stratify based on whether the brand was authenticated as “Famous
Brands in China” at the time of infringement. The positive effect is again larger for the brands that
were not “famous” at the time of infringement by 0.33, as compared to the domestically famous ones
(Column 3 of Table 6).
       Second, I stratify by the age of the brands. If counterfeits serve as mass advertisement, then
infringement surely has a larger impact when information about the brand has not yet been widely
disseminated. This suggests that the positive effects of counterfeiting is larger for newer brands than
for more established brands. Such is the case empirically (Column 4 of Table 6). I define “new brands”
as those whose age is below the median level. It is interesting to note that the impacts on the low-end
authentic sales are highly negative here, demonstrating the severe double-edged effects of counterfeit-
ing. While spreading the word is especially helpful for a new brand’s high-end products, low-end sales
are hurt significantly because counterfeits serve as such close substitutes for unknown brands without
a loyal customer base.
       In addition, I stratify based on the number of sub-brands the branded company owns. Results
again show that the positive effect is larger for brands that only have a single brand compared with
more established brands with multiple sub-brands (Column 5 of Table 6). The net positive effect for
the high-end shoes is 31% higher for the brands with just a single brand than for those with multiple
sub-brands, based on the coefficients (0.48+0.27 vs. 0.27).
       Finally, I stratify by the types of shoes tailored to customers of different age groups. Although
the classification may not be perfect because some shoes can be purchased across age groups, I have
worked with the companies to classify the shoes carefully based on their design intentions and records

                                                    21
of customer demographics. For instance, medium-leg men’s workboots are primarily worn by customers
aged 20-45, and “old man’s shoes” (a type of shoe with thick cotton insides) are designed for senior
people. I find that the positive spillover effects of counterfeiting are larger for shoes that are made for
young people than for those targeting older generations (Column 6 of Table 6). If the effect were not
due to an advertising mechanism, then I would expect to find the effect to be similar across both the
different shoe types and age groups.
          In sum, these stratification analyses show that the positive marginal effects of counterfeiter
entry on the sales of authentic shoes are largest among high-fashion boots and high-tier shoes of the
less established brands. The effects are also larger for shoes made for young people than for those
aimed at the older generation. These are exactly the products and brands that are expected to benefit
most from mass advertising. Counterfeits and imitations help establish “trends,” and trends are key
drivers of sales (Raustiala and Sprigman 2010). The results, therefore, provide strong evidence for
the advertising effects of counterfeits. The positive effect extends beyond the fashion industry. In an
interview with the New York Times, Michael Simon, the chief executive of LogMeIn, a company whose
software is used in smartphones and tablets, comments, “If people are going to steal something, we
sure as hell want them to steal our stuff. When you have a saturated market like Microsoft and have
no growth in these devices, then it might be different”(Schmidle 2010).



4.6        Discussions of Results
       The findings presented so far explain the sales mechanism that could further drive authentic produc-
ers’ quality upgrades in response to counterfeit infringements. In particular, among the set of branded
companies whose products started at similar price and quality levels, only those that experienced
counterfeit infringements strove to innovate after being counterfeited extensively. The companies that
were better acquainted with the AQSIQ and did not experience massive counterfeiting threats did not
demonstrate internal quality upgrades. Counterfeiting effects yield interesting patterns: not only did
firms innovate to alleviate competition from counterfeits, but I also find that their percentages of sales
concentrated more toward higher-end shoes even for the fixed-quality tiers over time. In hindsight, the
findings in this study that counterfeits have positive effects on high-end products and negative substi-
tution effects on low-end products would reinforce authentic firms’ incentives to innovate.10 Innovation
strategies had positive effects for consumers, because the quantity demanded increased, the product
  10
       The authentic firms were indeed delighted to learn this when I presented the results to them.




                                                         22
variety increased, and the deflated price associated with the basic characteristics remained stable.11
          It is worth noting that the data at hand are insufficient to further tease out the mechanism of
the advertising effect. Berger and Ward (2010) show that consumers of lower-tier luxury brands are
qualitatively different than those of higher-tier luxury brands in terms of the expertise necessary to
recognize the brand and to consume. In the current dataset, there is no significant correlation between
quality tier and likelihood of being counterfeited. However, as I acknowledge earlier, the annual-level
data do not capture differences in counterfeit entry across quality tiers at finer time intervals. Further,
it could be that low-tier consumers do not need much advertising to purchase, while counterfeits serve
to educate consumers in the higher tier. It is difficult to ascertain these dynamics of product exper-
tise with the present data, and they are interesting directions to pursue for future research. Future
research could also study the impacts of counterfeiting on fashion cycles. A qualitative study showed
that Shanghai Tang, a famous Chinese apparel brand, rolls out brand new collections every six months
to address the risks of copycats (KMPG 2010).
          One other limitation in the data is that only confiscated counterfeits are recorded and reported.
As discussed in the data section, this motivates my use of the dummy variable indicating significant
jumps in counterfeiting in the main specifications, though using the amount of counterfeits generates
qualitatively similar results. Suppose that the brands internalized the anticipated counterfeiting effects
in their self-enforcement investments (i.e., they tracked down more of the counterfeits for the low-end
quality tiers and fewer for the high-end ones); this would imply that the effect sizes as reported in
the paper may be overestimated while the direction is the same. Similarly, should the firm’s priors on
the counterfeiting effects be the opposite when they decided to invest in self-enforcement, the existing
effect estimates would be conservative estimates of the actual heterogeneous effects. In my interviews
with brand managers, I find no evidence that they were aware of such heterogeneous effects, and in fact
they were surprised to learn the findings afterwards. They also claimed that they had tracked down
most of their counterfeits.


5        CONCLUSION
       The sales impacts of counterfeits represent an urgent concern for business managers and policy
makers alike. The present research uses product-line-level panel data on Chinese shoe companies to
investigate the heterogeneous sales impacts of counterfeiting. I identify an exogenous loosening of
  11
    I also replicate these results in the lab. Lab experiments further enrich the evidence for the advertising
mechanism based on respondents’ stated preferences and purchase motivations. Please see the online appendix
at http://www.nber.org/ yiqian for more details.



                                                     23
public enforcement in monitoring footwear trademarks and its differential consequences in counterfeit
infringements for brands with heterogeneous degrees of acquaintance with the government agency han-
dling counterfeit enforcement. I operationalize this difference-in-difference approach by the interaction
between enforcement diversion and the relationship proxy to instrument for counterfeiters entry. The
empirical results are robust across specifications and consistent with theory. In addition, I establish the
causal relationship between counterfeiting and purchase intent for authentic products in experiments
where I randomly assign exposure to counterfeit shoe stimuli across a sample of respondents.
        The study uncovers the heterogeneous effects of counterfeits on the sales of branded products of
three quality tiers among existing product lines. Specifically, counterfeits have both advertising effects
for the brand and substitution effects for the authentic products. This finding supports previous studies
that have shown negative and positive effects of imitation but also specifies more clearly the context in
which a given effect will dominate. The advertising effect appears to dominate the substitution effect
for high-end authentic products, as reflected in the finding of a net positive effect of counterfeiting on
the sales of such goods. The substitution effect outweighs the advertising effect for low-end product
sales, resulting in a net negative effect. The effects last for some years. Such differential effects reinforce
incentives for authentic producers to innovate. For example, the results show that market shares for
higher-quality products increases post-counterfeit-entry, while those of the lower-end products decline.
I also show evidence for product-line proliferation after entry.
        My experimental approach replicates similar heterogeneous effects on purchase intent related
to high-, medium-, and low-tier branded products. These results suggest that counterfeits signal brand
popularity to at least some consumers and that a large number of consumers prefer access to a variety
of quality levels, further supporting the idea that counterfeits steal demand from low-end authentic
products while demonstrating positive spillover effects for high-end authentic products. These findings
substantiate and enrich the discovery in prior research (Qian 2008, 2011) that authentic firms’ average
prices and quality increase after entry by counterfeits. Combining these studies with the present one
provides a deeper understanding of how counterfeit entry under weak intellectual property protection
affects the innovation incentives of firms and markets. Moreover, the consistency of results from the
Chinese field panel data and U.S.-based lab experiments demonstrate that the panel-based findings
have implications beyond China.
        I also identify heterogeneous effects of counterfeiting along other dimensions of brand and prod-
uct. Notably, the positive spillover effects are larger for newer, less established brands and for brands
that are less famous at the time of the infringement. The effects are also larger for products that are
more fashion-driven in nature and those that are tailored to young customers. All these findings hint at

                                                      24
the advertising effects of counterfeiting for the targeted brand and product. It is worth noting that this
study disentangles the separate effects of the life stage of a brand and the quality tier within a brand
portfolio. Within each brand type and product class, I again identify the counterfeiting effects at the
quality-tier level through the difference-in-difference-in-difference simultaneous equation estimations.
       In sum, this paper identifies the heterogeneous effects of counterfeits on authentic-product sales
through a combination of field data and lab experiments. The findings have important policy and
business implications. For example, New York Senator Charles Schumer introduced legislation in Au-
gust 2010 that would rewrite copyright law to cover fashion design (Raustiala and Sprigman 2010),
but he may not have had in mind the positive effect of imitations. Since this study demonstrates that
counterfeits primarily hurt low-end authentic products and have positive net effects on high-end ones,
the focus of enforcement against counterfeits should be directed toward low-quality counterfeits or
counterfeits that steal business directly from authentic producers. It seems not only socially beneficial
to weed out low-quality counterfeits and to keep certain levels of high-quality competition but also
privately efficient for branded companies.
       In addition, the findings that the positive sales impact of counterfeiting is more pronounced
for brands that are not yet well known at the time of infringement could imply that trademarks and
IPR may be optimally enforced at different stages of brand or product adoption cycles or through the
use of a timing strategy. This is exactly what Microsoft did in China, by fiercely enforcing anti-piracy
measures only after the majority of Chinese users had adopted its products (in either authentic or pi-
rated form). In general, at the early stages of brand development, counterfeits could help boost brand
awareness and market penetration, playing a role very similar to that of buzz agents. Strong brand
awareness and familiarity may be required for positive thoughts and feelings toward the brand (Keller
2003), and counterfeiting helps to establish or enhance these prerequisites. This also links to findings
that suggest that no publicity is bad publicity (Berger et al. 2010), since counterfeits generate pub-
licity for the brand. As the brand grows in prominence, counterfeits’ benefits dwindle, and authentic
producers can enhance enforcement to curb the business-stealing effects of imitations.
       Moreover, the present results suggest that brands need not concern themselves significantly with
counterfeits that are of much lower quality than their authentic counterparts, since the low-quality im-
itations capture a very different customer segment that would not purchase the authentic product in
the first place. Brands can also devote relatively fewer enforcement resources to high-fashion product
lines and high-end lines designed for younger customers, as counterfeits can help set fashion trends and
diffuse authentic innovation. This further promotes the product-innovation cycle.
       Applications of the insights gained from this study go beyond the realm of counterfeits. For

                                                   25
                                                                                                       26


 example, Qian et al. (2010) identify a positive spillover effect of a low-quality (but not counterfeit)
 entrant on an original brand using comprehensive scanner data from an American apparel company.
 Kuksov and Xie (2011) also theorize about the positive competition effect in the status goods market.
 The findings I present here, therefore, could be extended to these and similar contexts. The collective,
 growing body of research in this area suggests that IPR protection likely has an optimal level and that
 the optimum varies from country to country (Qian 2007 and 2009), sector to sector (Qian et al. 2012),
 brand to brand, and even product to product (type and quality levels). The optimum could also have
 a time dimension, given the life-stage effects discussed in this study. Thus, to drive optimal innovation
 and enforcement policies, business managers and policy makers should keep in mind that counterfeiters
 can be both foes and friends.




 REFERENCES
Aghion, P., N. Bloom, R. Blundell, R. Griffith, and P. Howitt (2005), “Competition and Innovation: An
       inverted U relationship” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXX (2), 701-728.
American Apparel and Footwear Association (2005), ShoeStats, AAFA.
Anderson, E., Yi Qian, and D. Simester (2011), “Spillover Effects of a Low-quality Entrant,” Working
      Paper, Northwestern University and MIT.
AQSIQ, Administration of Quality Supervision, Inspection and Quarantine (1991-2004), Year Books.
AQSIQ (2000), Guidelines for ISO Applications and Frequently Asked Questions.
Bate, Roger, Ginger Jin, and Aparna Mathur (2012), “Counterfeit or Substandard? Assessing Price and
       Non-Price Signals of Drug Quality,” Working Paper.
Berger, J., A. Sorensen, and S. Rasmussen (2010), “Positive Effects of Negative Publicity,” Marketing
       Science, 29(5), pp. 815827.
Berger, J. and Morgan Ward (2010), “Subtle Signals of Inconspicuous Consumption,” Journal of Con-
       sumer Research, 37, 555-569.
Biais, B. and E. Perotti (2008), “Entrepreneurs and New Ideas,” RAND Journal of Economics, Vol. 39,
        No. 4, Winter 2008 pp. 11051125.
Branstetter, Lee and Mariko Sakakibara (2002), “Do Stronger Patents Induce More Innovation? Evi-
       dence From the 1988 Japanese Patent Law Reforms.” The American Economic Review, 92, 1,
       pp. 143-159.
Branstetter, L., Fisman, R., and Foley, C. F. (2006), The Quarterly Journal of Economics, February
       2006, 321-349.
Bresnahan, T., Shane Greenstein, and Rebecca Henderson (2010), “Schumpeterian Competition and
       Diseconomies of Scope: Illustrations from the Histories of Microsoft and IBM,” Working Paper.
Castro, J., D. Balkin, and D. Shepherd (2008), “Can Entrepreneurial Firms Benefit From Product
       Piracy?” Journal of Business Venturing, 23 (1): 75-90.
Chinese National Bureau of Statistics (1995), Codebook for the Third Chinese National Industrial Census,
       National Bureau of Statistics.
Cogitamus Consulting (2009), The Global Footwear Market: Athletic and non-Athletics Shoes, Packaged
       Facts. August 2009.
Conner, K.R. and Rumelt, R.P. (1991), “Software piracy: an analysis of protection strategies,” Manage-
      ment Science, Vol. 37, February, pp. 125-39.
Fink, C., K. Maskus, and Y. Qian (2010), “The Economic Effects of Counterfeiting and Piracy,” Advisory
       Committee on Enforcement WIPO 9/3/2010, World Intellectual Property Organization.
Gabriel, Satya J. (1998), “Is Banking Reform in China Still on Track?” Satya Gabriel’s Online Papers:
       China Essay Series http://www.satya.us
Galloni, A. (2006), “Bagging Fakers and Sellers”, Wall Street Journal, January 31, B1-2.
Gans, J. David Hsu, S. Stern (2008), “The Impact of Uncertain Intellectual Property Rights on the
       Market for Ideas: Evidence from Patent Grant Delays”, Management Science, 54: 982-997.
Godes, D. and Dina Mayzlin (2009), “Firm-Created Word of Mouth Communication: Evidence from a
       Field Test” Marketing Science, Vol. 28:4, pp.721-739.
Gosline, R. (2009), “Simultaneous Distinction, Democratization and Omnivorism Effects: A Longitudi-
       nal Analysis of Dynamic Symbolic Boundaries in Counterfeit Consumption Networks,” Disser-
       tation, Harvard Business School.
Gosline, R. (2010), “Counterfeit Labels: Good For Luxury Brands?” Forbes, 2/12/2010.
Grossman, G. and Shapiro, C. (1988a),“Foreign Counterfeiting of Status Goods,” Quarterly Journal of
      Economics, vol. 103, no. 412.
Grossman, G. and Shapiro, C. (1988b), “Counterfeit Product Trade”, American Economic Review, 78,
      59-75.
Hong, S.-H. (2008), “Measuring the Effect of Napster on Recorded Music Sales,” Manuscript available
       at https://netfiles.uiuc.edu/hyunhong/www/research.htm.
Hui, Kai-Lung and I.P.L. Png (2003), “Piracy and the Legitimate Demand for Recorded Music”, Con-
       tributions to Economic Analysis and Policy, Vol. 2 No. 1, Article 11.
Jaffe, A. and Lerner, Josh (2004), Innovation and Its Discontents, Princeton University Press.
Keller, Kevin, “Brand Synthesis: The Multidimensionality of Brand Knowledge.” Journal of Consumer
        Research, Vol 29, No. 4 (March 2003), p.595-600.
Khan, B.Z. (2004), “Does Copyright Piracy Pay? The Effects of U.S. International Copyright Laws on
      the Market for Books, 1790-1920”, NBER Working Paper Series, 10271.
KPMG China (2010), “Refined Strategies: Luxury extends its reach across China”, Consumer Markets
    6(5): 37.
Kuksov, D. and Y. Xie (2011), “Competition in a Status Good Market,” Working Paper.
Kyle, Margaret and Anita McGahan (2011), “Investments in Pharmaceuticals Before and After TRIPS,”
       Review of Economics and Statistics. March.
Lerner, J. (2009), “The Empirical Impact of Intellectual Property Rights on Innovation: Puzzles and
       Clues,” American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, 99:2, 343348.
Li, Ye, Yan Zhang, and Ting Zhu (2011), “How Multiple Anchors Affect Judgment? Evidence from the
        Lab and eBay.” University of Chicago Working Paper.
Liebowitz, S. J. (2006), “Economists Examine File-Sharing and Music Sales,” in Industrial Organization
       and the Digital Economy, eds. G. Illing and M. Peitz. Cambridge: MIT Press, 145-174.
Lin, Jessica (2011), Fake Stuff. Routledge, Taylor & Francis, New York.


                                                  27
Luo, L., J. Chen, J. Han, and C. Park (2010), “Dilution and Enhancement of Celebrity Brands through
       Sequential Movie Releases, Journal of Marketing Research, Vol.47, No.6, 1114-1128.
Mortimer, J. and J. H., C. Nosko, and A. Sorensen (2010), “Supply Responses to Digital Distribution:
      Recorded Music and Live Performance,” forthcoming, Information Economics and Policy.
Murray F. and S. Stern (2007), “Do formal Intellectual Property Rights Hinder the Free Flow of Scientific
      Knowledge?” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, Vol. 63:4, p.648-687.
Naughton, Barry (2002), “China’s Economic Think Tanks: Their Changing Role in the 1990s,” The
      China Quarterly, V.171, Cambridge University Press, Sep..
Oberholzer-Gee, Felix and Koleman Strumpf (2007), “The Effect of File Sharing on Record Sales: An
      Empirical Analysis,” Journal of Political Economy, 115:1.
—— (2009), “File-Sharing and Copyright”. Innovation Policy and the Economy series, volume 10. ed.
     Joshua Lerner and Scott Stern. MIT Press. 2009.
Piller, C. (2006), “How Piracy Opens Doors for Windows”, Los Angeles Times, April, 9,
        http://articles.latimes.com/2006/apr/09/business/fi-micropiracy9.
Qian, Yi (2007), “Do National Patent Laws Stimulate Domestic Innovation In A Global Patenting En-
       vironment? A Cross-Country Analysis of Pharmaceutical Patent Protection: 1978-2002” Review
       of Economics and Statistics, 89:3. MIT Press.
Qian, Yi (2008), “Impacts of Entry by Counterfeiters,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 2008,
       Vol. 123, No. 4: 15771609. MIT Press.
Qian, Yi (2010), “Brand Management and Strategies Against Counterfeits,” forthcoming, Journal of
       Economics and Management Strategy.
Qian, Yi and Jie Chen (2011), “Cross-culture Experiments on Counterfeits.”Northwestern University
       Working Paper.
Qian, Yi and Xie, Hui (2011), “No Customer Left Behind - A Distribution-Free Bayesian Approach
       to Accounting for Missing Xs in Marketing Models,” with Hui Xie, Marketing Science, August
       2011.
Qian, Yi and Xie, Hui (2013), “Which Customers are Lost to the Counterfeiters?” Northwestern Uni-
       versity Working Paper.
Qian, Yi and Victor Shih (2010), “Code Book for Board of Directors of Chinese Firms,” Memo, http :
       //www.nber.org/ yiqian/boardc odebook.pdf
Raustiala, K. and C. Sprigman (2009), “Piracy Paradox”, Virginia Law Review, Vol. 92, p. 1687.
Raustiala, K. and C. Sprigman (2010), “Why Imitation is the Sincerest Form of Fashion”, The New
       York Times, Aug. 12, 2010.
Rob, Rafael and Joel Waldfogel (2006), “Piracy on the High Cs: Music Downloading, Sales Displacement,
      and Social Welfare in a Sample of College Students,” Journal of Law and Economics, Vol.
      XLIX, April, p.29-62.
Schmidle, N. (2010), “Inside the Knockoff-Tennis-Shoe Factory,” The New York Times, Aug. 19, 2010.
Thursby, M., R. Jensen, and J. Thursby (1991), “Smuggling, Camouflaging, and Market Structure,”
      Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 106, No. 3 (Aug., 1991), pp. 789-814, Oxford University
      Press.
Wilcox, K., H. Kim, and S. Sen (2009), “Why Do Consumers Buy Counterfeit Luxury Brands?” Journal
       of Marketing Research, Vol. 46 (April), 24759.
Wild, Joff (2007), “The Truth about Trademarks in China,” World Trademark Review, January/February,
       2007.


                                                   28
Table 1. Political Connections and Average Counterfeiting Occurrences By Brand

 Notes: This table tabulates the average number of ISO certification days and the average sales
        quantities of counterfeits for each of the 31 brands in the sample.


               Brand             # ISO Days            The Sales Quantity of Counterfeits
                   1                     31                                             0
                   2                     31                                           14
                   3                     31                                           51
                   4                     46                                             0
                   5                     49                                          126
                   6                     65                                           27
                   7                     65                                           75
                   8                     78                                             0
                   9                     86                                           14
                  10                     95                                           75
                  11                    102                                           27
                  12                    107                                             0
                  13                    114                                          146
                  14                    115                                           60
                  15                    120                                             0
                  16                    144                                             0
                  17                    146                                           96
                  18                    169                                           62
                  19                    172                                          184
                  20                    172                                          135
                  21                    199                                           96
                  22                    204                                           41
                  23                    214                                          197
                  24                    214                                          145
                  25                    224                                           40
                  26                    249                                          161
                  27                    259                                          111
                  28                    264                                          160
                  29                    276                                          220
                  30                    289                                          146
                  31                    303                                          221
                Table 2: Summary Statistics Before and After the Policy Change
Variable:                                                        Pre-1995               Post-1995
Percentage of Government Resources in                            .11                    .02
    Monitoring Footwear Trademarks                               (.004)                 (.001)
Workdays Authentic Company Took to Pass ISO                      142                    149
    (Relationship Proxy)                                         (116.5)                (112.6)
Experience matches between brand managers                        3.11                   3.36
    and AQSIQ Officials                                          (3.79)                 (3.83)
Experience matches between product managers                      4.98                   5.11
    and AQSIQ Officials                                          (2.16)                 (2.14)
Incorporation Year of Authentic Brands                           1985                   1985
                                                                 (11)                   (11)
Number of Company Stores                                         0                      684
                                                                 (0)                    (533.5)
Authentic Brand-Protection Office Personnel                      .17                    4.0
    (Head count)                                                 (.46)                  (2.23)
Quantity (in 10,000 pairs)
 Fake Sale Quantity                                              Median 0               85.71
                                                                                        (75.85)
 Authentic Sale Quantity                                         309.38                 558.28
                                                                 (725.76)               (995.82)
Prices, Costs, and other Numerairs (Deflated, in USD)
 Fake Shoe Price                                                 Median 0               7.32
                                                                 (8.33 to 10.4)         (4.2)
 Fake Shoe Costs                                                 Median 0               2.66
                                                                 (2.2 to 3.56)          (1.56)
 Average Authentic Price of Existing Product Lines               26.21                  32.24
                                                                 (13.64)                (20.45)
 Average Authentic Costs of Existing Product Lines               22.61                  25.18
                                                                 ( 12.90)               (18.43)
 Average Authentic Price of New Product Lines                                           45.37
                                                                                        (26.06)
 Average Authentic Costs of New Product Lines                                           35.47
                                                                                        (24.37)
 Self-enforcement Costs of Authentic Brands                      520                    81380
                                                                 (1550)                 (83140)
 Advertising Expenditure                                         1496700                2381500
                                                                 (2724200)              (3329300)
 Real GDP per capita PPP                                         310.25                 488.13
                                                                 (5.57)                 (2.83)
No. of Obs.                                                      62                     310

This table presents the summary statistics of the brand-level dataset, slicing it into two parts: data
prior to the year 1995, when the Chinese government reallocated enforcement resources away from the
footwear sector to fill in the needs of the safety sectors, and data after 1995. Each row reports the means
and standard deviations (in parentheses) of a variable in the two time lines. The range statistics for the
counterfeit shoe prices and costs report the ranges of the corresponding values when counterfeits existed
for some brands. It was rather sparse before the policy shift. The percentage of government resources
devoted to monitoring the shoe sector is obtained from the Quality and Technology Supervision Bureau.
Real GDP per capita PPP is obtained from the World Bank World Development Indicators (WDI).
Prices and costs are deflated using the Consumer Price Index published in the WDI (Year 1995 was
set as the base year in the database).                 29
                                 Table 3: First-stage IV Regression

Dependent Variable:                                                    Fake Entry
                                                   (1)              (2)          (3)             (4)

Loose                                              .72**
                                                   (.04)
Relation proxied by ISO                                             .11                          .11
(scaled by dividing 100)                                            (.13)                        (.12)
Relation proxied by Biographic Match                                               .08           .09
                                                                                   (.06)         (.08)
Loose*ISO                                                           .24**                        .33**
                                                                    (.01)                        (.06)
Loose*Bio-match                                                                    .13**         .14**
                                                                                   (.03)         (.03)
Year trend                                         -.0001
                                                   (.0002)
Year Fixed Effects                                 No               Yes            Yes           Yes
No. of Obs.                                        372              372            5833          5833
p-values                                           .00              .00            .00           .00



This table reports the first stage of IV estimations. All models use brand-fixed effects. The counterfeit
entry dummy (equals one if counterfeits are discovered for a brand) and log of deflated authentic
product prices are regressed on the set of I.V., with the year trend and company fixed effects, in four
separate regressions. Each column reports one regression specification. Heteroskedasticity-consistent
standard errors that correct for clustering at the company level appear in parentheses. Statistical
significance levels: *–5%; **–1%. Columns 1 to 4 present alternative first-stage IV specifications to
show robust significant relationship between the set of IVs and the entry of counterfeits. The variables
are: Loose – a dummy indicating enforcement legislation change, which equals 1 in 1995 onwards;
ISO – relationship between the brand and the QTSB, as proxied by the number of work days between
the application and grant dates of ISO certificate for an authentic company; Loose*ISO – interaction
between legislation change and a company’s relationship with the government; Biographic matches –
an 1-10 scaled variable that is constructed based on the education and experience matches between
the brand and product-line managers and that of the AQSIQ officials; Loose*Bio-match – interaction
between legislation change and the biographic-match variable.




                                                   30
Table 4. IV Regression Results for Log Sale Quantity of Three Fixed Quality Tiers

Notes: This table reports five regression specifications. Point estimates (standard errors) are reported in the first
(second) row aligning with the corresponding independent variable. Standard Errors are clustered at the product-
line level. Year trend is used in order to obtain the estimates on the macroeconomic variables. “*” and “**”
denote statistical significance at the 0.05 and 0.01 levels, respectively.

Variable                            OLS pooled        IV pooled     High‐end       Medium‐end          Low‐end
                                         (1)              (2)           (3)             (4)               (5)

Entry                                                                    0.46*            ‐0.23            ‐0.57*
                                                                        (0.22)            (0.18)            (0.23)
  High‐end                                  0.31*         0.49*
                                            (0.13)        (0.18)
  Medium‐end                               ‐0.27*          ‐0.16
                                            (0.12)        (0.15)
  Low‐end                                 ‐0.94**       ‐0.75**
                                            (0.15)        (0.20)
ln(price)                                  ‐0.19*        ‐0.19*           ‐0.11               ‐0.18         ‐0.26
                                            (0.09)        (0.10)         (0.19)              (0.15)        (0.16)
ln(Ads)                                     0.22*         0.23*          0.27*                 0.21          0.13
                                            (0.11)        (0.12)         (0.14)              (0.17)        (0.19)
Age                                           0.01          0.01           0.01                0.00          0.00
                                            (0.01)        (0.02)         (0.01)              (0.01)        (0.02)
ln(household                                  3.66          4.26           0.45              3.11*        5.87**
 consumption)                               (2.38)        (2.27)         (0.67)              (1.45)        (1.12)
Economic growth                               0.02         ‐0.01         0.08*                ‐0.06      ‐0.15**
                                            (0.02)        (0.02)         (0.04)              (0.04)        (0.05)
Consumption per                              ‐0.02       ‐0.03*            0.05               ‐0.05      ‐0.18**
   GDP                                      (0.01)        (0.01)         (0.03)              (0.04)        (0.04)
Gini coefficient                              0.01          0.08           0.06             0.23**        0.39**
                                            (0.04)        (0.06)         (0.07)              (0.08)        (0.10)
Female shoes                               0.52**        0.42**          0.18*              0.56**        0.47**
                                            (0.03)        (0.05)         (0.08)              (0.09)        (0.10)
High‐leg boots                            ‐1.41**       ‐1.43**        ‐1.38**             ‐1.52**       ‐1.62**
                                            (0.05)        (0.05)         (0.11)              (0.14)        (0.16)
Medium‐leg boots                          ‐0.98**       ‐0.99**        ‐0.96**             ‐1.03**       ‐1.08**
                                            (0.04)        (0.03)         (0.05)              (0.06)        (0.09)
Slippers                                  ‐1.55**       ‐1.54**        ‐1.51**             ‐1.47**       ‐1.61**
                                            (0.05)        (0.05)         (0.08)              (0.07)        (0.09)
Sport shoes                                1.27**        1.53**         0.81**              1.32**        1.56**
                                            (0.26)        (0.22)         (0.31)              (0.30)        (0.33)
Constant                                  ‐11.67*       ‐10.98*         15.28*                ‐7.21      ‐12.39*
                                            (4.95)        (4.87)         (6.92)              (7.82)        (5.52)
Year Trend                                       Y             Y              Y                   Y             Y
Brand and product‐line FE                        Y             Y              Y                   Y             Y
Tier FE                                          Y             Y              N                   N             N
Year Trend*Tier                                  Y             Y              N                   N             N
N                                            5833          5833           1944                1945          1944
Table 5. Robustness Analyses with More Control Covariates and Natural Clusters of Quality Tiers
Notes: This table reports six regression specifications based on data resulting from natural clustering. Point estimates
(standard errors) are reported in the first (second) row aligning with the corresponding independent variable. Standard
Errors are clustered at the product-line level. Year trend is used in order to obtain the estimates on the macroeconomic
variables. “*” and “**” denote statistical significance at the 0.05 and 0.01 levels, respectively.

 Variable                     Cluster C     High‐end      Medium         Low‐end        Interact C       Cluster P
                                 (1)            (2)          (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)
 Entry                                        0.51**        ‐0.12         ‐0.71**
                                              (0.19)       (0.21)         (0.28)
   High‐end                       0.58**                                                      0.40**        0.56**
                                   (0.16)                                                      (0.13)        (0.18)
   Medium‐end                       ‐0.01                                                        0.01          0.37
                                   (0.15)                                                      (0.14)        (0.29)
   Low‐end                       ‐0.48**                                                     ‐0.57**       ‐0.65**
                                   (0.18)                                                      (0.14)        (0.23)
 ln(price)                        ‐0.23*         ‐0.17          ‐0.20         ‐0.28           ‐0.32*       ‐0.26**
                                   (0.11)       (0.21)         (0.19)        (0.19)            (0.12)        (0.10)
 ln(Ads)                             0.21         0.28           0.22          0.18            0.26*           0.22
                                   (0.12)       (0.15)         (0.17)        (0.17)            (0.12)        (0.12)
 Age                                 0.00         0.01           0.00          0.01              0.00          0.01
                                   (0.01)       (0.02)         (0.02)        (0.01)            (0.00)        (0.01)
 ln(household                        3.17         0.24         3.56*         4.27*                             2.98
  consumption)                     (1.82)       (0.87)         (1.38)        (2.12)                          (1.76)
 Economic growth                    ‐0.03       0.08*        ‐0.08**        ‐0.11*                             0.02
                                   (0.03)       (0.03)         (0.03)        (0.04)                          (0.02)
 Consumption per                    ‐0.02        ‐0.06           0.04         ‐0.03                           ‐0.01
  GDP                              (0.02)       (0.04)         (0.05)        (0.04)                          (0.03)
 WTO Accession                      ‐0.04        ‐0.02          ‐0.07       ‐0.14*                            ‐0.05
                                   (0.04)       (0.05)         (0.06)        (0.07)                          (0.04)
 Gini coefficient                    0.05        ‐0.08           0.13       0.43**                             0.07
                                   (0.04)       (0.08)         (0.09)        (0.14)                          (0.06)
 Female shoes                     0.47**       0.36**         0.36**        0.35**            0.48**        0.52**
                                   (0.04)       (0.07)         (0.06)        (0.08)            (0.10)        (0.06)
 High‐leg boots                  ‐1.51**      ‐1.51**        ‐1.44**        ‐1.4**           ‐1.51**       ‐1.40**
                                   (0.08)       (0.12)         (0.14)        (0.12)            (0.07)        (0.07)
 Medium‐leg boots                ‐0.98**      ‐1.13**        ‐1.02**        ‐1.0**           ‐0.98**       ‐0.96**
                                   (0.03)       (0.04)         (0.04)        (0.06)            (0.04)        (0.03)
 Slippers                        ‐1.46**      ‐1.57**        ‐1.53**        ‐1.6**           ‐1.46**       ‐1.53**
                                   (0.05)       (0.06)         (0.06)        (0.07)            (0.05)        (0.05)
 Sport shoes                      1.52**       1.37**         1.98**        1.11**            1.52**        1.46**
                                   (0.13)       (0.28)         (0.19)        (0.21)            (0.11)        (0.23)
 Constant                           ‐8.67     14.71**           ‐4.41       ‐10.79             4.98*          ‐7.58
                                   (5.12)       (6.45)         (6.53)        (8.43)            (2.12)        (4.73)
 Year Trend                             Y            Y              Y             Y                 Y             Y
 Brand and line FE                      Y            Y              Y             Y                 Y             Y
 Tier FE                                Y            N              N             N                 Y             Y
 YearTrend*Tier                         Y            N              N             N                N              Y
 YearTrend*Brand*Tier                   N            N              N             N                 Y             N
 N                                  5833         1518           2099          2216              5833          5833
Table 6. Stratification Analyses on the Mechanisms of the Positive Spillover Effects

Notes: This table reports six regression specifications to test the mechanism of the positive spillover effects of
counterfeiting. The moderating factors (M) are: 1. Whether the product is highly fashionable (dress shoes and tall-leg
women boots) or not; 2. Whether the brand was not classified as a “renowned brand” at the time of infringement; 3.
Whether the brand was not listed as “China Famous Brands” at the time of the infringement; 4. Whether the brand is
relatively new, whose age is below the median; 5. Whether the brand has a single brand; 6. Whether the products
were designed more for younger customers. Point estimates (standard errors) are reported in the first (second) row
aligning with the corresponding independent variable. Standard Errors are clustered at the product-line level. Year
trend is used in order to obtain the estimates on the macroeconomic variables. “*” and “**” denote statistical
significance at the 0.05 and 0.01 levels, respectively.


 Variable                       fashion     nonrenown nonfamous             newbrand        onebrand      user‐age
                                   (1)          (2)       (3)                  (4)             (5)           (6)
 E*M
   High‐end                       0.37*           0.46*           0.33*            0.51*         0.48*         0.37*
                                  (0.17)          (0.21)          (0.16)           (0.24)        (0.22)        (0.15)
    Medium‐end                      0.46            0.39            0.21            ‐0.29       ‐0.36*          ‐0.35
                                  (0.19)          (0.19)          (0.20)           (0.18)        (0.17)        (0.18)
    Low‐end                         0.12            0.21           0.16          ‐0.85**         0.63*         0.46*
                                  (0.24)          (0.25)          (0.19)           (0.27)        (0.23)        (0.18)
 Entry (E)
   High‐end                        0.39*         0.23*            0.35*              0.16          0.27        0.29*
                                  (0.16)          (0.12)          (0.13)           (0.13)        (0.17)        (0.13)
    Medium‐end                   ‐0.33*            ‐0.24           ‐0.22            ‐0.04          0.19         ‐0.13
                                  (0.17)          (0.16)         (0.19)            (0.15)        (0.14)        (0.18)
    Low‐end                     ‐0.78**         ‐0.89**         ‐0.82**           ‐0.38*       ‐1.01**       ‐1.09**
                                  (0.21)          (0.21)          (0.17)           (0.16)        (0.18)        (0.26)
 Moderator (M)
   High‐end                       0.14*            ‐0.23           ‐0.45          ‐0.54*        ‐1.22*           0.42
                                  (0.06)          (0.81)          (0.33)           (0.23)        (0.47)        (0.22)
    Medium‐end                      0.02         0.98**            ‐0.37            ‐0.14         ‐0.53          0.06
                                  (0.19)          (0.20)          (0.36)           (0.37)        (0.52)        (0.09)
    Low‐end                        ‐0.72           ‐0.17         ‐4.67*           2.13**       ‐2.35**          ‐0.62
                                  (1.28)          (1.07)          (1.19)           (0.81)        (0.82)        (1.01)
 ln(price)                       ‐0.21*          ‐0.19*          ‐0.18*             ‐0.18       ‐0.20*        ‐0.19*
                                  (0.11)          (0.10)          (0.09)           (0.10)        (0.10)        (0.10)
 ln(Ads)                            0.21          0.22*           0.25*              0.20          0.20        0.24*
                                  (0.12)          (0.11)          (0.12)           (0.13)        (0.13)        (0.12)
 age                                0.01            0.00            0.01             0.01          0.01          0.01
                                  (0.01)          (0.01)          (0.01)           (0.02)        (0.01)        (0.01)
 Economic growth                    0.03            0.03            0.02             0.02          0.03          0.01
                                  (0.02)          (0.02)          (0.02)           (0.02)        (0.02)        (0.02)
 log(household                      2.67            2.85            2.75             2.66          2.69          2.71
   consumption)                   (1.73)          (1.58)          (1.58)           (1.63)        (1.52)        (1.71)
 Consumption per GDP               ‐0.03           ‐0.02            0.01            ‐0.03       ‐0.04*          ‐0.04
                                  (0.02)          (0.02)          (0.02)           (0.02)        (0.02)        (0.03)
 Gini coefficient                0.07**          0.06**          0.07**           0.06**        0.04**        0.08**
                                  (0.02)          (0.02)          (0.02)           (0.02)        (0.01)        (0.02)
Female shoes          0.51**     0.50**     0.51**     0.48**     0.51**     0.51**
                       (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.03)
High‐leg boots       ‐1.46**    ‐1.44**    ‐1.47**    ‐1.44**    ‐1.46**    ‐1.46**
                       (0.04)     (0.04)     (0.04)     (0.05)     (0.05)     (0.05)
Medium‐leg boots     ‐0.86**    ‐0.86**    ‐0.95**    ‐0.91**    ‐0.90**    ‐0.99**
                       (0.04)     (0.04)     (0.04)     (0.04)     (0.04)     (0.04)
Slippers             ‐1.53**    ‐1.53**    ‐1.52**    ‐1.53**    ‐1.52**    ‐1.47**
                       (0.05)     (0.05)     (0.05)     (0.05)     (0.05)     (0.07)
Sport shoes           1.49**     1.48**     1.51**     1.48**     1.60**     1.55**
                       (0.20)     (0.20)     (0.19)     (0.20)     (0.21)     (0.21)

Year Trend                 Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y
Brand‐ and line‐FE         Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y
Tier FE                    Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y
YearTrend*Tier             Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y

N                      5833       5833       5833       5833       5833       5833
Figure 1. Bar Chart of the Percentage Sales Pre- and Post-Entry by Quality Tiers

Note: This figure presents the percentage sales breakdown of the product‐line level dataset, slicing it into two parts: data prior to
the year that the corresponding brand was infringed by its counterfeits and the data after that. All company‐level data are gathered
through original interviews and surveys. Existing product lines refer to those that existed throughout the sample period, while new
product lines refer to those that were added one to three years after the brands were infringed by counterfeits.

    a. Overall Breakdowns of Three Quality Tiers




    b. Breakdown by Existing Product Lines and New Product Lines, Each of Three Quality Tiers
Figure 2a. Box Plots of the Distributions of the Product-type-adjusted Deflated Unit Production Cost
Across Manufacturers’ Quality Tiers
       60
       40
   d c os t
    20 0
       -2 0




                  1                      2                       3


Figure 2b. Box Plots of the Distributions of the Product-type-adjusted Deflated Unit Production Cost
Across Quality Tiers by Natural Clustering
       60
       40
   d c os t
    20 0
       -2 0




                  1                       2                       3
Figure 3: Coefficient Trend of Log Sale Quantity against Years Relative to Entry for the Existing Product Lines




Figure 4: Coefficient Trend of Log Sale Quantity Against Years Relative to Entry for the New Product Lines
