                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   ESTIMATION AND EVALUATION OF DSGE MODELS:
                           PROGRESS AND CHALLENGES

                                         Frank Schorfheide

                                        Working Paper 16781
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16781


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2011




This paper is based on a lecture delivered at the 2010 Econometric Society World Congress in Shanghai.
It draws extensively from joint work with Boragan Aruoba and Marco Del Negro. I would like to thank
Harald Uhlig and participants of the World Congress session on macroeconometrics for their helpful
comments. Financial support from the National Science Foundation under grant SES-0617803 is gratefully
acknowledged. Gauss Programs to replicate the empirical analysis as well as a Technical Appendix
are available at http://www.ssc.upenn.edu/~schorf. The views expressed herein are those of the author
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Frank Schorfheide. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Estimation and Evaluation of DSGE Models: Progress and Challenges
Frank Schorfheide
NBER Working Paper No. 16781
February 2011
JEL No. C32,C50,E30,E50

                                            ABSTRACT

Estimated dynamic stochastic equilibrium (DSGE) models are now widely used for empirical research
in macroeconomics as well as for quantitative policy analysis and forecasting at central banks around
the world. This paper reviews recent advances in the estimation and evaluation of DSGE models, discusses
current challenges, and provides avenues for future research.


Frank Schorfheide
University of Pennsylvania
Department of Economics
3718 Locust Walk
McNeil 525
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6297
and NBER
schorf@ssc.upenn.edu
                                                                                              1


1     Introduction

Estimated dynamic stochastic equilibrium (DSGE) models are now widely used for empirical
research in macroeconomics as well as quantitative policy analysis and forecasting at central
banks around the world. This paper summarizes recent advances in the econometric analysis
of DSGE models, discusses current challenges, and highlights avenues for future research.
To illustrate the advances of the past decade, a prototypical empirical analysis based on a
small-scale New Keynesian DSGE model is presented. In this application, Bayesian inference
is used to measure the welfare effect of changing the central bank’s target inflation rate. The
Bayesian inference is implemented through Markov-Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods,
which deliver draws from the posterior distribution of DSGE model parameters. These
draws can be converted into impulse response functions, welfare effects of policy changes, or
other quantities of interest. Moreover, it is straightforward to obtain point estimates, e.g.,
posterior means or medians, or credible sets that reflect the posterior uncertainty.

    Despite the advances of the DSGE model literature, many important challenges remain.
This paper considers five of them in detail. First, while reported credible (or confidence) sets
for DSGE model parameters are often narrow, from a meta perspective, estimates of many
important parameters tend to be fragile across empirical studies. Second, macroeconomic
fluctuations in DSGE models are generated by exogenous disturbances. The estimated shock
processes are often highly persistent, and their path closely mirrors the path of one of the
observables. This raises concerns as to whether these shocks capture aggregate uncertainty
or misspecification. Third, many time series exhibit low frequency behavior that is difficult,
if not impossible, to reconcile with the model being estimated. This low frequency misspec-
ification contaminates the estimation of shocks and thereby inference about the sources of
business cycle fluctuations. Fourth, in view of more densely parameterized empirical models
such as vector autoregressions (VARs), DSGE models often appear to be misspecified in the
sense that VARs are favored by statistical criteria that trade off goodness of in-sample fit
against model dimensionality. Fifth, the predictions of the effects of rare policy changes often
rely exclusively on extrapolation by theory, which makes it difficult to provide measures of
uncertainty.
                                                                                              2


    This paper is organized as follows. The above-mentioned advances and challenges are
illustrated in Section 2. The remaining sections discuss recent research that addresses some
of these problems, including work on identification of DSGE models (Section 3), the gener-
alization of exogenous shock processes (Section 4), methods to construct hybrid models that
correct DSGE model misspecification (Section 5), and methods to conduct policy analysis
(Section 6). Finally, Section 7 concludes. Details of the empirical illustrations and exam-
ples that are presented in this paper are relegated to a Technical Appendix that is available
electronically.



2     A Prototypical Application

A central element of New Keynesian DSGE models is that firms face a cost of adjusting
nominal prices. In turn, firms tend to economize on price adjustments if inflation is nonzero.
This leads to a distortion of relative prices and an inefficient use of intermediate inputs, and
ultimately to output and welfare loss. At the same time, nonzero nominal interest rates
constitute a tax on money holdings and depress transactions that require the use of money
or highly liquid, non-interest-bearing funds. These two mechanisms create a trade-off for
policymakers. The New Keynesian friction is eliminated by targeting a zero inflation rate,
which equates nominal and real interest rate. The monetary friction, on the other hand,
is eliminated if the nominal interest rate is zero. A DSGE model can be used to estimate
the relative strength of the two frictions and to determine a long-run inflation rate that
trades off the opposing mechanisms. The following illustration is based on recent work by
Aruoba and Schorfheide (2011), henceforth AS. Section 2.1 provides a description of the
model economy. Section 2.2 discusses estimation results that highlight some of the recent
advances in the econometric analysis of DSGE models. Finally, Section 2.3 points toward a
number of problems and challenges that need to be addressed in future research.
                                                                                                               3


2.1       A Small-Scale DSGE Model

The model economy consists of households, final good producers, intermediate goods pro-
ducers, a central bank, and a fiscal authority. It is a simplified version of the widely cited
Smets and Wouters (2003, 2007) model because it abstracts from habit formation in con-
sumption and wage rigidity. I will subsequently provide a brief description of the agents’
decision problems, the aggregate resource constraint, and the exogenous shock processes.

Households. The economy is populated by a continuum of identical households. These
households take as given the aggregate price level Pt , the gross nominal interest rate Rt on
one-period bonds, the wage Wt , the rental rate of capital, Rtk , and the set of aggregate shocks
St , along with their laws of motion. The households maximize
                     "∞             (                                1−ν )#
                       X
                             (t−τ )                    χt   Mt A
                  Eτ       β         U (Ct ) − AHt +                                                         (1)
                       t=τ
                                                     1 − ν Pt Z∗1/1−α

subject to the constraints:

        Pt Ct + Pt It + Bt+1 + Mt+1 ≤ Pt Wt Ht + Pt Rtk Kt + Πt + Rt−1 bt + Mt − Tt + Ωt                     (2)
                                                                 
                                                               It
                               Kt+1 = (1 − δ)Kt + 1 − S               It .                                   (3)
                                                              It−1

U (Ct ) is the instantaneous utility from consuming Ct units of the final good, A is the disutility
associated with one unit of labor, Ht is hours worked, and Mt denotes the households’ money
holdings at the beginning of period t. The assumption of quasilinear preferences can be
motivated by the indivisible labor setup of Rogerson (1988) and is used for convenience in
many of the New Keynesian models discussed in Woodford (2003). Money balances enter
the utility function to capture the benefits of transaction services. The shock χt captures
time-varying preferences for money, and the parameter ν controls the interest-rate elasticity
of money demand.1
   1
       AS develop an estimable search-based monetary DSGE model, in which money is essential to facilitate
bilateral exchanges in a decentralized market. The reduced-form specification considered in this paper serves
                                                                                                 1/(1−α)
as a reference model in AS to assess the fit of the search-based DSGE model. The factor A/Z∗               in the
utility function can be viewed as a re-parameterization of the steady-state level of χt that keeps steady-state
velocity constant as one changes the preference parameter A and the steady-state level of technology Z∗
(introduced below).
                                                                                             4


   Equation (2) represents the households’ budget constraint. Final goods are purchased
at the price Pt and used for consumption and investment It . The household receives labor
income, rental income from lending capital Kt to firms, interest income from bond holdings
Bt , and dividends Πt from intermediate goods producers. Tt is a nominal lump-sum tax and
Ωt is the household’s net cash-in-flow from trading state-contingent securities. Equation (3)
determines the capital accumulation. The adjustment cost function S(.) satisfies the prop-
erties S(1) = 0, S 0 (1) = 0 and S 00 (1) > 0. I adopt the timing convention that Kt+1 (and
also Mt+1 ) denote capital and money holdings at the end of period t and do not depend on
period t + 1 shocks.

Final Good Production. The final good Yt is a composite made of a continuum of intermediate
goods Yt (i):
                                          Z       1                       1+λ
                                                                 1
                                   Yt =                Yt (i)   1+λ   di                    (4)
                                               0
with elasticity of substitution (1 + λ)/λ, where λ ∈ [0, ∞). The final good producers buy
the intermediate goods on the market, package them into Yt units of the composite good,
and resell them to consumers. These firms maximize profits in a perfectly competitive
environment taking Pt (i) as given, which yields the demand for good i
                                                   − 1+λ
                                             Pt (i)     λ
                                  Yt (i) =                 Yt .                             (5)
                                              Pt
Combining this demand function with the zero profit condition, one obtains the following
expression for the price of the composite good
                                       Z 1           −λ
                                                   1
                                                  −λ
                                  Pt =      Pt (i) di     .                                 (6)
                                               0

Aggregate inflation is defined as πt = Pt /Pt−1 .

Intermediate Goods Production. Intermediate goods producers, indexed by i, face the de-
mand function (5) and use a Cobb-Douglas technology with fixed costs F and stochastic
total factor productivity Zt :
                                                                                      
                                                           α               1−α
                          Yt (i) = max        Zt Kt (i) Ht (i)                   − F, 0 .   (7)

As in Calvo (1983), it is assumed that firms are only able with probability 1−ζ to re-optimize
their price in the current period. A random fraction ι of the firms that are not allowed to
                                                                                               5


choose Pt (i) optimally update their price Pt−1 (i) according to last period’s inflation rate
πt−1 , whereas the remaining 1 − ι firms keep their price constant. For a firm that is allowed
to re-optimize its price, the problem is to choose a price level Pto (i) that maximizes the
expected present discounted value of profits in all future states in which the firm is unable
to re-optimize its price. This firm discounts future using the time t value of a dollar in
period t + s for the consumers. The solution of this problem leads to a dynamic relationship
between inflation and marginal costs, the so-called New Keynesian Phillips Curve (NKPC).

Government Spending. In period t, the government collects a nominal lump-sum tax Tt ,
spends Gt on final good purchases, issues one-period nominal bonds Bt+1 that pay Rt gross
interest tomorrow, and supplies the money to maintain the interest rate rule. It satisfies the
following budget constraint every period

                           Pt Gt + Rt−1 Bt + Mt = Tt + Bt+1 + Mt+1 .                         (8)

Government spending Gt is assumed to evolve exogenously.

Aggregate Resource Constraint. Adding the households’ budget constraints, the government
budget constraint and the profits of intermediate goods producers yields the aggregate re-
source constraint
                                       Ct + It + Gt = Yt .                                   (9)

The quantity of final goods is related to the total inputs used by the intermediate goods
firms according to
                                                          Z             − 1+λ
                          1                                    Pt (i)       λ
                              Zt Ktα Ht1−α − F ,
                                              
                     Yt =                          Dt =                           di,       (10)
                          Dt                                     Pt

where Dt measures the extent of price dispersion. Unless Pt (i) = Pt for all firms, Dt is greater
than unity, which in turn implies the economy produces inside its production-possibility
frontier. Dt captures the output loss due to the New Keynesian friction.

Monetary Policy. Following authors like Sargent (1999) and Lucas (2000), I assume that
low frequency movements of inflation, such as the rise of inflation in the 1970s and the
subsequent disinflation episode in the early 1980s, can be attributed to monetary policy
changes. Unlike in the learning models considered by Sargent, Zha, and Williams (2006) or
                                                                                                                6


Primiceri (2006), in this paper the DSGE model offers no explanation why monetary policy
shifts occur over time and simply assumes a time-varying target inflation rate π∗,t . The
central bank supplies money to control the nominal interest rate and reacts to inflation and
output growth according to the rule
                                                                                   ψ1            ψ2
                       1−ρR ρR                                               πt              Yt
               Rt =   R∗,t Rt−1    exp[σR R,t ],    R∗,t = (r∗ π∗,t )                                    ,   (11)
                                                                             π∗,t           γYt−1

where r∗ is the steady-state real interest rate, γ is the gross steady-state growth rate of the
economy, and R,t is a monetary policy shock.

Exogenous Shocks. The model economy is subjected to five aggregate disturbances. Zt is the
stochastic total factor productivity process. gt is a shock that shifts government spending
according to
                                             Gt = (1 − 1/gt ) Yt .                                            (12)

The money demand shock χt shifts preferences for real money balances. Finally, the model
has two monetary policy shocks: R,t is assumed to be serially uncorrelated and captures
short-run shifts in monetary policy, whereas the time-varying inflation target π∗,t captures
long-run policy changes. Let Z̃t = ln (Zt /Z∗ ), χ̃t = ln (χt /χ∗ ) and g̃t = ln (gt /g∗ ), where Z∗ ,
χ∗ and g∗ are steady-state values of the respective exogenous disturbances. It is assumed
that these exogenous disturbances evolve according to stationary AR(1) processes Z̃t =
ρz Z̃t−1 + σz z,t , χ̃t = ρχ χ̃t−1 + σχ χχ,t and g̃t = ρg g̃t−1 + σg g,t . Finally, let π̃∗,t = ln (π∗,t /π∗ ),
where π∗ is a constant and π̃∗,t evolves as a random walk π̃∗,t = π̃∗,t−1 +σπ ππ,t . The innovations
are stacked in the vector t = [z,t , χ,t , g,t , π,t , R,t ] and are assumed to be independently
and identically distributed according to a vector of standard normal random variables. The
law of motion for the exogenous processes completes the specification of the DSGE model.

State-Space Representation. After log-linearizing the equilibrium conditions of the model,
the solution of the resulting rational expectations difference equations leads to a state-space
representation of the form

                                    yt = Ψ0 (θ) + Ψ1 (θ)t + Ψs (θ)st                                          (13)

                                    st = Φ1 (θ)st−1 + Φ (θ)t ,
                                                                                                7


where yt is a vector of observables, such as aggregate output, inflation, and interest rates; and
st contains the unobserved exogenous shock processes as well as the potentially unobserved
endogenous state variables of the model economy. The model specification is completed
by making a distributional assumption for the vector of innovations t and the initial state
vector s0 .



2.2       What Has the DSGE Model Estimation Literature Delivered?

The goal of the DSGE model estimation literature is to provide quantitative answers to
macroeconomic questions as well as probabilistic measures of uncertainty associated with
these answers. As an illustration, I will use the DSGE model described in Section 2.1 to
assess the welfare effects of changes in the target inflation rate. The model is estimated with
U.S. data from 1965 to 2005 on linearly detrended log GDP, interest rates, GDP deflator
inflation, log inverse M1-velocity, and an empirical measure of the target inflation rate that
is constructed from bandpass filtered inflation and long-run inflation expectations. Following
the empirical strategy in Aruoba and Schorfheide (2011), the target inflation rate is treated
as an observed variable such that it becomes possible to assess the time series fit of the DSGE
model and the propagation of unanticipated changes in the target inflation rate through a
comparison with a VAR. Except for the use of an observable measure of the target inflation
rate, the empirical illustration is representative of the large literature on estimated DSGE
models that has emerged recently.

Bayesian Inference. While over the past decades numerous econometric procedures for the
analysis of DSGE models have been developed,2 I will focus on Bayesian inference techniques
that have first been used in the context of DSGE model estimation in DeJong, Ingram, and
Whiteman (2000), Schorfheide (2000), and Otrok (2001) and are by now widely applied in
the literature. Let θ denote the collection of parameters of the DSGE model described in
Section 2.1. Bayesian inference starts from a prior distribution represented by the density
p(θ). The prior is combined with the conditional density of the data Y given the parameters,


   2
       The textbooks by Canova (2007) and DeJong and Dave (2007) provide a detailed overview.
                                                                                                8


denoted by p(Y |θ). According to Bayes Theorem, the posterior distribution, that is the
conditional distribution of parameters given data, is given by

                                p(Y |θ)p(θ)
                                                       Z
                      p(θ|Y ) =             , p(Y ) = p(Y |θ)p(θ)dθ,                         (14)
                                   p(Y )

where p(Y ) is called the marginal likelihood or data density. In DSGE model applications, it
is typically not possible to derive moments and quantiles of the posterior distribution analyt-
ically. Instead, inference is implemented via numerical methods such as MCMC simulation.
MCMC algorithms deliver serially correlated sequences {θ(s) }ns=1
                                                               sim
                                                                   of draws from the density
p(θ|Y ). Based on these draws, one can approximate the posterior density, its moments and
quantiles, and for instance construct credible sets. In addition, the sequence {θ(s) }ns=1
                                                                                        sim
                                                                                            can be
transformed into a sequence {f (θ(s) )}ns=1
                                         sim
                                             to characterize the posterior distribution of f (θ),
where f (θ) could be a set of steady states or impulse response functions computed from the
DSGE model. A more detailed discussion of numerical techniques to implement Bayesian
inference for DSGE models can be found, for instance, in An and Schorfheide (2007a) and
Del Negro and Schorfheide (2010).

Estimates of Parameters and Transformations Thereof. The output and inflation trade-off
faced by a central bank is determined by the NKPC, which for values of the target inflation
rate near zero can be approximated as follows:

                                π̃t = γb π̃t−1 + γf Et [π̃t+1 ] + κM
                                                                   g C t,                    (15)

where
                            ι                β                     (1 − ζ)(1 − ζβ)
                  γb =          ,   γf =          ,   and κ =                      .
                         1 + βι            1 + βι                     ζ(1 + βι)
x̃t denotes percentage deviations from the log-linearization point ln(xt /x∗ ) and M Ct abbre-
viates the marginal cost of producing an additional unit of the intermediate good. Posterior
and prior densities for the coefficient on marginal costs κ and lagged inflation γb are depicted
in the top panels of Figure 1. The posterior density of κ peaks at about 0.08 and the poste-
rior of γb peaks at 0.03, implying that the influence of the lagged inflation term in the NKPC
is essentially negligible. The posterior densities reflect the sample information and turn out
to be much more concentrated than the prior densities.
                                                                                                        9


    The bottom left panel depicts densities for the percentage loss 100|1/D∗ − 1| in output
caused by the inability of a fraction of intermediate goods producers to choose their prices
optimally. D∗ depends on the steady-state mark-up controlled by λ as well as the price
setting parameters ζ and ι:
                                                                    − 1−ι 1+λ
                                                     1         ζ      1   λ
                                      (1 − ζ)       1−ζ
                                                          −   1−ζ    π∗
                               D∗ =                           (1+λ)(1−ι)
                                                                                    .                (16)
                                                    1 − ζπ∗       λ


It can be verified that D∗ is bounded below from one. This lower bound is attained if prices
are flexible (ζ = 0), if all firms that are unable to re-optimize fully index their old prices
to inflation (ι = 1), or if the steady-state inflation rate is zero (meaning that the gross
inflation π∗ = 1). The posterior estimate of the output loss due to the New Keynesian
distortion is about 0.6%. Interestingly, it is the combination of modeling assumption about
the substitutability of intermediate inputs with information about the correlation between
inflation and a measure of aggregate marginal costs that delivers the output loss estimate.3
The prior density of D∗ peaks at about 0.1, because the prior distribution places more
weight on large values of γb , which imply the New Keynesian friction is reduced by the firms’
dynamic indexation.

    At last, the bottom right panel shows densities for the interest rate coefficient 1/(ν(R∗ −
1)) in the log-linearized demand equation for real money balances at the end of period t:
                                     1           γ      1−ν
                      M̃t+1 = −             R̃t + X̃t −     E[π̃t+1 ] + E[χ̃t+1 ],                   (17)
                                  ν(R∗ − 1)      ν       ν
where R∗ is the steady-state nominal interest rate. The (partial) interest rate elasticity
of money demand indirectly affects the welfare costs induced by taxing money balances
via inflation. In a Bayesian framework, the posterior densities plotted in Figure 1 provide a
formal characterization of parameter uncertainty. Point and interval estimates can be derived
as solutions to decision problems that entail the minimization of posterior expected losses.
The most widely used point estimates are the posterior mean and median, and the so-called
highest-posterior density interval is the shortest interval among all (including disconnected)
intervals that are 1 − α credible, i.e., have posterior probability 1 − α.
   3
       Alternatively, many authors use the frequency of price changes observed in micro-level data sets to
determine ζ and hence the magnitude of the aggregate distortion D∗ .
                                                                                             10


Policy Analysis. What are the relative strengths of the monetary and New Keynesian friction
and what rate of long-run inflation optimizes the trade-off between these two frictions? The
results obtained from the estimated model are depicted in Figure 2. Each line in the left
panel of the figure represents the (steady-state) welfare loss function for a particular draw of
θ from its posterior distribution. The loss is expressed in terms of consumption equivalents
relative to a 2.5% (annualized) target inflation rate. Negative values imply welfare gains.
The right panel contains (pointwise) posterior means and 90% credible intervals for these
losses. The welfare gain is maximized at an inflation rate of near zero, meaning that the
New Keynesian friction dominates the policy recommendation.

Summary. The empirical illustration suggests that econometricians have developed a pow-
erful toolkit that enables an elegant econometric analysis of DSGE models. The strengths
of the formal econometric analysis are its ability to efficiently extract information about pa-
rameters from long-run averages and sample autocovariances of macroeconomic time series
and to account for parameter (and model) uncertainty in inference and decision making.
Researchers have made extensive use of these strengths. The Bayesian approach has the
additional advantage that it allows the researcher to coherently combine sample information
(contained in the likelihood function) with nonsample information represented by prior dis-
tributions. There exist many published papers that to varying degrees follow the template
of the empirical analysis presented above, albeit in pursuit of answers to different economic
questions. The computations are by now automated in software packages such as DYNARE
and accessible to a large community of empirical macroeconomists, which is a reflection of
the progress that the literature has made over the past ten years.



2.3    Challenges

The smooth execution of the empirical analysis in the previous section may give the impres-
sion that the literature has solved most of the key conceptual problems associated with the
estimation of DSGE models. Unfortunately – for those who are applying the methods – and
fortunately – for those who are developing them, this is not the case. Computational con-
straints put bounds on the degree of realism and complexity of macroeconometric models. In
                                                                                               11


light of the steady progression of computational capabilities, much of the ongoing research
focuses on enriching endogenous propagation mechanisms (e.g., by incorporating labor mar-
ket frictions, financial frictions, informational frictions and learning, heterogeneity impulses),
the use of richer exogenous shock processes (e.g., anticipated shocks and shocks with regime-
switching or stochastic volatility dynamics), and accounting for model-implied nonlinear
dynamics of endogenous variables in the estimation of DSGE models. Rather than scrutiniz-
ing the latest advances in enriching DSGE models, I will focus on some methodological and
conceptual challenges that have plagued the field for a while. Recent advances in the estima-
tion of nonlinear DSGE models are discussed in Fernández-Villaverde and Rubio-Ramı́rez
(2011), with a special emphasis on time-varying volatility dynamics in macroeconomic data.

Challenge 1: Fragile Parameter Estimates. The NKPC (15) appears in many DSGE models.
In Schorfheide (2008), I compiled a table of 42 DSGE model-based estimates of κ and γb
that had been published in academic journals. The large number of estimates is testament
to a widespread use of the estimation techniques that have been developed in recent years.
The estimates range from essentially zero to about four. A value near zero implies that
monetary policy changes have a large effect on output but very little effect on inflation. A
value of four, on the other hand, means that prices are essentially flexible and that output
does not react to monetary policy changes. This remarkable range is due to differences in
model specification, choice of observables and sample period, data definitions, and detrend-
ing. Unfortunately, the measures of uncertainty reported in the individual studies give no
indication about the fragility of the results from a meta perspective. To illustrate this point,
Figure 3 depicts a 90% credible set for γb and κ in (15) based on the estimation of the DSGE
model described in Section 2.1 as well as the 42 parameter estimates surveyed in Schorfheide
(2008). It is apparent that the posterior uncertainty conditional on a specific model and data
choice is dwarfed by the variation across model specifications and data sets. The fragility
of parameter estimates potentially translates into other objects of interest such as inference
about the sources of business cycle fluctuations, forecasts, as well as policy prescriptions.
Thus, accounting for model uncertainty as well as for different approaches of relating model
variables to observables is of first-order importance.
                                                                                           12


Challenge 2: Aggregate Uncertainty versus Misspecified Endogenous Propagation. Figure 4
depicts the time series of inverse velocity used for the estimation of the DSGE model. In
addition, the figure shows a counterfactual path for velocity that is obtained by setting all
exogenous shocks except the money demand shock equal to zero. The sequence of money de-
mand shocks is kept at its estimated value. A visual inspection of Figure 4 suggests that the
money demand shock explains most of the historical variation in velocity. This finding has
two possible interpretations. On the one hand, it could be the case that velocity fluctuations
are overwhelmingly due to changes in money demand. On the other hand, it is conceivable
that the endogenous transmission of technology, government spending, and monetary policy
shocks into monetary aggregates is misspecified and the exogenous money demand shock
absorbs mostly specification error. In the absence of other empirical evidence, formal econo-
metric methods have difficulties distinguishing these two interpretations. The phenomenon
that the variation in certain time series is to a large extent explained by shocks that are
inserted into intertemporal or intratemporal optimality conditions is fairly widespread and
has led to criticisms of existing DSGE models, e.g. Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2007).

Challenge 3: Trends. The DSGE model of Section 2.1 implies that velocity follows a sta-
tionary process with a constant mean. Figure 4 shows that inverse velocity was falling from
1960 to 1982 and then rising subsequently, which suggests that its path would be better
captured by a trend-stationary model with a structural break. The problem of a mismatch
between trends in the data and trends in DSGE models is fairly widespread and extends be-
yond the velocity series. Most DSGE models impose strict balanced growth path restrictions
implying, for instance, that consumption-output, investment-output, government spending-
output, and real-wage output ratios should exhibit stationary fluctuations around a constant
mean. In the data, however, many of these ratios exhibit trends. As a consequence, counter-
factual low frequency implications of DSGE models manifest themselves in exogenous shock
processes that are estimated to be highly persistent. To the extent that inference about
the sources of business cycles and the design of optimal economic policies is sensitive to the
persistence of shocks, misspecified trends are a reason for concern.

Challenge 4: Statistical Fit. Macroeconometrics is plagued by a trade-off between theoretical
                                                                                              13


coherence and empirical fit. Theoretically coherent DSGE models impose tight restrictions
on the autocovariance sequence of a vector time series, which often limit its ability to track
macroeconomic time series as well as, say, a less restrictive vector autoregression (VAR). A
Bayesian framework allows researchers to assign probabilities to competing model specifica-
tions. If π0,i are prior probabilities assigned to models Mi , i = 1, 2, then the posterior odds
of the two models after observing a sample of T observations are given by

                                     π1,T   π1,0 p(Y |M1 )
                                          =                .                                (18)
                                     π2,T   π2,0 p(Y |M2 )

The marginal likelihood p(Y ), omitting the conditioning on Mi , was defined in (14) and
implicitly penalizes the in-sample fit of a model by a measure of complexity. The log marginal
likelihoods for the DSGE model and the VAR are −940.22 and −924.14, respectively, and
shift the prior odds in favor of the VAR by a factor of e16 .

   To shed some light on the difference in (penalized) fit of DSGE model and VAR, Figure 5
depicts the impulse responses to an unanticipated change in the target inflation rate. In both
the DSGE model and the VAR, the response is identified by the assumption that the target
inflation rate evolves exogenously. The target inflation shock raises inflation and nominal
interest rates by about 22 basis points in the long run. Output falls because the higher
inflation rate exacerbates both the New Keynesian and the monetary distortion. While the
estimated responses of output, inflation, and interest rates are similar, the inverse velocity
response is very different and points toward a source of misspecification of the DSGE model:
It is unable to capture the rather large long-run elasticity of money demand with respect to
interest rate changes.

   If the goal of the empirical analysis is to provide an impulse response function to an
unanticipated change in the target inflation rate, one might feel more comfortable relying on
the VAR prediction because a formal econometric analysis suggests to place more weight on
them (though the VAR does not provide a coherent economic explanation for the responses).
If, on the other hand, the goal is to determine the welfare effect of the change in the inflation
target, then the VAR is of limited use. While the drop in output and money balances might
suggest a welfare loss, it is unclear how to trade off a decrease in consumption against an
                                                                                              14


increase in leisure. At the same time the discrepancy between the VAR and the DSGE model
responses is disconcerting as money balances enter directly the households’ utility function.

   In order to narrow the gap between the DSGE and the VAR impulse responses to a target-
inflation rate shock, I reduce the value of ν from 31.7 to 3 to increase the (partial) elasticity
of money demand to interest rate changes without re-estimating the remaining parameters.
A comparison of impulse responses obtained under the two values of ν is provided in the top
panels of Figure 6. With ν = 3 there is overlap of the VAR and the DSGE impulse response
bands over a horizon of 5 to 20 quarters. While real deficiency of the DSGE model is its
inability to deliver a small short-run and a large long-run interest elasticity of money demand,
it is possible to adopt a “loss-function-based” estimation approach for ν and choose a value
that matches the properties of the DSGE models with the VAR evidence on the long-run
effect of target inflation changes. The bottom panels of Figure 6 illustrate how the change
in ν affects the policy implications. A higher interest elasticity increases the welfare cost
of inflation caused by the monetary distortion and shifts the optimal inflation toward -2%,
which yields a zero nominal interest rate.

Challenge 5: Reliability of Policy Predictions. Estimated DSGE models are often used
as laboratories for policy experiments. An example of such an experiment is a change in
the target inflation rate discussed above. While our sample contains observations from
a high inflation episode as well as observations from low inflation episodes, there are no
extended periods of zero or negative inflation, which are the inflation rates at which the New
Keynesian and the monetary friction create a trade-off for policymakers. More generally,
to the extent that no (or very few) observations on the behavior of households and firms
under a counterfactual policy exist, the DSGE model is used to derive the agents’ decision
rules by solving intertemporal optimization problems assuming that the preferences and
production technologies are unaffected by the policy change. In most cases, the policy
invariance is simply an assumption, and there is always concern that the assumption is
unreliable. This concern is typically exacerbated by evidence of model misspecification.
While it is conceivable that a model with the worse statistical fit delivers the better policy
prediction as illustrated by Kocherlakota (2007), bad fit is certainly no guarantor of good
                                                                                            15


policy predictions.

    In the remainder of this paper, I will discuss recent progress in overcoming these five
challenges. I will begin by reviewing current work on the identification of DSGE model
parameters (Section 3). Lack of identification contributes to the fragility of parameter esti-
mates. A second factor contributing to the fragility of estimates is model misspecification.
Misspecification also plays a leading role in the other four challenges. While misspecifica-
tion can be alleviated through improving the endogenous propagation mechanisms of the
DSGE model, I will focus on two other directions of research, namely the generalization of
exogenous shock processes in Section 4 and the development of hybrid models that correct
DSGE model misspecification in Section 5. Finally, in Section 6 I discuss some simulation
experiments that illustrate how even simple forms of heterogeneity and asset market incom-
pleteness can undermine the policy invariance of preference and technology parameters in
a representative agent model and lead to an understatement of the uncertainty associated
with policy predictions.



3     Identification and Inference

The fragility of estimates discussed in Section 2.3 is in part due to lack of identification of
key DSGE model parameters. Identification in DSGE models, even if they are linearized, is
much less transparent than identification in linear simultaneous equations models. This lack
of transparency is reflected in the fact that the system matrices of the state-space represen-
tation (13) are complicated nonlinear functions of the underlying DSGE model parameters
θ, which for all but the most rudimentary and unrealistic DSGE models can only be eval-
uated numerically. While the early literature on DSGE model estimation had paid very
little attention to identification, more recently researchers have realized that estimation ob-
jective functions are often uninformative with respect to important parameters such as the
Phillips curve coefficients in (15) or the parameters in the monetary policy rule (11). Canova
and Sala (2009), for instance, document identification problems in popular New Keynesian
DSGE models. Section 3.1 provides a simple example that illustrates the identification prob-
                                                                                                    16


lems. Section 3.2 presents recently developed conditions for identification of DSGE model
parameters, and consequences for econometric inference are discussed in Section 3.3.



3.1     A Simple Example

The following stylized example illustrates identification problems that may arise in the con-
text of DSGE models. Suppose that the structural model is nested in the following state-
space representation, which resembles (13):
                                                                                 
                                                         φ1    0                1
                         yt = [ 1 1 ]st ,       st =               st−1 +         t .         (19)
                                                         φ3 φ2                  0

The first state, s1,t , resembles an exogenous shock, such as technology, whereas the transition
equation for s2,t mimics that of an endogenous state variable such as the capital stock.
Moreover, for the sake of concreteness, suppose that the relationship between the reduced-
form (state-space) parameter φ = [φ1 , φ2 , φ3 ]0 and the structural (DSGE model) parameter
θ = [θ1 , θ2 ]0 is given by:

                               φ1 = θ12 ,   φ2 = (1 − θ12 ),   φ3 − φ2 = −θ1 θ2 .                  (20)

In order to understand the identification problems, it is useful to rewrite the state-space
model as ARMA(2,1) process

                               (1 − φ1 L)(1 − φ2 L)yt = (1 − (φ2 − φ3 )L)t .                      (21)

First, (20) implies that θ2 becomes nonidentifiable as θ1 approaches zero, because for θ1 = 0
the law of motion of yt is invariant to θ2 . Second, it can be easily verified that the following
two parameterizations are observationally equivalent:

                   θ12 = ρ,      (1 − θ12 ) = θ1 θ2   versus θ̃12 = 1 − ρ,      θ̃12 = θ̃1 θ̃2 .

Under both parameterizations, yt follows an AR(1) process with autocorrelation parameter
ρ, because one factor of the autoregressive polynomial of the ARMA(2,1) process cancels
against the moving-average polynomial.
                                                                                                   17


3.2     Conditions for Identifiability

Recent work by Iskrev (2010) and Komunjer and Ng (2009) develops necessary and sufficient
conditions for the identifability of DSGE model parameters. The conditions are meant to be
comparable to the rank and order conditions that exist for simultaneous equations models
and focus on linearized DSGE models with Gaussian innovations that can be cast in the
state-space form (13). Iskrev (2010) develops a condition based on the direct relationship
between the parameter vector θ and first and second population moments mT (θ) of a sequence
of observations Y1:T = [y1 , . . . , Yt ]0 . A sufficient condition for global identifiability is that
mT (θ̃) = mT (θ) implies that θ̃ = θ for each pair (θ, θ̃). If the condition holds only in an open
neighborhood of θ, then θ is locally identifiable. Since the state-space model is linear, the
identifiability condition is necessary if the structural shocks t as well as the initial state s0
are normally distributed. If mT (θ) is continuously differentiable, then θ is locally identifiable
if the Jacobian matrix ∂mT (θ)/∂θ0 is of full column rank. Since even linearized DSGE models
are nonlinear in the parameters, the rank condition needs to be verified for a large number
of empirically relevant parameter values. The simple model in Section 3.1 is not globally
identifiable, but it is locally identifiable for many values of θ. However, local identification
fails, for instance, if θ1 = 0.

   Komunjer and Ng (2009) extend Iskrev’s conditions from a finite number of second mo-
ments stacked in mT (θ) to the infinite-dimensional autocovariance sequence, represented by
the spectral density of yt . To do so, the authors develop rank conditions that ensure that
the mapping between θ and the reduced-form parameters of the state-space representation is
(locally) one-to-one. The difficulty in developing such conditions arises from the fact that the
parameters of the state-space representation themselves suffer from identification problems.
Thus, a naively defined reduced-form parameter vector

                    φ = [vec(Ψ0 )0 , vec(Ψ1 )0 , vec(Ψs )0 , vec(Φ1 )0 , vec(Φ )0 ]0 ,

where the Ψ and Φ matrices refer to the coefficient matrices in (13), needs to be re-
parameterized in terms of an identifiable subvector before rank conditions can be stated.
                                                                                                        18


3.3       Consequences for Inference

From an inferential viewpoint, there are two basic reactions to a potential lack of identi-
fication. The first perspective is represented in the large literature on weakly or partially
identified econometric models: Taking data and model as given, the econometrician should
use inferential procedures that are robust to a potential lack of identification. The second
perspective is reflected in the following quote from Dreze (1974), p. 164: “The econometri-
cian who is concerned with inference about parameters that are not identified may try to
overcome this difficulty by collecting richer data, or by resorting to a more restrictive the-
ory.”4 I will subsequently focus on identification-robust inference in Bayesian and frequentist
analysis as well as the notion of collecting richer data sets.

Bayesian Inference. Bayesian inference with proper priors does not require identifiability
as a regularity condition. As long as the prior distribution is proper (meaning the total
probability mass is one), so is the posterior, see for instance Poirier (1998). What matters
for inference is the curvature in the likelihood function, as priors do not get updated in
directions in which the likelihood function is flat. This leads to a number of practical chal-
lenges. First, inference becomes more sensitive to the choice of prior distributions, thereby
making a careful, systematic, and well-documented choice of prior distribution important for
compelling empirical work.5 Second, lack of identification may complicate the generation of
parameter draws from the posterior distribution.

    Figure 7 depicts two likelihood functions for the stylized model of Section 3.1, constructed
by simulating 100 artificial observations based on two different sets of “true” θ values. In
the top panel, the “true” value of θ1 is fairly close to zero, which makes it difficult to
identify θ2 . Accordingly, the likelihood function has a ridge and is fairly flat in the direction
of θ2 . The second parameterization highlights the global identification problem. While
not directly visible from the contours plotted in the figure, the likelihood function is in
   4
       The debate between Lubik and Schorfheide (2004, 2007) and Beyer and Farmer (2007) illustrates how
a restrictive theory can lead to identification and the disagreement between researchers as to whether such
restrictions should be imposed in empirical work.
    5
      Müller (2010) develops measures of prior sensitivity and informativeness tailored toward DSGE model
applications.
                                                                                                      19


fact bimodal. It is typically the lack of global identification and the resulting multimodal
posterior surfaces that cause problems for posterior simulators.6 While many of the posterior
simulators that are used in practice, most notably the version of the random-walk Metropolis
(RWM) algorithm described in An and Schorfheide (2007a), in principle deliver consistent
approximations of posterior moments and quantiles even if the posterior is multimodal, the
practical performance can be poor as documented in An and Schorfheide (2007a).

    Recent research on posterior simulators tailored toward DSGE models tries to address
the shortcomings of the “default” approaches that are being used in empirical work. An
and Schorfheide (2007b) use transition mixtures to deal with a multimodal posterior dis-
tribution. This approach works well if the researcher has knowledge about the location of
the modes, obtained, for instance, by finding local maxima of the posterior density with
a numerical optimization algorithm. Chib and Ramamurthy (2010) propose to replace the
commonly used single block RWM algorithm with a Metropolis-within-Gibbs algorithm that
cycles over multiple, randomly selected blocks of parameters. Kohn, Giordani, and Strid
(2010) propose an adaptive hybrid Metropolis-Hastings samplers and Herbst (2010) devel-
ops a Metropolis-within-Gibbs algorithm that uses information from the Hessian matrix to
construct parameter blocks that maximize within-block correlations at each iteration and
Newton steps to tailor proposal distributions for the various conditional posteriors.

Frequentist Inference. Standard large sample approximations of sampling distributions of
estimators and test statistics require parameter identifiability as regularity conditions. The
literature on identification-robust inference procedures relaxes this regularity condition while
maintaining that the coverage probability of a confidence interval CST (Y1:T ) constructed from
a sequence of observations Y1:T should converge uniformly in the following sense:

                              lim   inf   inf    Pφ̃ {θ ∈ CST (Y1:T )} = 1 − α.                     (22)
                            T −→∞ φ̃∈P θ∈Θ(φ̃)


Here φ̃ denotes an identifiable reduced-form parameter that indexes the probability distri-
    6
        Suppose the likelihood function of a DSGE model were completely uninformative with respect to all
parameters. In this case, one would simply have to generate draws from the prior, which typically can be
done by direct sampling or acceptance sampling given the highly informative prior distributions that are
used in the literature.
                                                                                                           20


bution of the data. Θ(φ̃) denotes the set of structural parameters that is consistent with a
particular reduced-form parameter φ̃. This set degenerates to a singleton in a point-identified
model. In the context of the example presented in Section 3.1, φ̃ could be defined as the
autocovariances of order zero to three. If the autocovariances of order one to three are zero,
then θ2 is nonidentifiable and Θ(φ̃) corresponds to a line in R3 .

    The standard approach of constructing confidence sets by taking a point estimate and
adding and subtracting multiples of the associated standard error estimate does typically
not lead to valid inference in models with identification problems (meaning (22) is violated).
Instead, confidence sets are often obtained through pointwise testing procedures. Suppose
                                                                              √
that inference for the reduced-form parameter φ̃ is regular in the sense that7 T (φ̃ˆ − φ̃) =⇒
N (0, Λ) and that the relationship between φ̃ and θ can be expressed by a function φ̃∗ (θ).
To obtain a valid confidence set, choose a grid T for θ and conduct pointwise tests of
the hypothesis φ̃ = φ̃∗ (θ) for all θ ∈ T . The confidence set for θ is composed of those
values of θ for which the null hypothesis cannot be rejected. This approach is explored in
Guerron-Quintana, Inoue, and Kilian (2010). While the procedure leads to valid inference
in the sense of (22), it has several drawbacks. In high-dimensional parameter spaces, the
procedure requires many pointwise tests. Moreover, the method is conservative in regions
of the parameter space in which the parameters are well identified. The development of
efficient methods to construct identification-robust confidence intervals for a DSGE model
remains an open area of research.

Richer Data Sets. DSGE models are typically estimated with observations on only a subset
of all the variables that appear in the model, because due to its stylized structure, it is
only able to capture the dynamics of some but not all variables in a realistic manner. For
instance, the simple structure of the labor market of the model in Section 2 (infinitely elastic
labor supply, absence of search frictions) makes it difficult to match the dynamics of hours
worked and wages, which is why these observations are omitted from the likelihood function.

    7
        The example in Section 3.1 illustrates that the sampling distribution of estimators of the state-space
coefficients may be irregular. To overcome this problem, φ̃ could be defined as the coefficients of the VAR
approximation of a DSGE model, which leads to a standard normal sampling distribution provided that the
process yt is stationary.
                                                                                             21


However, long-run properties of series that are excluded from the likelihood function, e.g., the
average labor share, remain informative about some of the DSGE model parameters. This
nonsample information can and should be used for inference. Nonsample information might
also include evidence from microeconometric panel studies on demand or supply elasticities.

    The nonsample information may be able to resolve some identification problems inherent
in the likelihood function. In a Bayesian framework, it is most natural to use this information
in the specification of a prior distribution, which was the approach taken in the empirical
analysis in Section 2. I started with marginal densities for the model parameters θi , i =
1, . . . , k and then combined them with a function f (θ) that incorporates some information
from long-run averages of observations that do not enter the construction of the likelihood
function:
                                                    k
                                                    Y
                                     p(θ) ∝ f (θ)         pi (θi ).                        (23)
                                                    i=1

where

                                  1 (I∗ (θ)/Y∗ (θ) − 0.16)2 (lsh(θ) − 0.60)2
                                                                           
             f (θ) = exp        −                          +                    .
                                  2         0.0052               0.012

Here I∗ (θ), Y∗ (θ), and lsh(θ) are functions that define the steady-state levels of investment,
output, and labor share. The values 0.16 and 0.60 are long-run averages of the investment-
output ratio and the labor share computed from U.S. data. This method of constructing prior
distributions is formalized in Del Negro and Schorfheide (2008). The underlying assumption
in the application of Bayes Theorem in this case is that sample and nonsample information
are approximately independent.



4     Sensitivity to Shock Specification

A DSGE model consists of endogenous propagation mechanisms, e.g., investment and cap-
ital accumulation, derived from some primitive assumptions about agents’ preferences and
production technologies, as well as exogenous propagation mechanisms. While most of the
modeling efforts in the DSGE model literature are rightly directed toward the specification
                                                                                            22


of the endogenous propagation mechanism, this section focuses on the specification of exoge-
nous shock processes and its consequences for inference based on estimated DSGE models.
These shocks themselves are frequently assumed to follow independent AR(1) processes as
in Section 2.1. The lag length restriction for the individual shock processes is, in many
instances, arbitrary. The assumption that the exogenous processes are independent of each
other is a reflection of a modeling strategy that tries to explain the comovements of macroe-
conomic aggregates with economic mechanisms rather than through correlated exogenous
shocks.

   A careful specification of the law of motion for the exogenous shocks can help to overcome
model misspecification, in particular if one means by misspecification inferior time series fit
(adjusted for model dimensionality) relative to more flexible time series models such as
VARs. More specifically, recent empirical work has documented that the fit of a DSGE
model can be improved by relaxing the restriction that the exogenous shocks exhibit AR(1)
dynamics. Smets and Wouters (2007) use an ARMA mark-up shock to improve model fit, and
Del Negro and Schorfheide (2009) let their government spending shock follow a higher-order
autoregressive process. Curdia and Reis (2010) propose to introduce correlation among the
exogenous processes and replace independent univariate shock processes by a vector process.
At the same time, some of the current arbitrariness in the specification of the exogenous
shock processes as well as potential generalizations to improve the model fit contribute to
the identification problems discussed in Section 3 and thereby to the fragility of parameter
estimates.

Generalization of Shock Dynamics and Identification. Consider a DSGE model in which
a representative firm has access to a Cobb-Douglas production function of the form Yt =
Zt Ktα Ht1−α and capital accumulates according to Kt+1 = (1 − δ)Kt + It . To the extent that
α can be measured from labor share data, δ from NIPA data on capital stock depreciation,
and output, hours, and investment are used as observables in the estimation, the latent total
factor productivity process Zt is essentially identified as (Solow) residual in the production
function. As discussed in Section 3.3, in a Bayesian estimation the information about α
and δ can be incorporated through a prior distribution. The Kalman filter that is used to
                                                                                                23


compute the likelihood function delivers estimates of the latent capital stock Kt as well as Zt .
Given observations on Yt , Ht , and It as well as fairly tight priors on α and δ, the only source
of uncertainty with regard to the latent variables is the initialization of the capital stock. In
turn, it is fairly straightforward to identify the coefficients of a flexible time series model for
the exogenous technology process. In practice, AR(1) or AR(2) models are widely used for
the TFP process because they are fairly successful in capturing the stochastic properties of
the Solow residual.

   Alternatively, consider a simplified version of the monetary policy rule (11):

                         R̃t = ρR R̃t−1 + (1 − ρR )(ψ1 π̃t + ψ2 Ỹt ) + R,t .                (24)

Unlike in the production function example, the slope coefficients in the monetary policy rule
are not tied to steady states of macroeconomic aggregates that could be identified through
long-run averages. As a consequence, assumptions about the stochastic properties of the
exogenous monetary policy shock R,t are closely tied to the identification of the policy rule
coefficients. The assumption that R,t is an iid sequence provides identification in the sense
that lagged inflation and output can serve as instrumental variables in the estimation of the
policy rule coefficients. This source of identification vanishes if R,t is allowed to be serially
correlated. Unfortunately, in many instances of DSGE model estimation, the identification of
key economic mechanisms is determined by somewhat arbitrary and restrictive assumptions
about the stochastic properties of exogenous shocks. More general shock processes, on the
other hand, are likely to exacerbate the problem of multimodal estimation objective functions
as illustrated in Herbst (2010).

Documenting Sensitivity to Auxiliary Modeling Assumptions. In particular in medium to
large-scale DSGE models that are estimated on seven or more observables, the choice of
several of the shocks is somewhat arbitrary. While there is little controversy about technology
and monetary policy shocks, the inclusion of inter- and intratemporal preference shocks, price
mark-up shocks, or risk-premium shocks tends to be controversial and typically guided by
improving model fit. To the extent that there is modeling uncertainty about the exogenous
shock structure and that assumptions about the shock structure affect the identification
of key parameters and propagation mechanisms, it is useful to document the sensitivity to
                                                                                                     24


modeling assumptions in a systematic manner. In Rı́os-Rull, Schorfheide, Fuentes-Albero,
Kryshko, and Santaeulalia-Llopis (2009), this is done by Bayesian model averaging across
model specifications with different exogenous shock specifications.



5        Hybrid Models

Econometric modeling typically faces a trade-off between theoretical coherence and empirical
fit. The DSGE paradigm delivers empirical models with a strong degree of theoretical coher-
ence that often fit worse than more densely parameterized time series models, e.g., VARs,
as illustrated in Section 2. In the literature, essentially two approaches exist to construct
empirical models that relax DSGE model restrictions. I will refer to these models as additive
hybrid models (Section 5.1) and hierarchical hybrid models (Section 5.2), respectively. Hy-
brid models provide a complete characterization of the law of motion of the data, as opposed
to empirical procedures that remove some variation from the data that the DSGE model is
unable to capture. At the same time, hybrid models retain important dynamic properties of
the DSGE model.



5.1        Additive Hybrid Models

The additive hybrid model augments the state-space model (13) by a latent process zt that
bridges the gap between data and theory:

                         yt = Ψ0 (θ) + Ψ1 (θ)t + Ψs (θ)st + Λ0 + Λ1 t + Λz zt                      (25)

                         st = Φ1 (θ)st−1 + Φ (θ)t ,     zt = Γ1 zt−1 + Γη ηt .

The process zt is often called measurement error, blaming the data collectors rather than
the DSGE model builders for the gap between data and theory.8 Unlike in the generaliza-
tion of the exogenous shocks of the DSGE model described in Section 4, the agents in the


    8
        The use of measurement errors in the estimation of optimization-based macro models dates back at
least to Sargent (1989) and Altug (1989) and has been advocated more recently by Ireland (2004).
                                                                                           25


model economy do not account for zt in their decision making and consequently there is no
interaction with the economic states st .

Special Cases. Without any restrictions on Λ and Γ, the model (25) is not identifiable. The
following two restrictions have been widely used in practice. First, a low dimensional vector
of structural shocks t is combined with a diagonal Γ1 matrix, e.g., Altug (1989). In this
setup, the t ’s generate the comovements between the observables, whereas the elements of
zt pick up idiosyncratic dynamics that are not captured by the structural part of the hybrid
model. Second, if one sets Ψ0 , Ψ1 , and Λz to zero, then the hybrid model uses the DSGE
component to describe the fluctuations of yt around a deterministic trend path, but it ignores
the common trend restrictions of the structural model. This version of the additive hybrid
model is typically estimated in two steps, e.g., Smets and Wouters (2003). In the first step,
deterministic trends are removed from the data, and in the second step, the DSGE model is
estimated based on the linearly detrended observations.

Correcting Low Frequency Misspecification. Section 2.3 illustrated that some of the misspec-
ification of DSGE models rests in their inability to capture certain long-run features of the
data. The hybrid model can be used to correct these deficiencies. Canova (2010) proposes
the following specification:

                           yt = Ψs (θ)st + Λ0 + zt                                       (26)

                           st = Φ1 (θ)st−1 + Φ (θ)t

                           zt = zt−1 + z̄t−1 + ηt ,   z̄t = z̄t−1 + νt .

Depending on the restrictions imposed on the variances of ηt and νt , the process zt is inte-
grated of order one or two and can generate a variety of stochastic trend dynamics.

Connecting DSGE Models with Large Data Sets. Macroeconomists have access to large
cross sections of aggregate variables that include measures of sectoral economic activities
and prices as well as numerous financial variables. Additive hybrid models can also be
used to link DSGE models with aggregate variables that are not explicitly modeled. Using
these additional variables in the estimation potentially sharpens inference about latent state
                                                                                         26


variables. Moreover, the link enables researchers to construct impulse response functions
and predictions for economic variables that are not explicitly modeled.

     Let yt denote the observable variables that are described by the DSGE model and let xt
denote a large vector of nonmodeled variables. The joint law of motion of yt and xt is given
by

                           yt = Ψ0 (θ) + Ψ1 (θ)t + Ψs (θ)st + zy,t                     (27)

                           xt = Λ0 + Λ1 t + Λs st + zx,t                               (28)

                           st = Φ1 (θ)st−1 + Φ (θ)t .                                (29)

Since the structure of this model resembles that of a dynamic factor model (DFM), e.g., Sar-
gent and Sims (1977), Geweke (1977), and Stock and Watson (1989), I refer to the system
(27) to (29) as DSGE-DFM. The vector of factors is given by the state variables associated
with the DSGE model. The processes zy,t and zx,t are uncorrelated across series and capture
idiosyncratic but potentially serially correlated movements (or measurement errors) in the
observables. (28) links the variables xt to the DSGE model. This linkage generates comove-
ments between the yt ’s and the xt ’s and allows the computation of impulse responses to
the structural shocks t . The DSGE-DFM was originally proposed by Boivin and Giannoni
(2006). Kryshko (2010) improves some computational aspects of the Bayesian inference for
the DSGE-DFM. Moreover, using a DSGE model very similar to the one described in Sec-
tion 2.1, he documents that the space spanned by factors extracted from the DSGE-DFM
is similar to the space spanned by the factors estimated with an unrestricted DFM. This
finding gives an economic interpretation to the factors extracted with a reduced-form factor
model and lends credibility to the state transitions implied by the DSGE model. Schorfheide,
Sill, and Kryshko (2010) study the forecast performance of the DSGE-DFM with respect to
some specific variables xt that are not explicitly modeled in the DSGE model.


5.2     Hierarchical Hybrid Models

Now consider the following modification of the additive hybrid model:

                         yt = Λ0 + Λ1 t + Λs st ,   st = Γ1 st−1 + Γ t ,             (30)
                                                                                                          27


where
                     Λi = Ψi (θ) + ηiΨ ,     i = 0, 1, s,   Γi = Φi (θ) + ηiΦ ,   i = 1, .             (31)

In this setup Ψi (θ) and Φi (θ) are interpreted as restrictions on the unrestricted state-space
matrices Λi and Γi . The disturbances ηiΨ and ηiΦ can capture deviations from the restriction
functions Ψi (θ) and Φi (θ). The smaller the variance of the η’s, the closer the empirical
model stays to the DSGE model. In a Bayesian framework, the stochastic restrictions (31)
correspond to a prior distribution of the unrestricted state-space matrices conditional on the
DSGE model parameters θ.

DSGE-VARs. It turns out that the formal Bayesian analysis of the model composed of (30)
and (31) is computationally challenging and the subject of ongoing research. The analysis
is considerably easier to implement if the state-space model in (30) is replaced by a VAR:

                               yt = B1 yt−1 + . . . + Bp yt−p + Bc + Σtr Ωt ,                          (32)

where Σtr is the unique lower triangular Cholesky factor of the one-step-ahead VAR fore-
cast error covariance matrix Σ, Ω is an orthogonal matrix, and t ∼ N (0, I). Let B =
[B1 , . . . , Bp , Bc ]0 . Suppose that DSGE model parameters θ and VAR parameters are linked
through binding functions denoted by

                                           B ∗ (θ),   Σ∗ (θ),   Ω∗ (θ).                                 (33)

The prior distribution for the VAR coefficients (B, Σ, Ω) conditional on θ is chosen such
that it is centered at the binding functions (33) but allows for deviations through a nonzero
covariance matrix, as in (31).9 This covariance matrix is scaled by a hyperparameter λ.
Overall, the setup leads to a hierarchical model of the form

                             pλ (Y, B, Σ, θ) = p(Y |B, Σ)pλ (B, Σ, Ω|θ)p(θ),                            (34)

where p(θ) is a prior for the DSGE model parameters and p(Y |B, Σ) is the likelihood function
associated with (32). Details of the specification of pλ (B, Σ, Ω|θ) can be found in Del Negro
and Schorfheide (2004) or Del Negro and Schorfheide (2010). The resulting empirical model
   9
       The basic idea of using a DSGE model to formulate a prior distribution for VAR coefficients dates back
to Ingram and Whiteman (1994).
                                                                                                           28


is more flexible than the DSGE model itself while it still inherits many of its dynamic
properties for a wide range of hyperparameter settings.

Empirical Illustration. The DSGE model from Section 2 is now used to create a hierarchical
hybrid model. The analysis differs in three dimensions from the DSGE-VARs in Del Negro
and Schorfheide (2004) and Del Negro, Schorfheide, Smets, and Wouters (2007). First, the
prior distribution used in the analysis is a combination of the Minnesota prior10 and the
DSGE model prior. For λ = 0, no information is used from the DSGE model and a VAR
with the Minnesota prior is estimated. For λ = ∞, on the other hand, the DSGE model
restrictions are dogmatically imposed. Second, the DSGE model implies that the target
inflation rate evolves according to a unit root process, which was not covered by the existing
DSGE-VAR setup. Consequently, I generalized the construction of the prior distribution to
allow for unit roots in the DSGE model. Third, in order to identify the target inflation rate
shock, I use the assumption that π∗,t is the first element of yt and simply restrict Ω in (32)
to be the identity matrix. Thus, the target inflation rate does not react to the other shocks
contemporaneously.

    The top left panel of Figure 8 depicts the log marginal data density as a function of the
hyperparameter λ, given by
                                                  Z
                                ln pλ (Y ) = ln       pλ (Y, Φ, Σ, θ)d(Φ, Σ, θ).                         (35)

This function peaks approximately at λ = 0.5. Thus, the DSGE model restrictions improve
the fit of the empirical model relative to the fit attained with only the Minnesota prior.
However, since the marginal likelihood is much larger at λ = 0.5 than at λ = ∞, the
plot provides evidence for model misspecification. The remaining panels of Figure 8 depict
posterior mean impulse responses to an inflation target shock as a function of λ. First, the
responses of the target inflation rate, output, and inflation do not substantially change as
one varies λ, suggesting that the DSGE model seems to be well specified in this dimension.
Second, the response of real money balances is highly sensitive to the choice of λ. The rather


  10
       Details on the version of the Minnesota prior used for the empirical analysis can be found in Del Negro
and Schorfheide (2010).
                                                                                              29


low value of λ favored by the marginal likelihood implies a real money balance response that
is much stronger than the response predicted by the DSGE model.



6     Econometric Policy Evaluation

As illustrated in Section 2, estimated DSGE models can serve as a laboratory for policy
experiments, such as changes in the target level of inflation or changes in tax policies. The
key assumption underlying such experiments is that the primitives of the model, in par-
ticular the parameters that characterize preferences and technologies, are policy invariant.
Chang, Kim, and Schorfheide (2010) conduct a simulation experiment to assess the policy
invariance of the parameters in a simple neoclassical stochastic growth model. The data
generating process is a heterogeneous agent economy in which individuals face idiosyncratic
productivity shocks, idiosyncratic productivity risk is uninsurable, individuals face a borrow-
ing constraint, and labor supply is indivisible. Based on aggregated data from this economy,
a representative agent model is estimated. The question of interest is to what extent the
effect of labor and capital tax changes can be correctly predicted with the estimated repre-
sentative agent model, assuming the invariance of the “structural” parameters. According
to the simulations, the parameters of the representative agent model are not invariant to the
policy changes. Moreover, the bias in the policy predictions is large relative to the size of the
predictive intervals obtained from the Bayesian analysis. Interestingly, there is little evidence
of misspecification when the representative agent model is estimated based on data from the
heterogeneous agent economy. Unlike in applications with actual U.S. data, posterior odds
favor the DSGE model over a less restrictive and more densely parameterized VAR.

    If the empirical analysis does reveal strong evidence of model misspecification in the
sense of a violation of the cross coefficient restrictions imposed by a DSGE model on a state-
space representation, e.g., (30), or a VAR approximation, e.g., (32), then there is not only
concern as to whether the structural parameters of the DSGE model should be treated as
policy invariant, but also whether the discrepancies between the restricted and unrestricted
representations are policy invariant. Del Negro and Schorfheide (2009) develop DSGE-VAR-
                                                                                          30


based methods to assess the robustness of policy predictions to perturbations in the model
misspecification.



7      Conclusion

The literature on the econometric analysis of DSGE models has made substantial progress
over the past decade, and the econometric analysis of DSGE models has become a fairly
standard procedure that is now taught in many Ph.D. programs around the world. Nonethe-
less, many challenges that need to be tackled in the future remain. The purpose of this
paper was to review several of these challenges and to discuss current research that tries to
address them.



References
Altug, S. (1989): “Time-to-Build and Aggregate Fluctuations: Some New Evidence,”
    International Economic Review, 30(4), 889–920.

An, S., and F. Schorfheide (2007a): “Bayesian Analysis of DSGE Models,” Econometric
    Reviews, 26(2-4), 113–172.

           (2007b): “Bayesian Analysis of DSGE Models–Rejoinder,” Econometric Reviews,
    26(2-4), 211–219.

Aruoba, S. B., and F. Schorfheide (2011): “Sticky Prices versus Monetary Frictions:
    An Estimation of Policy Trade-offs,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, forth-
    coming.

Beyer, A., and R. E. Farmer (2007): “Testing for Indeterminancy: An Application to
    U.S. Monetary Policy: Comment,” American Economic Review, 97(1), 524 – 529.

Boivin, J., and M. P. Giannoni (2006): “DSGE Models in a Data Rich Enviroment,”
    NBER Working Paper, 12772.
                                                                                  31


Calvo, G. (1983): “Staggered Prices in a Utility Maximizing Framework,” Journal of
  Monetary Economics, 12(3), 383–398.

Canova, F. (2007): Methods for Applied Macroeconomic Research. Princeton University
  Press, New Jersey.

        (2010): “Bridging Cyclical DSGE Models and the Raw Data,” Manuscript.

Canova, F., and L. Sala (2009): “Back to Square One: Identification in DSGE Models,”
  Journal of Monetary Economics, 56(4), 431–449.

Chang, Y., S.-B. Kim, and F. Schorfheide (2010): “Labor Market Heterogeneity and
  the Lucas Critique,” Manuscript.

Chari, V. V., P. J. Kehoe, and E. R. McGrattan (2007): “Business Cycle Account-
  ing,” Econometrica, 75, 781–836.

Chib, S., and S. Ramamurthy (2010): “Tailored Randomized Block MCMC Methods
  with Application to DSGE Models,” Journal of Econometrics, 155(1), 19–38.

Curdia, V., and R. Reis (2010): “Correlated Disturbances and U.S. Business Cycles,”
  Manuscript, Columbia University and FRB New York.

Cynamon, B., D. Dutkowsky, and B. Jones (2006): “Redefining the Monetary Aggre-
  gates: A Clean Sweep,” Eastern Economic Journal, 32, 661–672.

DeJong, D., and C. Dave (2007): Structural Macroeconometrics. Princeton University
  Press, New Jersey.

DeJong, D. N., B. F. Ingram, and C. H. Whiteman (2000): “A Bayesian Approach
  to Dynamic Macroeconomics,” Journal of Econometrics, 98(2), 203 – 223.

Del Negro, M., and F. Schorfheide (2004): “Priors from General Equilibrium Models
  for VARs,” International Economic Review, 45(2), 643 – 673.

        (2008): “Forming Priors for DSGE Models (and How It Affects the Assessment of
  Nominal Rigidities),” Journal of Monetary Economics, 55(7), 1191–1208.
                                                                                       32


         (2009): “Monetary Policy with Potentially Misspecified Models,” American Eco-
  nomic Review, 99(4), 1415–1450.

         (2010): “Bayesian Macroeconometrics,” in Handbook of Bayesian Econometrics,
  ed. by H. K. van Dijk, G. Koop, and J. Geweke. Oxford University Press.

Del Negro, M., F. Schorfheide, F. Smets, and R. Wouters (2007): “On the Fit
  of New Keynesian Models,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 25(2), 123–162.

Dreze, J. (1974): “Bayesian Theory of Identification in Simultaneous Equations Models,”
  in Studies in Bayesian Econometrics and Statistics, ed. by S. Fienberg, and A. Zellner.
  North-Holland, Amsterdam.

Fernández-Villaverde, J., and J. F. Rubio-Ramı́rez (2011): “Macroeconomics and
  Volatility: Data, Models, and Estimation,” in Advances in Economics and Econometrics:
  Theory and Applications, Tenth World Congress, ed. by D. Acemoglu, M. Arellano, and
  E. Dekel. Cambridge University Press, forthcoming, University of Chicago Press.

Geweke, J. (1977): “The Dynamic Factor Analysis of Economic Time Series,” in Latent
  Variables in Socio-Economic Models, ed. by D. J. Aigner, and A. S. Goldberger, chap. 19.
  North-Holland, Amsterdam.

Guerron-Quintana, P., A. Inoue, and L. Kilian (2010): “Frequentist Inference in
  Weakly Identified DSGE Models,” Manuscript.

Herbst, E. (2010): “Gradient and Hessian-based MCMC for DSGE Models,” Manuscript.

Ingram, B., and C. Whiteman (1994): “Supplanting the Minnesota Prior – Forecast-
  ing Macroeconomic Time Series Using Real Business Cycle Model Priors,” Journal of
  Monetary Economics, 49(4), 1131–1159.

Ireland, P. N. (2004): “A Method for Taking Models to the Data,” Journal of Economic
  Dynamics and Control, 28(6), 1205–1226.

Iskrev, N. (2010): “Local Identification in DSGE Models,” Journal of Monetary Eco-
  nomics, 57(2), 189–202.
                                                                                       33


Kocherlakota, N. (2007): “Model Fit and Model Selection,” FRB St. Louis Review,
  89(4), 349–360.

Kohn, R., P. Giordani, and I. Strid (2010): “Adaptive Hybrid Metropolis-Hastings
  Samplers for DSGE Models,” Riksbank Manuscript.

Komunjer, I., and S. Ng (2009): “Dynamic Identification of DSGE Models,” Manuscript,
  Columbia University and UCSD.

Kryshko, M. (2010): “Data-Rich DSGE and Dynamic Factor Models,” Manuscript, Uni-
  versity of Pennsylvania.

Lubik, T. A., and F. Schorfheide (2004): “Testing for Indeterminancy: An Application
  to U.S. Monetary Policy,” American Economic Review, 94(1), 190–217.

         (2007): “Testing for Indeterminancy: An Application to U.S. Monetary Policy:
  Reply,” American Economic Review, 97(1), 530–533.

Lucas, Robert E., J. (2000): “Inflation and Welfare,” Econometrica, 68(2), 247–274.

Müller, U. (2010): “Measuring Prior Sensitivity and Prior Informativeness in Large
  Bayesian Models,” Manuscript.

Otrok, C. (2001): “On Measuring the Welfare Costs of Business Cycles,” Journal of
  Monetary Economics, 45(1), 61–92.

Poirier, D. (1998): “Revising Beliefs in Nonidentified Models,” Econometric Theory, 14(4),
  483–509.

Primiceri, G. (2006): “Why Inflation Rose and Fell: Policymakers’ Beliefs and US Postwar
  Stabilization Policy,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121, 867–901.

Rı́os-Rull, J.-V., F. Schorfheide, C. Fuentes-Albero, M. Kryshko, and
  R. Santaeulalia-Llopis (2009): “Methods versus Substance: Measuring the Effects
  of Technology Shocks,” NBER Working Paper, 15375.
                                                                                      34


Rogerson, R. (1988): “Indivisible Labor, Lotteries and Equilibrium,” Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 21(1), 3–16.

Sargent, T. (1999): The Conquest of American Inflation. Princeton University Press, New
  Jersey.

Sargent, T. J. (1989): “Two Models of Measurements and the Investment Accelerator,”
  Journal of Political Economy, 97(2), 251–287.

Sargent, T. J., and C. A. Sims (1977): “Business Cycle Modeling Without Pretending to
  Have Too Much A Priori Economic Theory,” in New Methods in Business Cycle Research.
  FRB Minneapolis, Minneapolis.

Sargent, T. J., T. Zha, and N. Williams (2006): “Shocks and Government Beliefs:
  The Rise and Fall of American Inflation,” American Economic Review, 94(4), 1193–1224.

Schorfheide, F. (2000): “Loss Function-based Evaluation of DSGE Models,” Journal of
  Applied Econometrics, 15(6), 645–670.

            (2008): “DSGE Model-Based Estimation of the New Keynesian Phillips Curve,”
  FRB Richmond Economic Quarterly, Fall Issue, 397–433.

Schorfheide, F., K. Sill, and M. Kryshko (2010): “DSGE Model-Based Forecasting
  of Non-Modelled Variables,” International Journal of Forecasting, 26(2), 348–373.

Smets, F., and R. Wouters (2003): “An Estimated Dynamic Stochastic General Equi-
  librium Model of the Euro Area,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 1(5),
  1123–1175.

        (2007): “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A Bayesian DSGE Approach,”
  American Economic Review, 97(3), 586–606.

Stock, J. H., and M. W. Watson (1989): “New Indices of Coincident and Leading
  Economic Indicators,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1989, ed. by O. J. Blanchard,
  and S. Fischer, vol. 4, pp. 351–394. MIT Press, Cambridge.

Woodford, M. (2003): Interest and Prices. Princeton University Press, New Jersey.
                                                                                              35


                      Figure 1: Posterior (and Prior) Densities




Notes: NKPC marginal cost coefficient is κ in (15), NKPC lagged inflation coefficient is γb
in (15), NK Distortion is 100|1/D∗ − 1| in (16), and money demand elasticity is 1/(ν(1 − R∗ )
in (17). Solid lines depict posterior densities and dashed lines represent prior densities.

            Figure 2: Welfare Implications of Estimated DSGE Model




Notes: The left panel depicts several draws from the posterior distribution of steady-state
welfare costs (in percent of consumption) of deviating from 2.5% inflation as a function
of counterfactual target inflation. The right panel depicts pointwise posterior means and
credible intervals.
                                                                                          36



                Figure 3: New Keynesian Phillips Curve Estimates




Notes: 90% credible set obtained from estimated DSGE model is denoted by solid contours.
Point estimates reported in the papers surveyed in Schorfheide (2008) are indicated by “+”.



         Figure 4: Inverse Velocity: Actual and Counterfactual Path




Notes: The solid line depicts actual inverse velocity, and the dashed line depicts a counter-
factual path that is solely based on money demand shocks.
                                                                                         37




    Figure 5: Target Inflation Shock Impulse Responses – DSGE vs. VAR




Notes: 90% credible bands for impulse responses to a change in the target inflation rate for
DSGE model (solid) and VAR (dashed).
                                                                                            38




            Figure 6: The Role of ν: Impulse Responses and Welfare



                   ν = 31.7                                       ν = 3.0




Notes: Top panels: 90% credible bands for impulse responses to a change in the target
inflation rate for the DSGE model (solid) and the VAR (dashed). Bottom panels: pointwise
90% credible intervals of steady-state welfare costs (in percent of consumption) of deviating
from 2.5% inflation as a function of counterfactual target inflation. The left-hand side panels
are generated based on the posterior distribution of ν, which has a mean of ν̂ = 31.7. The
right-hand-side panels are based on fixing ν = 3.
                                                                                     39




    Figure 7: Example – Contours of the Likelihood Function for T = 100




Notes: The intersection of the solid line indicates the parameter value that was used to
simulate the observations from which the likelihood function is constructed.
                                                                                       40




                          Figure 8: DSGE-VAR Estimation




Notes: The top left panel depicts the log marginal data density of the DSGE-VAR as a func-
tion of λ/(1 + λ). The remaining panels depict posterior mean impulse responses computed
from the DSGE-VAR for various values of λ, ranging from λ = 0 (solid) to λ = ∞ (dotted).
                                                                                               A-1


 Technical Appendix to “Estimation and Evaluation of
      DSGE Models: Progress and Challenges”


A     DSGE Model

The subsequent exposition is based on a slightly more general utility function:

                                                        x1−γ
                                            U (x) = B        .
                                                        1−γ


A.1     Equilibrium Conditions

Household’s Problem: Given exogenous states, policy, and prices,

                            A
              U 0 (xt ) =                                                                     (A.1)
                            Wt
                                   U 0 (xt+1 ) Rt
                                                    
                   1 =      βEt                                                               (A.2)
                                    U 0 (xt ) πt+1
                                                                   
                                             it          it 0 it
                   1 =      µt 1 − S                +        S                                (A.3)
                                           it−1        it−1       it−1
                                   (                                           )
                                                                  2
                                            U 0 (xt+1 ) it+1
                                                                     
                                                                         i t+1
                            +βEt µt+1 0                             S0
                                              U (xt )        it            it
                                                           
                                                          it
                kt+1 =      (1 − δ)kt + 1 − S                                                 (A.4)
                                                        it−1
                                  0                                      
                                   U (xt+1 k                           
                  µt =      βEt                  Rt+1 + (1 − δ)µt+1                           (A.5)
                                    U 0 (xt )
                                 "                                   1−νm          −νm #
              U 0 (xt )            U 0 (xt+1 ) χt+1
                                                           
                                                                A               Mt+1
                        =   βEt                  +                                            (A.6)
                Pt                    Pt+1          Pt+1 Z∗1/1−α                Pt+1
                             U 0 (xt+1 )
               Ξpt+1|t =                                                                      (A.7)
                            U 0 (xt )πt+1

As in the search-based model, we define Mt+1 = Mt+1 /Pt .

Intermediate Goods Producing Firms’ Problem: Intermediate goods firms choose
their capital labor ratio as a function of the factor prices to minimize costs:

                                                     α Wt
                                            Kt =             Ht .                             (A.8)
                                                   1 − α Rtk
                                                                                                             A-2


Firms that are allowed to change prices are choosing a relative price pot (i) (relative to the
aggregate price level) to maximize expected profits subject to the demand curve for their
differentiated product, taking the aggregate price level Pt as well as the prices charged by
other firms as given, which leads to

        M Ct = α−α (1 − α)−(1−α) Wt1−α (Rtk )α Zt−1                                                  (A.9)
                                                  "                1+λ              #
                                                                  − λ
                                                         pot
                                                                 
                       1+λ
              = (pot )− λ Yt + ζβ (πtι )−1/λ IE t
          (1)                                                                    (1)
        Ft                                                              Ξpt+1|t Ft+1                (A.10)
                                                      πt+1 pot+1
                                                           "
                                                                     o
                                                                          − 1+λ −1
                                                                                                  #
                       1+λ                         1+λ             p          λ
              = (pot )− λ −1 Yt M Ct + ζβ (πtι )− λ IE t
          (2)                                                                                 (2)
        Ft                                                           t
                                                                                     Ξpt+1|t Ft+1 (A.11)
                                                               πt+1 pot+1
          (1)                 (2)
        Ft      = (1 + λ)Ft                                                                                (A.12)


Final Good Producing Firms’ Problem: Final goods producers take factor prices and
output prices as given and choose inputs Yt (i) and output Yt to maximize profits. Free entry
ensures that final good producers make zero profits and leads to
                                    h                     1                     1
                                                                                       i−λ
                            πt = (1 −       ζ) (πt pot )− λ   +      ι
                                                                  ζ(πt−1  1−ι − λ
                                                                         π∗∗ )                             (A.13)


Aggregate Resource Constraint: is given by

                                                                  (1−α)
                                        Yt = Dt−1 (Zt Ktα Ht              − F),                            (A.14)

where                       "          ι         (1−ι) #− 1+λ
                                                               λ
                                 πt−1          1                                                 1+λ
                   Dt = ζ                                           Dt−1 + (1 − ζ) (pot )−        λ    .   (A.15)
                                  πt           πt
The gross domestic product of this economy is given by Yt = Yt .

Market Clearing: The goods market clears:
                                            
                                          1
                           Xt + It + 1 −       Yt = Yt                                                     (A.16)
                                          gt

Monetary Policy: The central bank supplies the quantity of money necessary to attain
the nominal interest rate
                                                                                    ψ1            ψ2
                  1−ρR ρR                                                     πt              Yt
          Rt =   R∗,t Rt−1   exp{σR R,t },           R∗,t = (r∗ π∗,t )                                    (A.17)
                                                                              π∗,t           γYt−1
                                                                                         A-3


A.2     Steady States

For estimation purposes it is useful to parameterize the model in terms of Y∗ = Y∗ , H∗ , and
M∗ and solve the steady-state conditions for A, B, and Z∗ .

                    R∗ = π∗ /β
                          "             − 1−ι #−λ
                              1     ζ   1    λ
                    po∗ =        −
                            1 − ζ 1 − ζ π∗
                             1
                    R∗k =      +δ−1
                             β
                                            1+λ
                              (1 − ζ)(po∗ )− λ
                    D∗    =       − (1+λ)(1−ι)
                                             λ
                            1 − ζ π1∗
                     Ȳ∗ = Y∗ D∗

                    Z∗ = (Ȳ∗ + F)/(K∗α H∗1−α )
                                                   −(1−ι)/λ −1
                                                     1
                                     o
                         α(Ȳ∗ + F)p∗     1 −  ζβ  π∗
                    K∗ =
                                                                  
                                   k              −(1−ι)(1+λ)/λ 
                           (1 + λ)R∗
                                       
                                         1 − ζβ π1∗
                            1 − α K∗ k
                    W∗ =            R
                              α H∗ ∗
                     I∗   = δK∗

                    X∗ = Y∗ − I∗ − (1 − 1/g∗ )Y∗
                             "                      #1/νm
                          1           χ∗ π∗νm W∗
                     A =
                         M∗ (R∗ − 1)Z∗(1−νm )/(1−α)
                     U∗0 = A/W∗

                     B = U∗0 X∗γ



A.3     Log-Linearizations

We will frequently use equation-specific constants, such as A and B. Variables dated t + 1
refer to time t conditional expectations.
                                                                                                         A-4


Household’s Problem: The optimality conditions for the household can be expressed as

                                         1
                                W̃t =      X̃t                                                        (A.18)
                                         γ
                             −γ X̃t    = −γ X̃t+1 + (R̃t − π̃t+1 )                                    (A.19)
                                            1            β               1
                                 ĩt   =       ĩt−1 +       ĩt+1 +             µ̃t                  (A.20)
                                         1+β           1+β           (1 + β)S 00
                               k̃t+1 = (1 − δ)k̃t + δ ĩt                                             (A.21)

                       µ̃t − γ X̃t = β(1 − δ)µ̃t+1 − γ X̃t+1 + βR∗k R̃t+1
                                                                      k
                                                                                                      (A.22)
                                                                                   1
                        νm M̃t+1 = γ X̃t + νm χ̃t+1 − (1 − νm )π̃t+1 −                  R̃t           (A.23)
                                                                                 R∗ − 1
                             Ξ̃pt|t−1 = −γ(X̃t − X̃t−1 ) − π̃t .                                      (A.24)

Equations (A.18) to (A.24) determine wages, consumption, investment, capital, the shadow
value of installed capital, the rental rate of capital, real money balances, and the stochastic
discount factor.

Firms’ Problems: Marginal costs evolve according to

                                         M˜C t = (1 − α)w̃t + αR̃tk − Z̃t .                           (A.25)

Conditional on capital, the labor demand is determined according to

                                               H̃t = K̃t + R̃tk − W̃t                                 (A.26)

        (1)           (2)                         (1)       (2)
Since Ft      and Ft        are proportional, F̃t       = F̃t     = F̃t . The remaining optimality conditions
can be written as follows.
                                             
                                1+λ o
              F̃t   = (1 − A) −      p̃ + Ỹt                                                         (A.27)
                                 λ t
                                                                                 
                              ι   1+λ o 1+λ               1+λ o             p
                      +A − π̃t −        p̃ +      π̃t+1 +    p̃ + F̃t+1 + Ξ̃t+1|t
                              λ     λ t         λ          λ t+1
                          −(1−ι)/λ
                            1
           A1       = ζβ
                           π∗
                                                                                                      A-5


and
                                                                    
                                          1+λ           o           ˜
                  F̃t    = (1 − A) −             + 1 p̃t + Ỹt + M C t                              (A.28)
                                            λ
                                                                            
                                    ι(1 + λ)         1+λ          o      1+λ
                           +A −              π̃t −        + 1 p̃t +          + 1 π̃t+1
                                        λ              λ                  λ
                                                                
                               1+λ            o              p
                           +          + 1 p̃t+1 + F̃t+1 + Ξ̃t+1|t
                                  λ
                               −(1−ι)(1+λ)/λ
                                 1
                 A2      = ζβ                      .
                                 π∗

The relationship between the optimal price charged by the adjusting firms and the inflation
rate is given by
                                                                          −(1−ι)/λ
                                                                      1
                                  p̃ot   = (A − 1)π̃t − Aιζ                            π̃t−1        (A.29)
                                                                      π∗
                                             (po∗ )1/λ
                                 Ap =
                                              1−ζ

Equations (A.27) to (A.29) determine π̃t , F̃t , and p̃ot .

Resource Constraint, Market Clearing Conditions: Aggregate output evolves accord-
ing to
                             Ȳ˜t = Ỹt + D̃t = (1 + F/Ȳ∗ )[Z̃t + αK̃t + (1 − α)H̃t ].             (A.30)

and the steady-state price dispersion follows
                      − (1+λ)(1−ι)
                                                                           po (1 + λ)(1 − ζ) o
                                                                       
                 1           λ               (1 + λ)       ι(1 + λ)
   D̃t = ζ                           D̃t−1 +         π̃t −          π̃t−1 − ∗               p̃t     (A.31)
                 π∗                             λ              λ                  λD∗

The goods market clearing condition is of the form

                                                   X∗            I∗ ˜
                                         Ỹt =           X̃t +         It + g̃t .                   (A.32)
                                                 X∗ + I∗       X∗ + I∗

Monetary Policy: The monetary policy rule can be written as

                        R̃t = ρR R̃t−1 + (1 − ρR )[ψ1 (π̃t − π̃t∗ ) + ψ2 (Ỹt − Ỹt−1 )] + R,t .   (A.33)
                                                                                           A-6


B     Data

The data set is identical to the one used in Aruoba and Schorfheide (2011). The empirical
analysis is based on quarterly U.S. postwar data on aggregate output, inflation, inflation
expectations, interest rates, and (inverse) velocity of money. Unless otherwise noted, the
data are obtained from the FRED2 database maintained by the Federal Reserve Bank of
St. Louis. Per capita output is defined as real GDP (GDPC96) divided by civilian non-
institutionalized population (CNP16OV). I take the natural log of this measure and extract
a linear trend and link the deviations from this trend to the stationary fluctuations around
the deterministic steady state that the DSGE model produces. Inflation is defined as the
log difference of the GDP deflator (GDPDEF), and our measure of nominal interest rates
corresponds to the federal funds rate (FEDFUNDS). Money is incorporated as an observable
by using inverse M1 velocity. I use the sweep-adjusted M1S series provided by Cynamon,
Dutkowsky, and Jones (2006). The M1S series is divided by quarterly nominal output to
obtain inverse velocity, and we relate the natural logarithm of the resulting series to the log
deviations from 100 ∗ ln(M∗ /Y ∗ ). The estimation sample ranges from 1965:I to 2005:I, and
I use the likelihood functions conditional on data from 1964:I to 1964:IV to estimate the
DSGE model and the VARs.

    In order to obtain a measure of the inflation target, three series are combined: GDP
deflator filtered through a one-sided band-pass filter as well as 1-year and 10-year-ahead
inflation expectations obtained from the Survey of Professional Forecasters, maintained by
the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. Since the agents generate forecasts of future target
inflation rates with a random walk model, a one-sided bandpass filter that removes cycles of
a duration of less than 64 quarters is used. A time-domain moving average representation
of the ideal one-sided filter (truncated at 500 lags) is constructed, and then missing lagged
observations are replaced by optimal backcasts obtained from an estimated AR(4) model.

    To combine the three series, a small state-space model with measurement equations

                etBP = π
                π      e∗,t + 0.0251,t ,   et1y = π
                                            π      e∗,t + η2,t ,   et10y = π
                                                                   π       e∗,t + η3,t ,
                                                                                                    A-7


and state transitions

            π
            e∗,t = π
                   e∗,t−1 + σπ π,t ,   η2,t = ρ2 η2,t−1 + σ2 2,t ,   η3,t = ρ3 η3,t−1 + σ3 3,t

                                                                         et1y , and π
                                                                  etBP , π
is used. The i,t ’s are iid standard normal random variables and π                 et10y are
bandpass filtered inflation, 1-year-ahead forecasts, and 10-year-ahead forecasts, respectively.
                                      etBP is fixed to implicitly control the weight on the
The innovation standard deviation for π
bandpass filtered series and the remaining parameters are estimated. If one regresses the
filtered series π
                e∗,t on the three observed measures, the coefficients are 0.57 (e             πt1y ),
                                                                                πtBP ), 0.22 (e
          πt10y ). Moreover, the dynamics of π
and 0.23 (e                                  e∗,t are well approximated by the random walk
that the DSGE model agents use to forecast the target inflation rate.



C      Empirical Analysis

C.1     DSGE Model Estimation

The methods used to estimate the DSGE model are described in detail in An and Schorfheide
(2007a). The following DSGE model parameters are fixed during the estimation: δ = 0.014,
γ = 1, χ∗ = 1, g∗ = 1.2, ln(M∗ /Y∗ ) = −0.38, ln(H∗ /Y∗ ) = −3.35, ln Y∗ = 1, ψ1 = 1.7, and
the log-linearization point π∗,A = 4. Moreover, we set β = 1/(1 + rA /400), where rA = 2.5.
Marginal prior distributions for the remaining parameters are summarized in columns 2 to 4
of Table A-1. The joint prior is obtained by the product of the marginal densities, multiplied
by the function f (θ) defined in Equation (23) of Section 3.3 of the paper. Posterior means
and 90% credible intervals are provided in columns 5 and 6 of Table A-1.



C.2     VAR Estimation

The VAR used as a reference model in Section 2.3 is identical to the one used in Aruoba
and Schorfheide (2011). Output, inflation, interest rates, and inverse velocity are collected
in the 4 × 1 vector y1,t and the target inflation rate in the scalar y2,t . Moreover, let yt =
  0
[y1,t , y2,t ]0 . Assume that yt follows a Gaussian vector autoregressive law of motion subject
                                                                                                 A-8


to the restrictions that the target inflation rate evolves according to a random walk process
and that the innovations to the target inflation rate are orthogonal to the remaining shocks.
These restrictions are consistent with the assumptions that underlie the DSGE model and
identify the propagation of unanticipated changes in the target inflation. The VAR takes
the form

                      y1,t = Φ0 + Φ1 yt−1 + . . . + Φp yt−p + Ψ∆y2,t + u1,t                  (A.34)

                      y2,t = y2,t−1 + σπ∗ π∗ ,t ,                                           (A.35)

where u1,t ∼ N (0, Σ11 ) and is independent of π∗ ,t . The VAR composed of (A.34) and (A.35)
with p = 4 is estimated using the version of the “Minnesota” prior described in Del Negro
and Schorfheide (2010). The hyperparameters are λ1 = 0.1, λ2 = 3.1, λ3 = 5, λ4 = 1, and
λ5 = 1. Our prior assumes that the elements of Ψ are independently distributed according
to N (0, λ−2
          4 ).




C.3     DSGE-VAR Analysis

The DSGE-VAR framework described in Del Negro and Schorfheide (2010) is modified to
account for the fact that one of the observables, namely the target inflation rate, is non-
stationary. Moreover, the DSGE model prior for the VAR coefficients is augmented by a
standard Minnesota prior with the hyperparameter settings described above. Consider the
VAR of the form
                           yt = B1 yt−1 + . . . + Bp yt−p + Bc + Σtr Ωt ,                   (A.36)

where Σtr is the unique lower triangular Cholesky factor of the one-step-ahead forecast error
covariance matrix Σ, Ω is an orthogonal matrix, and t ∼ N (0, I). Let B = [B1 , . . . , Bp , Bc ]0 ,
x0t = [yt−1
        0              0
            , . . . , yt−p , 1] and write the VAR in matrix form as Y = XB + U . The prior
distribution of the VAR parameters given the DSGE model parameters θ, (B, Σ)|θ, is repre-
sented by dummy observations Y∗ (θ) and X∗ (θ). The resulting prior takes the Matric-normal
inverted-Wishart (MNIW) form
                                                                               
                                       ∗             0       ∗
                 B, Σ|θ ∼ M N IW B (θ), X∗ (θ) X∗ (θ), S (θ), λD T + TM       −k ,           (A.37)
                                                                                              A-9


where λD is a hyperparameter, T is the size of the actual sample, TM is the number of
dummy observations for the Minnesota prior, and

                B ∗ (θ) = [X∗ (θ)0 X∗ (θ)]−1 X∗ (θ)0 Y∗ (θ),

                S ∗ (θ) = Y∗ (θ)0 Y∗ (θ) − Y∗ (θ)0 X∗ (θ)[X∗ (θ)0 X∗ (θ)]−1 X∗ (θ)0 Y∗ (θ).

In the remainder of this subsection, I describe the construction of the moment matrices
X∗ (θ)0 X∗ (θ), X∗ (θ)0 Y∗ (θ), and Y∗ (θ)0 Y∗ (θ).

    In order to combine the DSGE model prior and the Minnesota prior, the moment matrices
are expressed as follows:

                                                                      0
                            X∗ (θ)0 X∗ (θ) = (λD T )ΓD         M  M
                                                     XX (θ) + X∗ X∗ , . . .


The first part is derived from the DSGE model and the second part corresponds to the
dummy observations that are used to specify the Minnesota prior. I will subsequently focus
on the first part. If the vector yt is stationary, then ΓD
                                                         XX (θ) is the population covariance

matrix of xt . An extension to the case of nonstationary yt ’s can be obtained as follows.
Recall that the DSGE model has a state-space representation of the form

                                yt = Ψ0 + Ψs st ,     st = Φ1 st−1 + Φ t .

Assume that the state vector st in period t = −τ was equal to zero, s−τ = 0, and that
t ∼ iidN (0, Σ ). By iterating the state-transition equation forward, one can obtain the
distribution of s0 and hence y0 . Iterating the state-transition forward for another p periods
yields the joint distribution of y0 , . . . , yp . The matrices ΓD     D         D
                                                                 XX , ΓXY , and ΓY Y are now con-

structed from the appropriate elements of the joint covariance matrix of y0 , . . . , yp . If some
of the elements of st are nonstationary and others are stationary, the stationary ones can be
initialized in period −τ through their ergodic distribution, and the nonstationary ones with
a pointmass at zero. In our application, st contains one nonstationary element, namely the
target inflation rate, and we set τ = 40.
                                                                                                    A-10


                       Table A-1: Prior and Posterior Distributions




                                                   Prior                          Posterior
               Name      Density               Para (1)       Para (2)    Mean       90% Intv

                                                      Households
               ν         Gamma                      20.0           5.00   31.7       [24.8, 38.2]
                                                           Firms
               α         Beta                       0.30           .025   0.28       [0.27, 0.29]
               λ         Normal                     0.15           0.01   0.16       [0.15, 0.18]
               ζ         Beta                       0.60           0.15   0.75       [0.72, 0.79]
               ι         Beta                       0.50           0.25   0.03       [0.00, 0.07]
               S 00      Gamma                      5.00           2.50   5.37       [2.68, 8.11]
                                                     Central Bank
               ψ2        Gamma                      1.00           0.50   1.02       [0.83, 1.21]
               ρR        Beta                       0.50           0.20   0.67       [0.63, 0.72]
               σR        InvGamma                   0.50           4.00   0.33       [0.28, 0.39]
               σR,2      InvGamma                   1.00           4.00   0.80       [0.59, 1.01]
                 ∗
               π̃0,A     Normal                     0.00           2.00   -0.11     [-3.27, 3.26]
               σπ        InvGamma                   0.05           4.00   0.05      [ 0.04, 0.05]
                                                           Shocks
               ρg        Beta                       0.80           0.10   0.90       [0.86, 0.93]
               σg        InvGamma                   1.00           4.00   1.15       [0.99, 1.30]
               ρχ        Beta                       0.80           0.10   0.98       [0.97, 0.99]
               σχ        InvGamma                   1.00           4.00   1.30       [1.18, 1.42]
               ρz        Beta                       0.90           0.05   0.80       [0.70, 0.89]
               σz        InvGamma                   2.00           4.00   2.08       [1.32, 2.81]

Notes: Para (1) and Para (2) correspond to the means and the standard deviations for Beta,
Gamma, and Normal distributions and to s and ν for the Inverse Gamma distribution with
                                     2 /2σ 2
density pIG (σ|ν, s) ∝ σ −ν−1 e−νs             .
