                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    THE CONSEQUENCES OF FINANCIAL INNOVATION:
                       A COUNTERFACTUAL RESEARCH AGENDA

                                              Josh Lerner
                                              Peter Tufano

                                         Working Paper 16780
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16780


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2011




We would like to thank Bob Hunt, Bill Janeway, Joel Mokyr, Antoinette Schoar, Scott Stern and participants
at the American Economic Association’s 2010 Meeting, the National Bureau of Economic Research’s
Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity Pre-Conference and Conference, and Brown University’s
Conference on Financial Innovation for their helpful comments. We thank the Division of Faculty
Research and Development at the Harvard Business School for support of this project. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Josh Lerner and Peter Tufano. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
The Consequences of Financial Innovation: A Counterfactual Research Agenda
Josh Lerner and Peter Tufano
NBER Working Paper No. 16780
February 2011
JEL No. G20,O31

                                             ABSTRACT

Financial innovation has been both praised as the engine of growth of society and castigated for being
the source of the weakness of the economy. In this paper, we review the literature on financial innovation
and highlight the similarities and differences between financial innovation and other forms of innovation.
We also propose a research agenda to systematically address the social welfare implications of financial
innovation. To complement existing empirical and theoretical methods, we propose that scholars examine
case studies of systemic (widely adopted) innovations, explicitly considering counterfactual histories
had the innovations never been invented or adopted.


Josh Lerner
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 214
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
jlerner@hbs.edu

Peter Tufano
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 359
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
ptufano@hbs.edu
       The significance of financial innovation has widely touted. Many leading scholars,

including Miller (1986) and Merton (1992), highlight the importance of new products and

services in the financial arena, sometimes characterizing these innovations as an “engine of

economic growth.”



       At several levels, these arguments are plausible. Financial innovations can be seen as

playing a role akin to that of the “general purpose technologies” delineated by Bresnahan and

Trajtenberg (1995) and Helpman (1998): not only do these breakthroughs generate returns for

the innovators, but they have the potential to affect the entire economic system and can lead to

far-reaching changes. For instance, these innovations may have broad implications for

households, enabling new choices for investment and consumption, and reducing the costs of

raising and deploying funds. Similarly, financial innovations enable firms to raise capital in

larger amounts and at a lower cost than they could otherwise and in some cases (for instance,

biotechnology start-ups) to obtaining financing that they would otherwise simply be unable to

raise. This latter idea is captured in a recent model of economic growth by Michalopoulos,

Laeven, and Levine (2010), who argue that growth is driven not just by profit-maximizing

entrepreneurs who spring up to commercialize new technologies, but also by the financial

entrepreneurs who develop new ways to screen and fund the technologists.



       Moreover, it appears that financial innovation is ubiquitous. Tufano (1995, 2003) shows

that far from being confined to the last few decades, financial innovation has been part of the

economic landscape for centuries. Goetzmann and Rouwenhorst (2005) document 19 major

financial innovations that span the past 4000 years, ranging from the innovation of interest to


                                               2
creation of Eurobonds. Not only is financial innovation an historical phenomena, it is also a

widespread one. For example, , Tufano (1989) shows that of all public offerings in 1987, 18

percent (on a dollar-weighted basis) consisted of securities that had not been in existence in

1974.



        But at the same time, claims of the beneficial impacts of financial innovations must be

approached with caution. One reason is that despite the acknowledged economic importance of

financial innovation, the sources of such innovation remain poorly understood, particularly

empirically. In a recent review article, Frame and White (2004) are able to identify only 39

empirical studies of financial innovation. Moreover, this literature concentrates largely on the

“back end” of the innovation process, focusing on the diffusion of these innovations, the

characteristics of adopters, and the consequences of innovation for firm profitability and social

welfare. Frame and White identify only two papers on the origins of innovation, namely, Ben-

Horim and Silber (1977) and Lerner (2002).



        The paucity of research in this area contrasts sharply with the abundant literature on the

sources of manufacturing innovation. This neglect is particularly puzzling given the special

circumstances surrounding financial innovation. Several considerations—discussed in detail in

Section III—suggest that the dynamics of financial innovation are quite different from those in

manufacturing. Together, these considerations suggest the need to examine financial innovation

as a phenomenon in its own right.




                                                3
       The second reason for caution has been the recent crisis in the global financial system,

which has shaken many economists’ faith in the positive effects of financial innovation.

Certainly, in many post mortems of the crisis, financial innovation was seen as far from an

“engine of economic growth.” For instance, Levitin characterized recent changes in retail

financial services as “negative innovations,” such as “opaque pricing, including billing tricks and

traps… that encourag[e] unsafe lending practices.” A similar theme was sounded by Krugman

(2007) in regards to securities regulation:



       (T)he innovations of recent years—the alphabet soup of C.D.O.’s and S.I.V.’s, R.M.B.S.

       and A.B.C.P.—were sold on false pretenses. They were promoted as ways to spread risk,

       making investment safer. What they did instead—aside from making their creators a lot

       of money, which they didn’t have to repay when it all went bust—was to spread

       confusion, luring investors into taking on more risk than they realized.



       Given this unsettled but huge territory, it is premature to provide definitive answers

regarding the causes and consequences of financial innovations and how they differ from the

much better understood innovation process in the manufacturing sector. Indeed, a number of

observers have pointed out recently that financial innovations are neither all bad nor all good, but

contain a mixture of elements (e.g., Johnson and Kwok (2009), Litan (2010), Mishra (2010)).



       There are many different research approaches to understanding financial innovation,

including empirical studies, theoretical models, and traditional historical descriptions. Each has

advantages and disadvantages, which we discuss below. In this paper, our goal is to lay out a


                                                 4
complementary research agenda, which we hope will encourage subsequent scholars. After we

review the definition of financial innovation, we turn to three general observations about how

financial innovation is similar to and different from other forms of innovation—and which

inform the limitations of standard research methods We then consider three case studies of

particular innovations and highlight both what is known and unknown about their consequences.



       The original Rate and Direction volume was published in 1962. Just two years later,

Robert W. Fogel, a future Nobel laureate in Economics, published his masterpiece Railroads and

American Economic Growth. In it, Fogel advanced a method, now used in history, political

science and economic history, to consider counterfactual histories. In a counterfactual analysis,

the researcher (a) posits a set of plausible counterfactuals and how they might have come to pass;

and (b) evaluates metrics to establish the implications of these alternative historical paths. We

suggest how this method, while seemingly imprecise and controversial, can be used to better

understand financial innovation. We also discuss the limitations of this method. In our

conclusion, we suggest avenues for future exploration.




I.     Background on financial innovation



       Much of the theoretical and empirical work in financial economics considers a highly

stylized world in which there are few types of securities (e.g., debt and equity) and a handful of

simple financial institutions, such as banks or exchanges. In reality there are a vast range of

different financial products, many different types of financial institutions, and a variety of


                                                5
processes that these institutions employ to do business. The literature on financial innovation

must grapple with this real-world complexity.



       Financial innovation is the act of creating and then popularizing new financial

instruments, as well as new financial technologies, institutions, and markets. The innovations are

sometimes divided into product or process variants, with product innovations exemplified by

new derivative contracts, new corporate securities, or new forms of pooled investment products,

and process improvements typified by new means of distributing securities, processing

transactions, or pricing transactions. In practice, even this innocuous differentiation is not clear,

as process and product innovations are often linked. Innovation includes the acts of invention

and diffusion, although in point of fact these two are related as most financial innovations are

evolutionary adaptations of prior products.



       As noted above, one of the major challenges associated with the study of financial

innovation is the lack of data. Studies of manufacturing innovation traditionally focus on R&D

spending and patenting. Given the rarity with which financial service firms report R&D spending

and the fact that financial patents were used only infrequently until recently, these measures are

unlikely to be satisfactory in this context. Most alternatives are also troubling. Consider, for

instance, the listings of new securities compiled by Thomson Reuters’ Securities Data Company

(SDC), which maintains the leading database of corporate new issues. First, much of the

innovation in financial services has taken place outside the realm of publicly traded securities,

such as new Automatic Teller Machines and insurance products. Second, as Tufano (2003)

points out, many of the “novel” securities identified in the SDC database are minor variants of


                                                 6
existing securities, often promulgated by investment banks seeking to differentiate themselves

from their peers.



       Thus, saying much systematically about the variation in the rate of financial innovation

across time and space is challenging. Lerner (2006) takes a first step towards addressing this gap

by developing a measure of financial innovation based on news stories in the Wall Street

Journal. The analysis finds that financial innovation is characterized by a disproportionate role

of smaller firms. More specifically, a doubling in firm size is associated with less than a doubling

in innovation generation. Moreover, firms that are less profitable in their respective sectors are

disproportionately more innovative. These results are consistent with depictions by Silber (1975,

1983) that more marginal firms will contribute the bulk of the financial innovations. In addition,

older, less leveraged firms located in regions with more financial innovation appear to be more

innovative. Few patterns are seen over time, though this may reflect the fact that the analysis is

confined to the years 1990 through 2002. Financial innovations seem to be disproportionately

associated with U.S.-based firms, though this may reflect the use of a U.S.-based publication to

identify the innovations.



       A major focus of writings on financial innovations has been the attempt to catalog the

inventions. Goetzmann and Rouwenhorst (2005) group the 19 financial innovations they study

into three categories, based on whether they (a) facilitate the transfer of value through time; (b)

allow the ability to contract on future values; and (c) permit the negotiability of claims. There

are almost as many schemes as authors, but many of these share the feature of looking through to

the underlying functions performed by the innovations. Merton’s (1992) and Crane et al.’s


                                                 7
(1995) schemes are illustrative. In particular, they identify six functions that innovations—and

more generally, economies—perform:



            1. Moving funds across time and space (e.g., savings accounts);

            2. The pooling of funds (e.g., mutual funds);

            3. Managing risk (e.g., insurance and many derivatives products);

            4. Extracting information to support decision-making (e.g., markets which provide

                price information, such as extracting default probabilities from bonds or credit

                default swaps);

            5. Addressing moral hazard and asymmetric information problems (e.g., contracting

                by venture capital firms); and

            6. Facilitating the sale or purchase of goods and services through a payment system

                (e.g., cash, debit cards, credit cards).



Not surprisingly, no classification scheme is perfect, and more importantly, given their

complexity of design and use, many innovations span multiple categories in this scheme and its

alternatives.



        In many respects, financial innovations resemble any other kind of invention. Among the

points of commonality are:



       These innovations are not easy or cheap to develop and diffuse. While the cost of

        developing many security innovations is considerably smaller than for manufacturing or


                                                    8
          scientific innovations, investment banks frequently retain many highly compensated

          Ph.D.s and MBAs and lawyers to design new products and services. Furthermore,

          innovators must frequently expend considerable resources developing distribution

          channels for their products.

         These innovations are risky. Tufano (1989) documents that the vast majority of security

          discoveries do not lead to more than a handful of subsequence issuances.

         Innovation is frequently linked closely with the competitive dynamics between

          incumbents and entrants, as suggested by the work cited above.

         Firms have struggled, at least until recently (and perhaps temporarily) to obtain

          intellectual property protection, akin to many emerging industries.



But in other respects, financial innovation is quite different. It is to these dissimilarities that we

turn in the next section.




II.       What is different—and challenging—about financial innovation?



          In general, economists’ thinking about financial innovation has been shaped by their

experience with innovation in manufacturing industries. Assessments of the nature and

consequences of innovation in the service sector are rarer. Financial innovation illustrates the

limitations of our understanding of non-manufacturing innovation in particularly sharp relief.




                                                   9
       At first glance, it might be unclear why financial innovation should differ from other

types of new product development. In the canonical accounts of financial innovation (most

importantly, Ross (1976) and Allen and Gale (1994)), innovation is driven by investor demand

for a particular set of cash flows. Astute intermediaries recognize this demand and engineer

securities with the desired characteristics. By splitting up or combining cash flows of existing

securities, the intermediaries can create profits (at least in the short run) for themselves and

increase social welfare. Described in this way, the financial innovation process seems little

different from Apple’s decision to introduce a tablet which combined features of a laptop and a

cell phone, or Tropicana’s introduction of orange juice with added calcium.



       But these similarities between financial and other forms of innovation can be deceptive.

In this section, we posit three sets of issues that make the study of financial innovation

particularly challenging:



      The financial system is highly interconnected. As a result, a financial innovation is likely

       to generate a complex web of externalities, both positive and negative. Therefore,

       assessing the social consequences of financial innovation can be very challenging.

      Financial innovations are highly dynamic. As an innovation diffuses from pioneering

       adopters to more general users, these products frequently change in their underlying

       structure, the way that they are marketed, and how they are used. These transformations

       mean that the consequences of an innovation may change over time.

      While certainly many forms of innovation, such as pharmaceuticals, are subject to

       regulation, the regulation of new financial products and services is particularly complex


                                               10
          and dynamic, and new financial reform has an uncertain impact on the pace and direction

          of financial innovation.



a) The challenge measuring social welfare



          Since the pioneering work of Trajtenberg (1990), economists have understood that the

benefits of innovation can be empirically quantified. These studies have focused on products

whose features can be reduced to a relatively modest number of attributes and price. Each

innovation can then be understood as offering a different combination of attributes. Often within

the context of a discrete choice model, economists then use data on actual attributes, prices, and

sales to estimate the underlying demand and utility functions of the representative consumer. The

benefits from an innovation can then be quantified as the increase in social welfare associated

with having the new set of choices compared to the ones available in the earlier period.1 At least

in theory, such a framework would allow one to assess whether innovations tend to significantly

boost social welfare, or whether much of the spending on new product development is socially

wasteful, motivated instead by the rent-seeking behavior and the desire to steal market share

from competitors as Dasgupta and Stiglitz (1980) suggest.



          To be sure, many innovations give rise to externalities that would resist this type of

straightforward analysis. For instance, the widespread diffusion of cellular telephones and text

1
    Other important papers in the literature on the quantification of the economic benefits of

innovations and new goods more generally include Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1995),

Bresnahan (1986), Hausman (1997), and Petrin (2002).

                                                  11
messaging has led by many accounts to an increase in automobile accidents caused by distracted

drivers—and had led to regulation to prohibit these uses of the innovations. Similarly, medical

advances that prolong the lives of cancer patients may have the consequence of putting greater

financial pressures on Social Security and Medicare as the longevity (and associated medical

costs) of senior citizens increase.



       The particular challenge associated with assessing the social impact of financial

innovation lies in the fact that so many of its consequences are in the form of externalities. On

the positive side of the ledger, many financial innovations address broad social needs. For

example, venture capitalists provide a blend of money and expertise to help young firms

succeed; credit cards extend credit but also simplify the process of purchasing goods and

services. Moreover, in many instances, the decisions of early adopters have important

consequences for others. For instance, as the pool of mutual funds has proliferated and funds

have grown, upfront and annual fees associated with these products have generally fallen. As a

result, the decision to partake of a financial innovation changes the attractiveness of the

innovation for others.



       But at the same time, in many instances these innovations have consequences to non-

transacting parties which may be less desirable. To return to the subject of Krugman’s quote

earlier, the collapse in the markets for many of the complex securities based on mortgages

contributed to a dramatic reduction in credit availability throughout the economy. Thus, these

innovations indirectly may have led to numerous small businesses facing much higher interest

rates or being unable to access credit at all, even though they had no involvement with the


                                               12
mortgage market. Even “well-meaning” innovations, such as process innovations that reduced

the costs and effort of refinancing mortgages can lead to unintended consequences in the

economy, a point emphasized by Khandani, Lo, and Merton (2009).



       These detrimental effects are frequently referred to as “systemic risk.” One immediate

challenge is that systemic risk itself is a poorly defined notion. This confusion is captured by the

following quote from Alan Greenspan (1995):



       It would be useful to central banks to be able to measure systemic risk accurately, but its

       very definition is still somewhat unsettled. It is generally agreed that systemic risk

       represents a propensity for some sort of significant financial system disruption, … (but)

       until we have a common theoretical paradigm for the causes of systemic stress, any

       consensus of how to measure systemic risk will be difficult to achieve.



       Schwarcz (2008), after compiling the various definitions that have been used in policy

circles, suggests the following definition:



       the risk that (i) an economic shock such as market or institutional failure triggers (through

       a panic or otherwise) either (X) the failure of a chain of markets or institutions or (Y) a

       chain of significant losses to financial institutions, (ii) resulting in increases in the cost of

       capital or decreases in its availability, often evidenced by substantial financial-market

       price volatility.




                                                  13
       Given the interconnected nature of the financial system, it would be surprising if the most

widely adopted financial innovations did not contribute to systematic risk as defined above, as

well as “systemic benefits.” When the bulk of the social impact is through positive and negative

externalities, it is unclear how one should seek to assess welfare consequences of innovations.



b) The challenge of dynamic impacts



       The word “innovation” is used by economists to indicate a change, and financial

innovation must be understood as part of a process of change. Financial innovations—especially

systemically important ones—demonstrate two related dynamic features: the innovation spiral

and a change in the how products are used over time.



       Merton (1992) coined the term “innovation spiral” to describe the process whereby one

financial innovation begets the next. Sometimes this spiral has one successful innovation

providing the raw material, or building blocks, for another. For example, the innovation of a

futures market in a particular commodity can allow financial engineers to build specialized and

more complex over-the-counter (OTC) products using dynamic trading strategies. An innovation

need not be successful, however, to be part of the innovation spiral. Tufano (1995) and Mason,

Merton, Perold and Tufano (1995) describe a sequence of financial innovations, most of which

were unsuccessful, but nonetheless provided information that led to a subsequent wave of newer

products. Persons and Warther (1997) formally model this spiral process. The innovation spiral

is not unique to financial innovations; elsewhere one innovation can produce follow-on effects

including lowering the barriers to subsequent innovation. For example, in electronics,


                                               14
semiconductor innovations have made possible a host of products ranging from personal

computers to industrial applications to handheld devices. Similarly, the technology developed for

unsuccessful pioneering personal digital assistants, such as Go’s Pen Operating System and

Apple’s Newton, ultimately led to the success of the BlackBerry and iPhone. Once one

acknowledges the existence of an innovation spiral, one must recognize that actions that might

discourage a certain innovation could have implications for the development of subsequent

innovations.



       Much of the research on innovation deals with the dynamics of the adoption process, i.e.,

how a new product, process or service is taken up, first by innovators, then early adopters, early

majority, late majority and laggards. This adoption process is typically characterized by an S-

curve (or logistic function) which plots the number of adopters as a function of time. There is a

substantial body of work on adoption rates, but Rogers (1962) is generally credited with

codifying and advancing this literature. An S-curve adoption pattern suggests that, almost by

definition, an innovation is unlikely to have economy-wide or systemic implications until it has

been adopted fairly widely.



       Most of the work on the diffusion of innovations deals with the characteristics of the

population of potential adopters and of the actual adopters. Generally, more knowledgeable,

sophisticated and risk-taking individuals adopt innovations earlier. Generalizing across the

landscape of innovations in general (not just financial breakthroughs), Rogers highlights five

types of adopters:




                                               15
      Innovators, the initial ones to take up the innovation. These are typically younger, better

       educated, and have higher social status than later adopters.

      Early adopters, who often serve as opinion leaders in shaping others’ decision to adopt

       the product.

      The early majority, who adopt an innovation after a varying time lag.

      The late majority, who approach innovations with skepticism and wait until most of

       society has adopted the innovation.

      The laggards, who are the last to adopt an innovation, and tend to be older and of lower

       social status and with limited resources.



The mechanisms behind these broad patterns have attracted extensive research in subsequent

years. For instance, Coleman, Katz and Menzel (1966) highlighted how these patterns are driven

by direct social ties between potential adopters; Burt (1987) has emphasized more diffuse

connections with third parties; and Granovetter (1978) explained many of the differences

because of differing psychological thresholds.



       Not only do the identities of adopters change over time, but sometimes the way in which

products are used can evolve. Early adopters may not only be more aware of the features—and

limitations—of new products, but use them differently. For example, it is typically difficult to

get an issuer and set of investors to be the first to issue and buy a new security. These innovation

partners are often informally part of the product development process, consulted by the bankers

who are trying to bring the product to market. They would typically be much more informed

about the strengths and weaknesses of a product than a late majority adopter, who might take a


                                                   16
product’s widespread usage to signal its lack of flaws. For example, in litigations involving

“failed” financial products, it seems anecdotally that later adopters are more likely to sue,

claiming that they were unaware of the potential flaws with the product, sometimes even

claiming they never even read the security documents. (Consistent with these claims, Lerner

(2010) shows that those who litigate patented financial innovations are disproportionately

smaller, more marginal firms, with less financial resources. Similarly, studies of litigation of new

securities offerings suggest that much of the litigation is initiated by relatively unsophisticated

individual investors (Alexander (1991).)



       This challenge is captured in a model of financial innovation by Gennaioli, Shleifer, and

Vishny (2010). The paper argues that a financial innovation can address the demand for clients

for a particular set of cash flows and thus be socially beneficial. But they suggest that the risks

associated with these new products’ cash flows may be systematically underestimated by these

investors. In this case, they show, there may be excessive issuance of novel securities by

financial institutions. Once the investors suddenly realize these risks, there will be an exodus

back to traditional, safer products. In this way, financial innovation can add to the fragility of the

overall financial system.



       Given the importance of externalities in financial innovation, the changing awareness of

adopters may have broad implications. While some late adopters of smart-phones might use only

a portion of their newest gadget’s technology, the social costs of their ignorance might be

minimal. However, a late adopting, unsophisticated investor or borrower using a new complex

instrument might find himself with an exposure or liability that sophisticated earlier adopters


                                                 17
fully appreciated. Understanding the dynamics of adoption provides some insight into the

potential for financial innovations to give rise to externalities and systemic risks. We may need

to understand especially the processes whereby innovations become widely accepted—by whom

and for what purpose—to understand systemic risks.



       An appreciation of the innovation spiral and the diffusion processes for financial

innovations highlights the challenges facing much traditional empirical work on financial

innovation.    First, to understand social welfare, it is problematic to study a single financial

innovation out of context, as any one innovation—whether successful or not—will tend to

influence the path of future innovations.      Second, most empirical studies, but especially

structured interventions like randomized control trials, document the experiences of early

adopters, and the way in which the product is used by these sophisticated adopters. However,

the experiences of later adopters—and the ways in which innovations are adapted for multiple

uses as they are diffused more broadly—may give greater clues as to the social welfare

implications of financial innovations.    Finally, the long time spans over which financial

innovations diffuse and the innovation spiral that an initial innovation often engenders suggest

that the researcher needs an extended time frame, or an historical approach to studying financial

innovations.



c) The interaction between regulation and innovation



       The relationship between financial innovation and regulation is complex. There has been

much written about regulation (and taxes) as being important stimuli for financial innovation.


                                               18
Miller (1986) expounds on this link at some length, and it is fairly easy to find financial products

whose origins can be tied, at least in part, to regulations or taxes. For example, in the nineteenth

century, the innovation of low-par stock was an outgrowth of state securities taxes (Tufano

(1995)). In the 1980s, the growth—and preferred stock form—of various adjustable rate products

was stimulated by inter-corporate dividend deduction rules. More recently, bank capital rules

have encouraged the creation or adaptation of a variety of capital securities.



       Not only does regulation give rise to certain innovations, but then regulators need to

“catch up” with the products, in a cat-and-mouse process that Kane (1977) labels the regulatory

dialectic. Innovators look for opportunities that exploit regulatory gaps, regulators impose new

regulations, and each new regulation gives rise to new opportunities for more innovation. In this

back and forth, the regulatory system can be at a disadvantage for a variety of reasons. First,

many regulatory bodies have mandates that are defined by product or by institution, rather than

by function. For example, consider just a few of the products that deliver equity-index exposure:

baskets of stocks, index funds, exchange-traded funds (ETFs), futures contracts, index-linked

annuities, indexed-linked certificates of deposit, and various structured notes. Suppose that one

wanted to regulate equity exposures broadly. One would have to coordinate activities between

the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), Commodity Futures Trading Commission,

banking regulators, and state insurance regulators for just a start. Without broad mandates or

functional jurisdictions, opportunities for regulatory arbitrage through innovation will occur.

Second, even a well-staffed, reasonably well paid, and highly talented regulatory agency is up

against a world of potential entrepreneurs and innovators. Inevitably, regulation will tend to react

to innovations, typically with a lag. From the perspective of systemic risk, this responsive


                                                19
approach may be appropriate, as innovations early in their S-curve adoptions are unlikely to pose

economy-wide risks, and are probably bought and sold by the more sophisticated set of adopters.




III.   A counterfactual approach to studying the social welfare implications of systemic

       financial innovations



       In the wake of the events of the past few years, there have been numerous calls to limit or

even ban financial innovation. For example, in a 2009 Business Week article entitled “Financial

Innovation under Fire,” Coy notes:



       [S]ome economists go further and argue that any financial innovation is guilty until

       proven innocent. Former International Monetary Fund chief economist Simon Johnson

       and James Kwak, authors of the popular Baseline Scenario blog, wrote in the summer

       issue of the journal Democracy that innovation often generates unproductive or even

       destructive transactions. “The presumption should be that innovation in financial

       products is costly…and should have to justify itself against those costs,” they wrote.



In April 2009, Fed Chairman Bernanke, while defending financial innovation, noted its

precarious state in public debates:



       The concept of financial innovation, it seems, has fallen on hard times. Subprime

       mortgage loans, credit default swaps, structured investment vehicles, and other more-


                                               20
         recently developed financial products have become emblematic of our present financial

         crisis. Indeed, innovation, once held up as the solution, is now more often than not

         perceived as the problem.2



An interesting sign of the mood is the Security and Exchange Commission’s creation of the first

new division in 30 years, a Division of Risk, Strategy, and Financial Innovation, implicitly

joining “financial innovation” and “risk.”3



         Against this chorus of anti-innovation rhetoric, it is important to carry out rigorous

scholarly research to establish the social costs and benefits of financial innovation. Given the

large number of financial innovations, it is important to come up with a research strategy that can

address the important policy issues of the day. These debates seem to be of various forms:

financial innovations’ potential to give rise to systemic risks; financial innovations’ potential to

harm consumers; and “wasteful” use of private resources by financial innovators in rent-seeking

behavior. Against this potential list of costs we must analyze innovation’s benefits, both direct

and indirect.



         In this article, we focus on the systemic risks and benefits imposed by financial

innovations. If an innovation is to have system-wide implications, it must be broadly adopted.

This research strategy permits us to focus on widely adopted innovations, rather than narrowly

adopted ones or others which were never or barely adopted by users. To study potentially

2
    http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20090417a.htm.
3
    http://www.sec.gov/news/press/2009/2009-199.htm.

                                                21
wasteful rent-seeking or some aspects of consumer damage, one would need to include these

latter innovations, but they strike us as not being the likely locus of systemic risks or benefits.



   How do we define a “systemically important” or “broadly adopted” financial innovation? We

use top-down data on the economy to identify these innovations. For example, if one studies the

balance sheet of the US household over the past 60 years, a number of striking trends emerge, in

particular the economic importance of money market mutual funds, mutual funds more

generally, and retirement plans. Clearly, these are innovations that were adopted widely in the

post-war period.



   Then, for a subset of these innovations, we detail the elements of their welfare implications.

Using a technique of historians, we not only detail actual outcomes, but also discuss

counterfactual histories: What would the economy have been like had this innovation not been

invented or popularized? While this method is inherently judgmental, it frames a discussion or

debate that attempts to tease out not only the direct costs and benefits, but also the externalities—

both positive and negative—associated with each innovation. In the section below, we provide

the logic of our selection of these case studies of systemic innovations and a brief primer on the

methods of counterfactual history.



a) Methodology: Criteria for selection of case studies and the counterfactual approach



       We need a disciplined way to scan the economy to select our case studies. To do this, we

consider the major changes in the way that financial functions are delivered to each of the major


                                                  22
non-governmental sectors in the economy. The sectors are (a) households, (b) non-financial

corporations, (c) financial firms, and (d) public entities. As noted above, the functions include six

activities: (a) pooling, (b) payments, (c) moving funds across time and space, (d) managing risk,

(e) resolving information asymmetries, and (f) extracting information from markets. Our primary

frame of reference for our exercise is the United States in the post-war period.


                               Households     Non-financial firms        Financial firms
Pooling                       Mutual funds    Venture capital and        Securitization
                              and exchange-     private equity
                               traded funds
Moving money across
time and space

Payments                      Card products

Managing risk                  Retirement          Derivatives
                                accounts

Resolving information                         Venture capital and
asymmetries                                     private equity

Extracting information                                                     Derivatives
from markets


       We focus on three case studies: venture capital and private equity, mutual funds and

exchange-traded funds, and securitization. This allows us to focus on three of the functions and

three of the sectors. In addition, the selection of these case studies suggests the strengths and

weaknesses of a counterfactual approach, as the first two case studies are more amenable to this

approach than is the third.



       Most economic analyses attempt to measure outcomes of interventions relative to some

alternative. We typically exploit cross-sectional and time-series variation—often with large-


                                                 23
sample data—to tease out the relative effects of some intervention or innovation. We use

control/treatment approaches or randomized control trials to minimize noise and identify

phenomena. These methods work well when we have large samples or natural experiments.



       Unfortunately, systemic innovations do not lend themselves well to these methods.

Because they are systemic, it is difficult to find adequate “control” states. Pre/post tests are

problematic because innovations are adopted over long periods of time. These tests are also

difficult because early adopters may not be representative of late adopters—and the way the

product is used may vary over time. Randomized control trials do not tend to capture the

systemic effects when products are broadly adopted. This is not to say that econometric methods

are not useful in understanding financial impacts, but they have meaningful limits, and that

complementary approaches can be valuable.



       A meaningful alternative is to adopt a historical approach to understanding systemic

innovations that span years or decades. There are a number of excellent studies of financial

history and economic history, with a few that specialize in financial innovation. Goetzmann and

Rouwenhorst’s edited volume (2005) contains a set of 19 essays on particular innovations,

including the invention of interest in Sumerian Loans, the creation of Roman Shares, the origins

of paper money in China, Dutch perpetuities, modern European annuities, inflation indexed

bonds in early America, and the first Eurobonds in the nineteenth century. Davis’ (1994) book,

A History of Money, spans 3000 BC to the 20th Century. With this wide sweep, it covers a

number of innovations in its scope. Beyond documenting the various forms of instruments

created over time, Davis traces the evolution of financial institutions, for example, the working


                                               24
class financial institutions of friendly societies, cooperatives, building societies in Europe in the

nineteenth century. Kindleberger (1984), Cameron et al (1967), and Cameron (1972) are other

fine examples of centuries-long, multi-country historical studies of the evolution of financial

systems. Cameron, et al. (1972), studying banking in the early stages of industrialization, note

that financial innovation is “necessary for the realization of (technical innovation)” and in

combination can bring achieve “the pooling of risks and economies of scale in finance as well as

in manufacture.”      However, the role of some innovations in creating financial crises is

highlighted in Kindleberger (1984, p. 270):



       Time and again in these pages it has been stressed that when the macroeconomic system

       is constrained by a tight supply of money, it creates more, at least for a time. Shortage of

       gold and silver has lead to substitution of copper, pepper, salt, that is, to more primitive

       commodity monies, or to more sophisticated substitutes such as various forms of paper

       (and plastic): bank money, bank notes, bills of exchange, especially chains of bills of

       exchange, bank deposits, open-book credits, credit cards, certificates of deposit, Euro-

       currencies and so on.



In his analysis, these expansions of the money supply sometimes lead to overextension, distress,

speculation, and at times panics and crashes.



       While a historical approach has the advantage of intensely studying phenomena, it may

not address relative performance implications, unless one adopts a comparative historical

approach, for example comparing one period or country to another. Unfortunately, however,


                                                 25
these comparisons often suffer from a great deal of endogeneity that makes interpretation

difficult. For example, while we could compare economies with considerable financial

innovation to those less innovative, it is highly unlikely that these comparisons would be ceteris

paribus. Financial innovation, and certainly financial development more generally, is not

unrelated to economic development, so these types of comparisons are problematic. For

example, the adoption of mutual funds is related to a number of metrics of financial development

and to the state of legal institutions (Khorana, Servaes and Tufano, 2005).



       Scholars have used various approaches to deal with these inevitable issues by studying

counterfactual or virtual histories. In essence a counterfactual approach requires the analyst to

posit “what would have happened if…had happened (or not happened).” This method has been

used—and debated—by historians, economic historians, political scientists, sociologists and

philosophers. For reviews, see, for example, Ferguson (1997, chapter 1), Cowan and Foray

(2002), Sylvan and Majeski (1998), Bunzl (2004), Tetlock and Lebow (2001). While dismissed

by some as a “mere parlour game” (Carr 1987), and referred to in scatological terms by others

(see ref. in Ferguson 1999), the method has been used extensively.



       Counterfactual reasoning seems to have been adopted most extensively in international

relations and politics. For example, Ferguson (1999) is a collection of papers which study a

variety of counterfactuals: “What if Charles I had avoided the Civil War? What if there had been

no American Revolution? What if Germany had invaded Britain in May 1940?” Perhaps the

most well known example of the method (among economists) is Fogel’s groundbreaking 1964

book Railroad and American Economic Growth: Essays in Econometric History. The book


                                                26
studies the impact of the railroads by trying to assess how the economy would have developed in

their absence, as noted in Fogel’s preface:



   The pages that follow contain a critical evaluation of the proposition that railroads were

   indispensible to American economic growth during the nineteenth century…(I) estimate the

   amount by which production possibilities of the nation would have been reduced if

   agricultural commodities could not have been shipped by railroads.



       Fogel combines counterfactual reasoning with empirical estimates of development. He

compares observed GDP increases with three counterfactuals: no railroads at all, an extension of

internal navigation (canals), and the improvement of country roads. In essence, Fogel’s work

demonstrates the core elements of counterfactual analysis. First, he identifies an important topic

where the facts do not permit the type of replicability that underscores much of scientific inquiry.

Second, he identifies a set of alternative paths of history. Subsequent work has differentiated

between “miracle worlds” and “plausible worlds,” based on the likelihood of the alternative to

have played out. In Fogel’s examples, he did not posit air travel (a miracle, to be sure in the 19th

century), but rather quite plausible alternative transportation developments. Finally, Fogel

rigorously attempts to analyze the economic implications of these alternatives using a well-

defined metric.



       Fogel was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1993 for having given birth to cliometrics or new

economic history. In its award, the Nobel committee made clear the importance of Fogel’s

pioneering of the counterfactual approach:


                                                27
         Robert W. Fogel’s scientific breakthrough was his book (1964) on the role of the

         railways in the American economy. Joseph Schumpeter and Walt W. Rostow had earlier,

         with general agreement, asserted that modern economic growth was due to certain

         important discoveries having played a vital role in development. Fogel tested this

         hypothesis with extraordinary exactitude, and rejected it. The sum of many specific

         technical changes, rather than a few great innovations, determined the economic

         development. We find it intuitively plausible that the great transport systems play a

         decisive role in development. Fogel constructed a hypothetical alternative, a so called

         counterfactual historiography; that is he compared the actual course of events with the

         hypothetical to allow a judgment of the importance of the railways. He found that they

         were not absolutely necessary in explaining economic development and that their effect

         on the growth of GNP was less than three per cent. Few books on the subject of economic

         history have made such an impression as Fogel’s. His use of counterfactual arguments

         and cost-benefit analysis made him an innovator of economic historical methodology.4



         Fogel’s use of counterfactual arguments flew in the face of “common sense” and

demonstrated the power of this method. Just as the innovation of railroads gave rise to some

changes in the economy, but perhaps not as much as originally thought, financial innovations are

long-lived phenomena that can substantially alter the economic landscape—but perhaps not as

much as originally thought. We use counterfactual reasoning and methods to structure our

exploration of the social consequences of these innovations. Our goal is not to definitively

determine whether recent financial innovations were or were not socially valuable. Rather, we



4
    Taken from http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/economics/laureates/1993/press.html.
                                                28
lay out an approach to make progress on this problem—and challenge others to use this approach

systemically. Our three case studies provide some factual background on the innovations, then

lay out—for debate—counterfactual histories and thoughts about the implications of each. A full

analysis, a la Fogel, of the counterfactual history of each innovation would be beyond the scope

of this review paper.



       While we adopt this method as a complement to existing historical, experimental, and

econometric methods, we acknowledge the many strong and legitimate criticisms of it, and of

Fogel’s work. There are important, and quite specific, critiques of the calculations employed by

Fogel by Nerlove (1966), McClelland (1968), David (1969), among others.               In particular,

David’s (1969) critique focuses on problems caused by inadequate consideration of

complementaries (e.g., passenger transportation or changes in inventories to reflect different

transport speeds), path-dependent adoption processes (e.g., learning effects or returns to scale),

finding the correct scaled metric for measuring social benefits, or the challenge of taking a partial

(vs. general) equilibrium approach. This latter general point lies at the heart of the criticism—

and appeal—of counterfactual analysis, as summarized by Goldin (1995):



    The notion of a counterfactual was hard for many historians to swallow. It involved the

    hypothetical removal of the largest enterprise at the time, the first big business in America,

    one of the most productive sectors, and some of the wealthiest Americans, to mention just a

    few parts of the mental experiment. But, noted Fogel, those who were making claims about

    the indispensability of the railroad were implicitly invoking precisely this experiment. He

    was merely making the claim explicit and subjecting it to hard evidence.


                                                 29
In some sense, the instances where counterfactual analysis is most problematic—where an

innovation is intrinsically bound up with the rest of the economy for decades—are precisely

those instances where it is useful to complement existing research with this more provocative

method. A full quantification of the social welfare consequences of removing railroads (or

mutual funds or venture capital) from the economy is daunting, but the audacity of asking the

question forces our profession to try to address the many issues that bedeviled Fogel and his

critics. If this method provokes debate and criticism—and additional work—we will have

achieved some of our objectives, moving the discussion beyond simplistic notions about

financial innovation.



b) Venture capital and private equity



   i. A brief history



       Long before the creation of the venture capital and private equity industry, fast-growing

firms were able to raise financing. Banks provided debt in the form of loans, and for more long-

run, riskier investments, wealthy individuals provided equity.



       But by the time of the Great Depression of the 1930s, there was a widespread perception

that the existing ways of financing fast-growing young firms were inadequate. Not only were

many promising companies going unfunded, but investors with high net worth frequently did not

have the time or skills to work with young firms to address glaring management deficiencies.

Nor were the alternatives set up by the Roosevelt administration during the New Deal—such as


                                               30
the Reconstruction Finance Corporation—seen as satisfactory. The rigidity of the loan evaluation

criteria, the extensive red-tape associated with the award process, and the fears of political

interference and regulations all suggested a need for an alternative.



       The first formal venture capital firm was established with both private and social returns

in mind. American Research and Development (ARD) grew out of the concerns that the United

States, having been pushed out of the depression by the stimulus of wartime spending by the

federal government, would soon revert to economic lethargy when the war ended. In October

1945, Ralph Flanders, then head of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, argued that if this

danger was to be addressed, a new enterprise was needed, with the goal of financing new

businesses. He argued that the enterprise would not only need to be far more systematic in

“selecting the most attractive possibilities and spreading the risk” than most individual investors

had been, but would need to tap into the nation’s “great accumulation of fiduciary funds” (i.e.,

pension funds and other institutional capital) if it was to be successful in the long term.



       ARD was formed a year later to try to realize this vision. Flanders recruited a number of

civic and business leaders to join in the effort, including MIT president Karl Compton. But the

day-to-day management of the fund fell on the shoulders of Harvard Business School professor

Georges F. Doriot. ARD in its communications emphasized that its goal was to fund and aid new

companies in order to generate “an increased standard of living for the American people.”



       Flanders, Doriot, and their contemporaries realized that the financing of young, growing,

and restructuring companies was a risky business. These information problems made it difficult


                                                 31
to assess these companies and permitted opportunistic behavior by entrepreneurs after the

financing was received. These risks had deterred investors from providing capital to these firms.



       To illustrate these problems, if the firm raises equity from outside investors, the manager

has an incentive to engage in wasteful expenditures (e.g., lavish offices) because he may benefit

disproportionately from these but does not bear their entire cost. Similarly, if the firm raises debt,

the manager may increase risk to undesirable levels. Because providers of capital recognize these

problems, outside investors demand a higher rate of return than would be the case if the funds

were internally generated. Additional problems may appear in the types of more mature

companies in which private equity firms invest. For instance, entrepreneurs might invest in

strategies or projects that have high personal returns but low expected monetary payoffs to

shareholders.



       Even if the manager wants to maximize firm value, information gaps may make raising

external capital more expensive or even preclude it entirely. Equity offerings of companies may

be associated with a “lemons” problem: that is, if the manager is better informed about the

company’s investment opportunities and acts in the interest of current shareholders, then he will

only issue new shares when the company’s stock is overvalued. Indeed, numerous studies have

documented that stock prices decline upon the announcement of equity issues, largely because of

the negative signal sent to the market. This “lemons” problem leads investors to be less willing

to invest at attractive valuations in young or restructuring companies, or even to invest at all.




                                                 32
         ARD established an approach to addressing these problems that venture capital and

private equity groups have followed ever since. First, by intensively scrutinizing companies

before providing capital, and only funding a small fraction of those seeking funds, they could

alleviate some of the information gaps and reduce capital constraints. Second, they employed a

variety of tools that allowed them to monitor and control firms after the transactions. These

included the use of convertible securities with powerful control rights, the syndication and

staging of investments, the provision of oversight through formal board seats and information

rights, the incentivization of management through extensive equity holdings, and informal

coaching of management. Finally, there was a real effort to certify the funded entrepreneurs as

being different from their peers, which facilitated their ability to enter into alliances, get access

to investment bankers, and so forth. The tools that venture capital and private equity investors

use in this difficult environment enable companies ultimately to receive the financing that they

cannot raise from other sources.



         The activity in the private equity industry increased dramatically in late 1970s and early

1980s. Industry observers attributed much of the shift to the U.S. Department of Labor’s

clarification of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act’s “prudent man” rule in 1979.

Prior to this year, the legislation limited the ability of pension funds to invest substantial amounts

of money into venture capital or other high-risk asset classes. The Department of Labor’s

clarification of the rule explicitly allowed pension managers to invest in high-risk assets,

including private equity. Numerous specialized funds—concentrating in areas such as leveraged

buyouts, mezzanine transactions and such hybrids as venture leasing—sprang up during these

years.


                                                 33
       The subsequent years saw both very good and trying times for private equity investors.

On the one hand, the 1980s saw venture capitalists back many of the most successful high-

technology companies, including Cisco Systems, Genentech, Microsoft, and Sun Microsystems.

Numerous successful buyouts—such as Avis, Beatrice, Dr. Pepper, Gibson Greetings, and

McCall Pattern—garnered considerable public attention during that period. At the same time,

commitments to the private equity industry during this decade were very uneven. The annual

flow of money into venture capital funds increased by a factor of ten during the first half of the

1980s, but steadily declined from 1987 through 1991. Buyouts underwent an even more dramatic

rise through the 1980s, followed by a precipitous fall at the end of the decade.



       Much of this pattern was driven by the changing fortunes of private equity investments.

Returns on venture capital funds had declined sharply in the mid-1980s after being exceedingly

attractive in the 1970s. This fall was apparently triggered by overinvestment in a few industries,

such as computer hardware, and the entry of many inexperienced venture capitalists. Buyout

returns underwent a similar decline in the late 1980s, due in large part to the increased

competition between groups for transactions” Kaplan and Stein (1993) documented that of the 66

largest buyouts completed during the market peak (between 1986 and 1988), 38 percent

experienced financial distress, which they define as default or an actual or attempted

restructuring of debt obligations due to difficulties in making payments, and 27 percent actually

did default on debt repayments, often in conjunction with a Chapter 11 filing. Kaplan and Schoar

(2005) and other papers provide indirect supporting evidence, showing that the performance of

both venture and private equity funds is negatively correlated with inflows into these funds.


                                                34
Funds raised during periods of high capital inflows—which are typically associated with market

peaks—perform far worse than their peers.



   The 1990s and 2000s saw these patterns repeated on an unprecedented scale. The second half

of the 1990s saw dramatic growth and excellent returns in venture capital investments; the 2000s

saw tremendous growth of private equity funds. This recovery was triggered by several factors.

The exit of many inexperienced investors after the earlier collapse ensured that the remaining

groups faced less competition for transactions. The healthy market for initial public offerings

during much of 1990s meant that it was easier for venture funds to exit transactions, leading to

high returns. Meanwhile, the extent of technological innovation—particularly in information

technology-related industries—created extraordinary opportunities for venture capitalists. The

mid-2000s saw unprecedented availability of debt on favorable terms, which enabled buyout

groups to highly leverage firms and make high returns likely. New capital commitments to both

venture and buyout funds rose in response to these changing circumstances, increasing to record

levels. Once the enabling condition deteriorated, the level of fundraising and investment dropped

sharply. Funds were left with large numbers of transactions which could not be exited, and

investors faced the certainty of a sharp drop in returns.



   ii. The broader social impact: Venture capital



       Clearly, the innovations of venture capital and private equity funds exert a major impact

on the fates of individual companies. But does all this fundraising and investing influence the

overall economic landscape as well? We will look at evidence regarding venture capital first, and


                                                 35
then private equity funds. One caveat should be noted upfront: all these studies examine the last

three decades, with a particular emphasis on the experience of the United States, a time and place

that are certainly not representative of the entirety of economic history. There is little choice,

however, given the relative youth of these intermediaries and the lack of data on earlier,

pioneering funds.



       To assess this question, we can look at studies of the experience of the market with the

most developed and seasoned venture capital industry, the United States. Despite the fact that

venture activity is particularly well developed in this nation, the reader might be skeptical as to

whether this activity would noticeably impact innovation: for most of past three decades,

investments made by the entire venture capital sector totaled less than the research-and-

development and capital-expenditure budgets of large, individual companies such as IBM,

General Motors, or Merck.



       One way to explore this question is to examine the impact of venture investing on wealth,

jobs, and other financial measures across a variety of industries. Though it would be useful to

track the fate of every venture capital-financed company and find out where the innovation or

technology ended up, in reality only those companies that have gone public can be tracked.

Consistent information on venture-backed firms that were acquired or went out of business

simply doesn’t exist. Moreover, investments in companies that eventually go public yield much

higher returns than support given to firms that get acquired or remain privately held.




                                                36
        These firms have had an unmistakable effect on the U.S. economy. In late 2008, 895

firms were publicly traded on U.S. markets after receiving their private financing from venture

capitalists (this does not include the firms that went public, but were subsequently acquired or

delisted). One way to assess the overall impact of the venture capital industry is to look at the

economic “weight” of venture-backed companies in the context of the larger economy.5 By late

2008, venture-backed firms that had gone public made up over thirteen percent of the total

number of public firms in existence in the United States at that time. And of the total market

value of public firms ($28 trillion), venture-backed companies came in at $2.4 trillion—8.4

percent.



        Venture-funded firms also made up over 4 percent (nearly $1 trillion dollars) of total

sales ($22 trillion) of all U.S. public firms at the time. Contrary to the general perception that

venture-supported companies are not profitable, operating income margins for these companies

hit an average of 6.8 percent—close to the average public-company profit margin of 7.1 percent.

Finally, those public firms supported by venture funding employed 6 percent of the total public-

company workforce—most of these jobs high-salaried, skilled positions in the technology sector.

Clearly, venture investing fuels a substantial portion of the U.S. economy.




5
    This analysis is based on the authors’ tabulation of unpublished data from SDC Venture

Economics, with supplemental information from Compustat and the Center for Research into

Securities Prices (CRSP) databases.


                                                37
        This impact is quite modest in industries dominated by mature companies—such as the

manufacturing industries. But contrast those industries with highly innovative ones, and the

picture looks completely different. For example, companies in the computer software and

hardware industry that received venture backing during their gestation as private firms

represented more than 75 percent of the software industry’s value. Venture-financed firms also

play a central role in the biotechnology, computer services, and semiconductor industries. In

recent years, the scope of venture groups’ activity has been expanding rapidly in the critical

energy and environmental field, though the impact of these investments remains to be seen.

Presumably, these are industries where the externalities generated by new activity are the

greatest.



        It might be thought that it would be not difficult to address the question of the impact of

venture capital on innovation in a more rigorous manner. For instance, one could seek to explain

across industries and time whether, controlling for R&D spending, venture capital funding has an

impact on various measures of innovation. But even a simple model of the relationship between

venture capital, R&D, and innovation suggests that this approach is likely to give misleading

estimates.



        This is because both venture funding and innovation could be positively related to a third

unobserved factor, the arrival of technological opportunities. Thus, there could be more

innovation at times that there was more venture capital, not because the venture capital caused

the innovation, but rather because the venture capitalists reacted to some fundamental




                                                38
technological shock which was sure to lead to more innovation. To date, only a handful of papers

have attempted to address these challenging issues.



       The first of these papers, by Hellmann and Puri (2002), examines a sample of 170

recently formed firms in Silicon Valley, including both venture-backed and non-venture firms.

Using questionnaire responses, they find evidence that venture capital financing is related to

product market strategies and outcomes of startups. They find that firms that are pursuing what

they term an innovator strategy (a classification based on the content analysis of survey

responses) are significantly more likely and faster to obtain venture capital. The presence of a

venture capitalist is also associated with a significant reduction in the time taken to bring a

product to market, especially for innovators (probably because these firms can focus more on

innovating and less on raising money). Furthermore, firms are more likely to list obtaining

venture capital as a significant milestone in the lifecycle of the company as compared to other

financing events. There seems to be a link between this form of financial innovation and more

traditional product innovation.



       The results suggest significant interrelations between investor type and product market

dimensions, and a role of venture capital in encouraging innovative companies. But this does not

definitively answer the question of whether venture capitalists cause innovation. For instance, we

might observe personal injury lawyers at accident sites, handing out business cards in the hopes

of drumming up clients. But just because the lawyer is at the scene of the car crash does not

mean that he caused the crash. In a similar vein, the possibility remains that more innovative




                                               39
firms choose to finance themselves with venture capital, rather than venture capital causing firms

to be more innovative.



       Kortum and Lerner (2000) visit the same question. Here, the study looks at the aggregate

level: did the participation of venture capitalists in any given industry over the past few decades

lead to more or less innovation? It might be thought that such an analysis would have the same

problem as the personal injury lawyer story above. Put another way, even if we see an increase in

venture funding and a boost in innovation, how can we be sure that one caused the other?



       The authors address these concerns about causality by looking back over the industry’s

history. In particular, as we discussed above, a major discontinuity in the recent history of the

venture capital industry was the U.S. Department of Labor’s clarification of the Employee

Retirement Income Security Act in the late 1970s, a policy shift that freed pensions to invest in

venture capital. This shift led to a sharp increase in the funds committed to venture capital. This

type of external change should allow one to figure out what the impact of venture capital was,

because it is unlikely to be related to how many or how few entrepreneurial opportunities there

were to be funded.



       Even after addressing these causality concerns, the results suggest that venture funding

does have a strong positive impact on innovation. The estimated coefficients vary according to

the techniques employed, but on average a dollar of venture capital appears to be three to four

times more potent in stimulating patenting than a dollar of traditional corporate R&D. The

estimates therefore suggest that venture capital, even though it averaged less than three percent


                                                40
of corporate R&D in the United States from 1983 to 1992, is responsible for a much greater

share—perhaps ten percent—of U.S. industrial innovations in this decade.



          A natural worry with the above analysis is that it looks at the relationship between

venture capital and patenting, not venture capital and innovation. One possible explanation is

that such funding leads entrepreneurs to protect their intellectual property with patents rather

than other mechanisms such as trade secrets. For instance, it may be that the entrepreneurs can

fool their venture investors by applying for large number of patents, even if the contributions of

many of them are very modest. If this is true, it might be inferred that the patents of venture-

backed firms would be lower quality than non-venture-backed patent filings.



          How could this question of patent quality be investigated? One possibility is to check the

number of patents that cite a particular patent.6 Higher-quality patents, it has been shown, are

cited by other innovators more often than lower-quality ones. Similarly, if venture-backed

patents are lower quality, then companies receiving venture funding would be less likely to

initiate patent-infringement litigation. (It makes no sense to pay money to engage in the costly

process of patent litigation to defend low-quality patents.)



          So, what happens when patent quality is measured with these criteria? As it happens, the

patents of venture-backed firms are more frequently cited by other patents and are more

6
    Patent applicants and examiners at the patent office include references to other relevant patents.

These serve a legal role similar to that of property markers at the edge of a land holding.



                                                  41
aggressively litigated—thus it can be concluded that they are high quality. Furthermore, the

venture-backed firms more frequently litigate trade secrets, suggesting that they are not simply

patenting frantically in lieu of relying on trade-secret protection. These findings reinforce the

notion that venture-supported firms are simply more innovative than their non-venture-supported

counterparts.



       Mollica and Zingales (2007), by way of contrast, focus on regional patterns: as a regional

unit, they use the 179 Bureau of Economic Analysis economic areas, which are composed by

counties surrounding metropolitan areas. They exploit the regional, cross-industry, and time-

series variability of venture investments in the United States to study the impact of venture

capital activity on innovation and the creation of new businesses. Again, they grapple with

causality issues by using an instrumental variable: as an instrument for the size of VC

investments, they use the size of a state pension fund’s assets. The idea is that state pension

funds are subject to political pressure to invest some of their funds in new businesses in the

states. Hence, the size of the state pension fund triggers a shift in the local supply of VC

investment, which should help identify the effect of VC on patents.



       Even with these controls, they find that VC investments have a significant positive effect

both on the production of patents and on the creation of new businesses. A one standard

deviation increase in VC investment per capita generates an increase in the number of patents of

between 4 and 15 percent. An increase of 10 percent in the volume of VC investment increases

the total number of new business by 2.5 percent.




                                               42
   iii. The broader social impact: Private equity



        Turning to private equity, in the past decade, the growth of this industry has triggered

anxiety about the impact of buyouts in markets as diverse as China, Germany, South Korea, the

United Kingdom, and the United States. This anxiety is not unreasonable. While the leveraged

buyout transactions of the 1980s were scrutinized in a number of important academic analyses,

these studies had two important limitations. First, the bulk of the older research focused on a

relatively small number of transactions involving previously publicly traded firms based in the

United States. But these represent only a very modest fraction of all buyouts. The second

limitation of the older research relates to the fact that the industry has grown and evolved

tremendously since the 1980s.



        A variety of recent research has sought to assess the consequences of private equity

investments over a more comprehensive sample. Each study has looked at a particular

consequence of the investment process.



        First, Stromberg (2008) examined the nature and outcome of the 21,397 private equity

transactions world-wide between 1970 and 2007. In the most straightforward possible outcome,

the author simply sought to understand the consequences of these transactions. The key findings

were:



       Of the exited buyout transactions, only 6 percent end in bankruptcy or financial

        restructuring. This translates into an annual rate of bankruptcy or major financial distress


                                                43
       of 1.2 percent per year. This rate is a lower default rate for U.S. corporate bond issuers,

       which has averaged 1.6 percent per year.

      Holding periods for private equity investments have increased, rather than decreased,

       over the years. 58 percent of the private equity funds’ investments are exited more than

       five years after the initial transaction. So-called “quick flips” (i.e. exits within two years

       of investment by private equity fund) account for 12 percent of deals and have also

       decreased in the last few years.



This study, of course, only examines one small fraction of what would be the consequences of

these transactions. It cannot answer the question of whether the bulk of the firms would be worse

or better off because of these transactions.



       Bloom, Sadun, and van Reenen (2009) examine management practices across 4,000 PE-

owned and other firms in a sample of medium-sized manufacturing firms in Asia, Europe, and

the U.S. using a unique double-blind management survey to score firms across 18 dimensions.

The main goal of the study is to determine whether private equity ownership, relative to other

ownership firms, is a way to achieve improved management practices within firms through the

introduction of new managers and better management practices.



       They find that private equity-owned firms are, on average, the best-managed ownership

group. PE-owned firms are significantly better managed across a wide range of management

practices than government, family, and privately owned firms. This is true even controlling for a

range of other firm characteristics such as country, industry, size, and employee skills. PE-owned


                                                44
firms are particularly strong at operations management practices, such as the adoption of modern

lean manufacturing practices, using continuous improvements and a comprehensive performance

documentation process. But because the survey is only a cross-sectional one, they cannot

determine whether the private equity groups turned these firms into better managed ones, or

simply purchased firms that were better managed in the first place.



       Lerner, Sorenson and Stromberg (2008) examine long-run investments by firms. This

work was motivated by the lively debate about the impact of private equity investors on the time

horizons of the companies in their portfolios. The private status, according to some, enables

managers to proceed with challenging restructurings without the pressure of catering to the

market’s demands for steadily growing quarterly profits, which can lead to firms focusing on

short-run investments. Others have questioned whether private equity-backed firms take a

longer-run perspective than their public peers, pointing to practices such as special dividends to

equity investors.



       In this study, one form of long-run investment was examined: investments in innovation.

Innovation offers an attractive testing ground for the issues delineated above due to various

factors. These factors include the long-run nature of R&D expenditures, their importance to the

ultimate health of firms, and the extensive body of work in the economics literature that has

documented that the characteristics of patents can be used to assess the nature of both publicly

and privately held firms’ technological innovations.




                                               45
       The key finding is that patenting levels before and after buyouts are largely unchanged.

But firms that undergo a buyout pursue more economically important innovations, as measured

by patent citations, in the years after private equity investments. In a baseline analysis, the

increase in the key proxy for economic importance is 25 percent. This results from firms

focusing on and improving their research in their technologies where the firms have historically

focused.



       In a pair of studies, Davis, et. al., (2008, 2009) have examined the impact of these

investment on employment and productivity. The former question has aroused considerable

controversy. Critics have claimed huge job losses, while private equity associations and other

groups have released several recent studies that claim positive effects of private equity on

employment. While efforts to bring data to the issue are highly welcome, many of the prior

studies have significant limitations, such as the reliance on surveys with incomplete responses,

an inability to control for employment changes in comparable firms, the failure to distinguish

cleanly between employment changes at firms backed by venture capital and firms backed by

other forms of private equity, and an inability to determine in which nation jobs are being created

and destroyed.



       The authors constructed and analyzed a dataset in order to overcome these limitations

and, at the same time, encompass a much larger set of employers and private equity transactions

from 1980 to 2005. The study utilizes the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD) at the U.S.

Bureau of the Census to follow employment at virtually all private equity-backed companies,

before and after private equity transactions.


                                                46
       Among the key results were:



      Employment grows more slowly at establishments that are bought out than at the control

       group in the year of the private equity transaction and in the two preceding years. The

       average cumulative employment difference in the two years before the transaction is

       about 4 percent in favor of controls.

      Employment declines more rapidly in bought-out establishments than in control

       establishments in the wake of private equity transactions. The average cumulative two-

       year employment difference is 7 percent in favor of controls. In the fourth and fifth years

       after the transaction, employment at private equity-backed firms mirrors that of the

       control group.

      But firms backed by private equity have 6 percent more greenfield job creation, that is, at

       new facilities in the United States, than the peer group. It appears that the job losses at

       bought-out establishments in the wake of private equity transactions are largely offset by

       substantially larger job gains in the form of greenfield job creation by these firms.



In their follow-on study, the authors focus on whether and how labor productivity changes at

U.S. manufacturing firms that were targets of private equity transactions in the United States

from 1980 to 2005. The interpretation of the patterns regarding employment changes needed to

be cautious, because we did not examine productivity changes at these establishments.




                                                47
      The authors find that while firms acquired by private equity groups had higher productivity

than their peers at the time of the original acquisition, they experienced in the two-year period

after the transaction productivity growth two percentage points more than at controls. About 72

percent of this out-performance differential reflects more effective management of existing

facilities, rather than the shut-down and opening of firms. (It should be noted that private equity

investors are much more likely to close underperforming establishments at the firms they back,

as measured by labor productivity.)



      iv. A counter-factual approach



          As noted above, one form of analysis increasingly popular among economic historians is

counterfactual reasoning. We can seek to understand the impact of venture capital and private

equity by considering the possibilities that these sectors had not developed.7



          A crucial argument offered by the functional perspective (Merton, 1992) is that in the

absence of a financial institution, other actors may evolve to play the same function. There are at

least three alternative institutions that could have played these roles of venture capitalists and

private equity investors: individual investors, governments, and integrated financial institutions.

The evidence suggests that in some respects, these entities could have substituted for the missing




7
    Another approach would be to identify the evolution of industries where these intermediaries

were not active. Because the industries where investments took place were not randomly

selected, this approach is fraught with interpretive issues.

                                                 48
institutions. But evidence also appears to suggest that these substitute institutions would have

faced significant limitations, which are likely to have reduced their effectiveness.



       As we mentioned earlier, angel investors were well established as financiers to

entrepreneurs long before the establishment of venture funds. By the last decades of the

nineteenth century and the first decades of the twentieth century, wealthy families had

established offices to manage their investments. Families such as the Phippes, Rockefellers,

Vanderbilts, and Whitneys invested in and advised a variety of business enterprises, including

the predecessor entities to AT&T, Eastern Airlines, and McDonnell Douglas.



       Lamoreaux, Levenstein, and Sokoloff (2007) examine the financing of entrepreneurial

ventures in Cleveland at the turn of twentieth century when, they argue, the region had a status

not unlike that of Silicon Valley later in the century. They document that the entrepreneurs

largely relied on personal connections to finance breakthroughs, whether through friends, family

members, or mentors from earlier employment. These investors provided a bundle of services

not unlike those of contemporary venture capitalists, including capital, certification of the new

enterprise to strategic partners and other potential investors, and sometimes protection against

exploitation by would-be opportunists.



       But other evidence suggests that angels have important limitations. Hoberg, et. al., (2009)

obtained access to a remarkable data-set of entrepreneurial firms: the legal records of clients of

Brobeck, Phleger & Harrison, a prestigious San Francisco law firm that filed for bankruptcy in

2003. They find that among the transactions that required a smaller amount of financing (which,


                                                 49
they argue, was largely a function of exogenous considerations such as the fundamental nature of

the technology), the performance of the angel-backed and venture-backed firms were about

equal: while the angel deals had a somewhat lower incidence of failure, but many of these are

inactive. The probability of initial public offerings and acquisitions, outcomes that are most often

associated with financial success, was about the same. But among larger transactions, the

venture-backed firms were more successful on all dimensions examined. The authors suggest

that capital constraints may explain the differences: both types of financing can work for small

deals, but the requirements of larger deals makes venture capital a superior mode of financing.



         A second alternative source of financing is government funding. This substitute for

traditional venture financing has been employed widely, but probably nowhere more extensively

than Europe. Dozens of national and region-wide initiatives in recent decades have sought to

promote funding for entrepreneurs and venture capital funds. To cite just one of many examples,

in 2001, the European Commission provided more than €2 billion to the European Investment

Fund, making it Europe’s largest venture investor overnight. This amount is very significant

relative to the roughly €4 billion that were invested by European venture funds in that year.



         Through this large investment, the EIF intended to stimulate entrepreneurship. Europe

had seen a low level of venture activity for many decades: when the ratio of venture investment

to gross domestic product is computed for leading industrialized nations, the European nations

are invariably among the lowest.8 The lack of activity reflected the miserable returns that

8
    These calculations can be undertaken compiled from various publications and web sites of the

Canadian, European, Israeli, and U.S. (National) venture capital associations, as well as those of

                                                 50
European venture investments have yielded. Venture Economics’ calculations suggest that from

the beginning of the industry through the end of 2009, the average European venture fund had an

annual return of 1.6 percent: hardly a number to warm the hearts of investors!9 (The comparable

number for U.S.-based funds over the same period is 15.0 percent.) Thus, policymakers have

argued, the low levels of fund-raising and low historical returns create a need for public

financing



         Unfortunately, the numerous efforts launched by the European Union to encourage the

financing of new firms have followed a depressingly familiar pattern. Even if the intention of the

initiative is to create reasonable-sized funds, by the time every country, and every region in each

country, gets its “fair share” of the government’s money, the pie has been sliced in very thin

pieces indeed. The European Seed Capital Fund Scheme is one telling example. As Gordon

Murray (1998) points out, these funds (which typically had under €2 million in capital) were so

undercapitalized that even if they did nothing beside pay for the salary of an investment

professional and an administrative assistant, rent for a modest office, and travel, and never

invested a single dollar, they would run out of capital long before their assigned ten-year life was

up. Moreover, with so few Euros to disperse, the investments they could make were tiny.

Certainly, they were insufficient to get the typical entrepreneurial company to the point where it

could go public, or even, in many cases, to the point where it would be interesting to a corporate


the Asian Venture Capital Journal. In some nations where venture capital investments are not

clearly delineated, we employ seed and start-up investments. The GDP data are from the Central

Intelligence Agency (2009).
9
    Return data taken from http://banker.thomsonib.com/ta/.

                                                51
acquirer. For a number of groups, their best hope of achieving any return from their investments

was to sell the stakes back to the companies they had bought them from. This is hardly a way to

achieve the European Commission’s goal of providing capital to needy entrepreneurs.



       A final alternative, seen particularly among latter-stage investors, are integrated financial

institutions. In a number of nations, such as Japan, the bulk of the financing to rapidly growing

and restructuring entities are provided by large integrated financial institutions. Even in the

United States, where the independent private equity industry was founded, over one-quarter of

all private equity transactions involve a bank-affiliated fund (Fang, et al., 2010).



       It might be thought that these diversified financial institutions, in addition to substituting

adequately for private equity groups, might actually be able to undertake investment more

successfully. Such a conclusion is suggested by the literature on internal capital markets. Stein

(1997), for example, sees organizational diversification across activities (in this context, banks

that can engage in either underwriting or investing) as an important element of efficient capital

allocation. When opportunities are poor in one industry, he argues, managers can maintain their

overall capital budget (which they value in and of itself) while still making good investments in

their other industries. By contrast, managers of narrowly focused firms with poor investment

opportunities have no place else to invest and, in an effort to maintain their capital budgets, may

end up investing in negative net present value projects.



       Empirical data suggests, however, that the effectiveness of these institutionalized

investors is far less effective in practice. In particular, the share of transactions affiliated with


                                                 52
banks is pro-cyclical, peaking at times of big capital inflows into the private equity market.

Transactions done at the top of the market are most likely to experience subsequent distress, and

this pattern is especially pronounced for transactions involving banks’ private equity groups.

This result is particularly striking because prior to the transaction, targets of bank-affiliated

investments generally have significantly better operating performance than other buyout targets,

though their size and other features are similar. The results suggest that incentive problems and

an inability to add value to portfolio companies have limited the success of bank-affiliated funds.



       These plausible counterfactual histories, in which venture and private equity investors

were replaced by angels, governments, or integrated financial institutions, suggest that while

important aspects of the venture capital and private equity process can be duplicated, the

alternative approaches also have their own challenges, which makes it hard to duplicate the free-

standing investment organizations. While we must be cautious in our interpretation, the

counterfactual analysis suggests that these institutions could not have been readily replaced.

Unlike the railroads, which could have been replaced by alternative transportation modes, these

financial innovations may have had a larger unique contribution to economic growth.



   v. Taking stock



       It should be noted, however, that all of these studies have important limitations. First,

these studies consider venture capital and private equity in aggregate. As alluded to above, both

industries have been characterized by highly “lumpy” fundraising, where a few years account for

the peak of the activity. These years are also characterized by poorer private returns and higher


                                                53
rates of bankruptcy, which might suggest that the social returns from these periods are modest as

well.



        These limitations are particularly acute in the case of the private equity studies. None of

these studies can grapple with the consequences of the 2005-08 market peak, which accounted

for fully 47 percent of the private equity raised (in inflation-adjusted dollars) between 1969 and

2008.



        Moreover, the findings that have been completed to date raise questions about what goes

on during these boom periods. Axelson, et al., (2009) document the cyclical use of leverage in

buyouts. Using a sample of 1,157 transactions completed by major groups worldwide between

1985 through 2008, they show that the level of leverage is driven by the cost of debt, rather than

the more industry- and firm-specific factors that affect leverage in publicly traded firms. The

availability of leverage is also strongly associated with higher valuation levels in deals.



        Similarly, Davis, et al., (2009) find that the positive productivity growth differential at

target firms (relative to controls) is not even. Rather, it is larger in periods with an unusually high

interest rate spread between AAA-rated and BB-rated corporate bonds, and virtually non-existent

during periods with low spreads. One interpretation of this pattern is that private equity groups

are committed to adding value to their portfolio only during periods when making money

through other means (e.g., through leverage and financial engineering) is not feasible, i.e., during

periods when private equity activity is relative quiescent.




                                                  54
       If firms completing buyouts at market peaks employ leverage excessively and are less

likely to focus on adding value, as their findings suggest, we may expect industries with heavy

buyout activity to experience more intense subsequent downturns. Moreover, the effects of this

overinvestment would be exacerbated if private equity investments drive rivals, not backed by

private equity, to aggressively invest and leverage themselves. (Chevalier (1995) shows that in

regions with supermarkets receiving private equity investments, rivals responded by entering and

expanding stores.)



       But this claim remains unproven. A counter-argument, originally proposed by Jensen

(1989), is that the high levels of debt in private equity transactions force firms to respond earlier

and more forcefully to negative shocks to their business. As a result, private equity-backed firms

may be forced to adjust their operations earlier—at the beginning of an industry downturn,

enabling them to better weather a recession. Even if some private equity-backed firms eventually

end up in financial distress, their underlying operations may thus be in better shape than their

peers, which facilitates an efficient restructuring of their capital structure and lowers the

deadweight costs on the economy. Consistent with this argument, Andrade and Kaplan (1998)

study thirty-one leveraged buyouts from the 1980s that became financially distressed, and found

that the value of the firms post-distress was slightly higher than the value before the buyout,

suggesting that even the leveraged buyouts that were hit most severely by adverse shocks added

some economic value. Thus, the extent to which the steady-state findings are weakened and

undone by the intense cyclicality in these markets remains an open question.



c) Mutual funds and exchange-traded funds


                                                 55
          Just as venture capital and private equity have become important components of the

modern US economy, mutual funds (including exchange-traded funds) have become a dominant

force in the investment management arena. While there has been substantial work on mutual

funds, little of it directly addresses the social welfare consequences of this innovation. To lay out

the approach for studying its implications, we (a) provide a brief history of the U.S. mutual fund

industry; (b) demonstrate its economic importance; (c) highlight the areas in which funds may

have positively and negatively influenced social welfare; and (d) sketch out a counterfactual

history to draw out these consequences.



i.        A brief history of the innovations in U.S. mutual fund industry



          While mutual funds have antecedents in nineteenth century British Unit Investment

Trusts (comparable to closed-end funds today) and earlier European structures, the “modern”

open-end mutual fund was created in 1924.10 The Massachusetts Investment Trust, launched in

March 1924, was followed in quick succession by the State Street Investment Corporation in

July and the Investment Corporation in November 1925. Like the investment trusts that preceded

them, these new funds were pooled investment vehicles offering professional active investment

management services. The key innovations were the structure of the funds, as well as the manner

10
     For a history of the fund industry, see Fink (2008) and the references therein. For a useful list

of innovations in the fund industry, see http://www.icifactbook.org/fb_appd.html. For the early

predecessors of modern mutual funds, see Goetzmann and Rouwenhorst (2005), chapter 15,

“The Origins of Mutual Funds” by Rouwenhorst.

                                                   56
in which redemptions were handled. Open-ended mutual funds, as they would come to be

known, had a single class of investor claims in the form of equity, rather than a levered structure

(still common in closed-end funds). More importantly, they allowed investors to buy or redeem

shares on a daily basis at net asset value, unlike the prior investment trusts which traded on

exchanges and were (and are) typically sold at discounts or premia to net asset value. The offer

of shares and redemptions was daily and continuous, as opposed to the infrequent issuance of

new shares by prior investment trusts.



       The next major wave of innovation in mutual funds took place in the early 1970s. Up

until this time, funds had held portfolios of stocks, and, to a far lesser degree, bonds. No fund

had primarily held short-term money market instruments and designed itself to maintain a stable

net asset value. In September 1972, the Reserve Fund was launched, followed a few weeks later

by a competing fund, the Capital Preservation Fund, and in 1974 by offerings by Dreyfus and

Fidelity. The latter allowed shareholders to redeem shares through a check-writing feature. The

innovation of money market funds was not the holding of short-term instruments per se, but their

mechanisms to maintain stable net asset values through either rounding their NAVs to the nearest

penny (penny rounding funds), by valuing their portfolio at amortized cost (versus market value),

or by adding or subtracting realized gains and losses from accrued income on a daily basis. (See

Fink (2008), p. 84). These practices would eventually be memorialized into regulation through

section 2a7 of the 1940 Act, which would permit amortized cost accounting and penny rounding

methods for money market funds.




                                                57
       At about the same time, in the early 1970s, the first municipal bond funds, by Kemper

and Fidelity, were offered, expanding the asset classes in which fund shareholders could invest.

In the early 1970s, institutional index funds were first offered. Rather than use active

management or a completely unmanaged fixed portfolio, these investments offered investors the

return of a stock index (including the occasional rebalancing due to additions/deletions by the

index). The next major retail innovation would take place in 1976, with the creation of the first

indexed mutual fund, Jack Bogle’s Vanguard First Index Investment Trust. The First Index

Investment Trust brought the indexing concept to retail investors in a mutual fund structure,

wrapped around a low-cost, high-service business model that was informed by Bogle’s

experiences beginning with his 1951 Princeton college thesis on “The Economic Role of

Investment Companies.” (See Slater (1997).)



       A more recent innovation, similar in spirit to index funds but with a different institutional

structure, was created in 1992 by Leland O’Brien Rubinstein in the form of SuperTrust and

rapidly followed by a similar offering by the American Stock Exchange in the form of SPDRs.

(See Tufano and Kyrillos (1994).) The products, which would later morph into exchange-traded

funds, had features of the old fixed-portfolio investment trusts and closed-end funds, in that they

passively managed funds that were bought and sold on exchanges. The key innovation was to

find a way to keep these funds trading at fundamental value or net asset value, rather than at

fluctuating discounts and premia. The traditional open-end fund did so by contract form,

allowing shareholders to buy and redeem shares at the NAV. The ETF innovation kept the link to

NAV by allowing institutions to assemble the portfolio of underlying securities and create new

ETFs (and disassemble the ETF portfolio into its underlying components.) By creating a direct


                                                58
link between the security and its underlying components, ETFs minimize discounts or premia to

NAVs. Overall, the fund industry has witnessed a high level of innovation over the past decades.



ii. The economic importance of the U.S. mutual fund industry



       Over the past few years, policymakers have been debating whether mutual funds, or at

least money market mutual funds, are “systemically important” and should be regulated by

others beyond the SEC. Regardless of the outcome of this regulatory debate, there is little

question that mutual funds are one of the most successful financial innovations of the twentieth

century. Whether measured by their growth rates, adoption rates, fraction of capital

intermediated in the economy, or importance to household balance sheets, mutual funds are

critical to the economy. Furthermore, evidencing the innovation spiral, the original actively

managed stock and bond mutual fund structure has been the chassis on which we have seen

innovations such as index funds, exchange-traded funds, sector funds, and money market funds.



       On an absolute level, the U.S. mutual fund industry is simply enormous. As of October

2009, industry assets (excluding ETFs) exceeded $10 trillion, as shown below from the

Investment Company Institute’s data on the 7,762 funds in operation:




Total net assets of U.S. domiciled mutual funds, October
2009 (billions of dollars)
Stock funds                                             4,596.2
Hybrid funds                                              604.5
Taxable bond funds                                      1,682.5
Municipal bond funds                                      443.9
Taxable money market funds                              2,951.3

                                               59
Tax-free money market funds                               409.9
Total                                                  10,688.3
Source: http://www.ici.org/research/stats/trends/trends_10_09. This total excludes exchange-

traded funds, with $738 billion in assets.


          These absolute numbers, while staggering in size, do not put the economic importance of

the fund industry into context. One way to do so is to examine their adoption, in aggregate, by an

important sector of the economy: households. The chart below shows the breakdown of

aggregate financial assets held by the US household (and nonprofit) sector in 1950 and 2008, as

calculated by the Federal Reserve’s Flow of Funds accounts.11



  Composition of U.S. household financial market assets 1950 and 2008
                                               1950 2008 Gain/Loss
 Bank-system deposits                           28.1 18.2          -9.9
 Money market mutual funds                       0.0    4.5         4.5
 Direct holdings of stocks and bonds            51.1 29.0         -22.1
 Mutual funds (stock, bond, balanced)            0.7 10.0           9.3
 Pension Reserves (incl. DB and DC plans)        5.2 30.4          25.2
 Other                                          14.9    7.9        -7.0
 Total Financial Market Assets                  100 100
 Total Mutual Fund Share                         0.7 14.5          13.8

          The pervasive impact of mutual funds can be seen in this aggregate balance sheet. First,

from 1950 through 2008, households held far fewer “deposits,” defined broadly, with the

deposit-like share going from 28.1 percent of financial assets to 22.7 percent. Of this 22.7

percent, money market funds accounted for 4.5 percent, or nearly one-fifth. Secondly, in 1950,

slightly over half of all household financial assets were in direct holdings of stocks and bonds.

11
     http://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/z1/ for the various data series. These numbers include

financial assets excluding equity in unincorporated businesses, to reflect financial market claims.

                                                 60
By 2008, this figure had dropped to 29.0 percent, but 10 percent were held in long-term stock

and bond mutual funds, which increased from 0.7 percent to 10.0 percent over 58 years. Finally,

the decline in direct holdings of stocks and bonds was more than offset by an increase in

holdings in pension reserves, which rose from 5.2 percent to 30.4 percent of all household

financial assets. A large fraction of these pension assets are in defined contribution plans, which

in turn are invested in mutual funds. Putting these three elements together, mutual funds have

had a profound impact on the household balance sheet.



iii. The social welfare implications of mutual funds



       While there is little question that mutual funds have not only been a financial innovation,

but a successful one in terms of adoption, how can we gauge the social welfare implications of

this sector? Unlike the venture capital and private equity innovations, where researchers have

documented employment, business formation, product innovation, and productivity impacts,

there is far less done at a macro level on the social welfare impacts of the fund industry. In part,

this may reflect the fact that funds are not typically involved with portfolio firms in the same

direct way as private equity or venture capital firms. Their impact on social welfare would come

from benefits to investors who seek low-cost diversified portfolios, or to capital markets, as

information processors and as deep pools of capital. Our discussion focuses primarily on the

former—the costs and benefits to investors.



       It is clear from the past six decades of history that households’ revealed preference has

been to hold funds more than to hold individual securities—and to hold securities more than


                                                61
bank deposits. If one were to assume that these choices were the direct result of the existence of

mutual funds, one could provide a crude estimate of the return differential earned by investors as

a result of the mutual fund innovation, one portion of the social welfare gains from innovation.

For the purpose of this thought exercise, suppose that households allocated their assets between

cash (earning the risk-free rate) and the market (stocks and bonds), which earns a premium over

the risk-free rate.



        Define



        rf = the risk-free rate, a proxy for the return on deposits

        RP = the equity risk premium on an unmanaged portfolio of assets

        M = the fraction of assets held in securities (market), prior to the introduction of mutual

        funds

        M = the incremental fraction of assets held in securities (market) as a result of mutual

        fund introduction. Presumably, M > 0, based on the decrease in deposits over the post-

        war period.

        f = the weighted average incremental fee charged by funds in excess of the embedded

        fees in direct holdings of equities, where the weight is given by the mix of mutual fund

        holdings as a fraction of all market holdings. The sign of f is unclear: while funds have

        explicit fees, there are implicit fees with holdings in banks (in the form of deposit-loan

        spreads) as well as explicit fees.



Pre and post the introduction of mutual funds, the household sector’s return would be


                                                  62
                 E(Rpre ) = (1-M)rf +(M)(rf+ERP)

                 E(Rpost ) = (1-M-M)rf + (M+M)(rf+ERP-f)



Taking the difference between these two and combining terms, we could calculate a net increase

in return equal to



                 - Mf +M(ERP-f),



where the first term is the decrease in private return due to incremental weighted average fees

and the second term is the net increase in return due to the increased holdings of risky market

assets.



          Even a quick inspection of this naïve formula makes clear some of the challenges with

estimating this differential. First, an increase in returns that is accompanied by a commensurate

increase in risk does not increase social welfare, unless we can show that the representative

investor was better able to move closer to some optimal level of risk taking.



          Second, it assumes that the introduction of funds does not affect the risk-free rate or the

market risk premium. However, if in aggregate funds moved more funds into the market and

away from banks and other low risk investments, these returns, and other market-wide elements

such as liquidity, could easily be affected. The increased demand for riskier assets from the

deeper pool of potential market investors could lower costs of capital for firms. The more


                                                  63
intensive alpha-seeking behavior of funds could make prices more reflective of efficient market

levels and reduce bid-ask spreads. However, both of these assertions would need to be proven.



        Third, it attributes the change in deposit holdings entirely to funds and does not consider

secondary influences of the innovation. For example, holdings of higher-risk portfolios would

tend to increase household wealth but lead to greater fluctuations in wealth. The former would

tend to increase the willingness to hold risky assets, and the latter might depress this willingness.

Also, the introduction of money market funds might have led households to hold more in low

risk assets.



        Fourth, while mutual funds clearly charge fees, and ample research demonstrates that

funds cannot persistently beat the market, we need to calculate the incremental fees incurred by

household investors. While the absolute level of mutual fund expenses is greater than zero, and

while turnover is far higher than a passively managed portfolio, the relevant comparison for our

purposes would be the incremental fees and turnover relative to the benchmark pre-fund

portfolio, composed of bank deposits and direct holdings of securities. A directly held portfolio

would have individual investors (or a bank trust department) managing her own investments,

paying retail commissions, and implementing her own trading strategy. Most likely, this

alternative would also have households less well diversified.



        This simple specification makes clear some of the elements left out of this analysis. On

the positive side, we would need to capture:




                                                 64
           a) Greater development of capital and debt markets as a result of new institutions.

               There is extensive literature on financial development and economic

               development. While there are ongoing debates about the causality and magnitude

               of these relationships, one would have to acknowledge that mutual funds have

               been a substantial element of financial development.

           b) Greater holding of foreign securities to counteract home bias. French (2008)

               documents a substantial increase in U.S. holdings of foreign securities, which

               partially might be attributed directly or indirectly to mutual fund holdings.

           c) Greater savings overall. While it is purely speculative, one wonders what the

               savings rates of individuals would have been in the absence of mutual funds.

           d) Institutional competition for the fragmented and regulated banking industry. On

               this latter point, the development of money market funds was an explicit reaction

               to the interest rate caps imposed by Regulation Q.



       Finally, without a mutual fund sector, would we have seen the development or

widespread adoption of defined contribution (DC) pension plans, where the employee selects his

or her investments from a menu largely consisting of retail funds? Technically, it would have

been possible to move to this system were no retail funds in place by offering retail investors the

option of investing in institutional products. However, realistically, this might have been difficult

because along with the investment management aspects of mutual funds came the recordkeeping

systems that would support DC plans. Also, retail offerings of funds likely made it easier for

firms and employees to understand and to get comfortable with workplace-based defined

contribution plans. By the time DC plans were introduced (spurred by the 1974 ERISA rules and


                                                 65
the 1978 Revenue Act), consumers had extensive experience with funds, with over 10 million

mutual fund accounts in America.12



          On the negative side, this specification would not capture (a) “Excessive” rent seeking by

mutual fund companies and the associated transfer of wealth from investors to the industry; (b)

“Excessive” or “insufficient” savings by individuals; (c) “Excessive” risk taking by individuals;

(d) “Costly” disintermediation of the banking sector, including the relative loss of regulatory

control over the money supply that bank regulators had traditionally enjoyed. All of these costs,

and benefits, are difficult to measure because in many instances we lack models to determine the

optimal levels of these quantities. The optimal level of risk taking in the economy, for example,

depends on preferences and risk aversion, which are not exogenous.



iv. Counterfactual histories



          Trying to untangle any of these issues is difficult enough, but the specification also

makes clear that one cannot analyze the social welfare consequences of the fund industry except

in context. Had mutual funds not been invented (or adopted), what counterfactual history might

have emerged? Which are plausible and “miracle” alternatives? Surely investing and pooling

would have continued, as core functions in a financial system, but the institutional arrangements

would have been different without mutual funds, index funds, and ETFs. Some possible

alternatives include:




12
     See http://www.icifactbook.org/fb_data.html, table 1.

                                                 66
   1. Continuation of the pre-fund status quo, involving banks, bank trust departments, direct

        holdings of stocks and bonds, brokers and financial advisors, closed-end funds, and

        opaque holdings of securities through intermediaries such as insurance companies.

   2.   Modified status quo outcomes, where some of these institutions came to dominate

        others, e.g., a movement to greater intermediation but in the form of insurance-wrapped

        investments.

   3. “Miraculous” innovations, such as fractional shares and bonds that would permit

        individual investors to create diversified portfolios at a small scale.



        The first possibility, of the pre-fund status quo, is largely a banking and direct security

holding alternative. Closed-end funds would have remained a minor player in the economy. Fink

(2008) argues that closed-end funds became marginalized in the wake of the events of 1929, and

direct holdings of securities—sold by brokers—were preferred as the means by which

households acquired exposure to the “market.” In this counterfactual world, households would

hold poorly diversified, rarely rebalanced portfolios of a small number of securities. They would

have been advised by bank trust departments (for the very wealthy), securities brokers, and

popular periodicals. One could not assume index funds or ETFs in this counterfactual, as they

were part of the innovative process we are analyzing. One may not even be able to assume low-

cost brokerage models, as they too, were a relatively recent financial innovation.



        While the actively managed mutual fund industry is often criticized for failing to produce

reliably positive excess returns or alpha, it is less likely that investors would have performed

better on their own employing this direct-ownership counterfactual. Perhaps the most complete


                                                  67
analysis of the social welfare impacts of mutual funds, in the context of active investing, can be

found in French’s (2008) AFA Presidential Address. In it, he documents the perpetual, and

costly, search for alpha, estimating the deadweight loss to be about 67 basis points per year

relative to passive investing. French convincingly documents that actively traded mutual funds

are considerably more expensive than passive portfolios, but assumes virtually zero costs for

direct-held portfolios: “I assume the only expenses individuals incur when they hold shares

directly are trading costs, which are included in the aggregate estimates below. I ignore, for

example, the time they spend managing their portfolios and the cost of subscriptions to Value

Line and Morningstar.” It is unclear if he includes non-commission payments to financial

advisors, bank trust departments, or others who would facilitate the direct investing activities of

investors. In our counterfactual, we would need to include these costs, which were likely

sizeable. Furthermore, it is not clear that the direct buyers of securities would receive excellent

investing advice. Recent evidence by Bergstresser, Chalmers and Tufano (2009) for example,

shows that broker-sold mutual funds consistently underperform direct-sold funds. If this is any

indication, replacing thousands of fund managers with millions of even less-well-informed

brokers is not likely to increase household wealth. One might imagine that household portfolios

might show even greater home bias and would virtually certainly not contain index-like fund

holdings.



       The second alternative is that an intermediated solution other than open-end funds and

ETFs could have emerged. Despite their lack of popularity in the 1930s, perhaps closed-end

funds might have enjoyed renewed popularity. While they provide pooling and liquidity to

investors, it is unlikely that this path would have lead to higher social welfare for investors. First,


                                                  68
closed-end funds routinely trade at discounts and premia to net asset values, and investors would

need to bear this additional discount risk (in addition to the risk of fluctuations in the portfolio’s

NAV). Second, by their nature, closed-end funds have a fixed amount of assets under

management, versus an open-end fund which can expand or contract assets in response to

demand. Closed-end funds would therefore benefit less from economies of scale due to growth

than would open-end funds. Closed-end funds also require incremental distribution expenses and

legal expenses to start new funds to accommodate new demand, whereas open-end funds can

accept new assets at virtually no administrative costs.



         Another possible intermediated solution would have been that insurance-based

investments would have met demand had the fund innovation not taken place. Revealed

preference suggests that there is greater demand for funds than for bundled insurance-cum-

investment products. As of the end of 2008, mutual funds (excluding ETFs) held $9.6 trillion in

assets; by comparison, total assets held by life insurers was $4.6 trillion, with much of the latter

backing non-investment term insurance products.13 Given this sizeable difference in revealed




13
     Data from http://www.icifactbook.org/fb_data.html (Table 1) and

http://www.acli.com/ACLI/Tools/Industry+Facts/Assets+and+Investments/. The mutual fund

number includes $3.8 trillion in money market funds and $5.8 trillion in long-term investments.

However, the life insurance figure includes both assets held to back term policies (with no

investment element) and other policies (universal, whole life, etc.) with an investment

component. In 2008, about three-quarters of all life insurance purchases were for term insurance,

which does not have an investment component.

                                                 69
demand, it is difficult to believe that a bundled insurance-investment product would have

satisfied investor preferences as well as funds have. Furthermore, the bundling of these products

makes them more difficult to explain and sell, likely leading to higher transaction costs (and

possibly poorer matching of products to consumer needs). For a discussion of these problems,

and the resultant market failures that can give rise to regulation, see Campbell, et, al., (2010).



       Another, more miraculous, possibility is that an alternative functional substitute for funds

would have emerged, providing low-cost pooling and investment management, small lot sizes for

diversified portfolios, and liquidity in the form of daily trading. By 2000 or so, this alternative

history might not have seemed far-fetched. A number of startups offered products of this sort,

allowing investors to directly buy pools of securities, including fractional shares, and provided a

high level of liquidity. For example, one of the first of these innovators, folioFN permitted

investors to buy folios (portfolios) of stocks (as well as mutual funds) in fractional shares.

However, it would take the development of the Internet, and the adoption of Internet-based

transacting, to make this counterfactual a reality. Even so, one wonders about the ultimate

returns earned by direct investors. Recent behavioral finance work, by Odean (1999), Barber and

Odean (2000, 2001a, 2001b, 2002, 2004) and others call into question the investing acumen of

individual investors.




(http://www.acli.com/NR/rdonlyres/0BFEABCA-1E2A-4F4C-A879-

95CF104238AB/22608/FB0709LifeInsurance1.pdf, Table 7.2).

                                                 70
          Overall, a more extensive consideration of these, and other, counterfactuals would likely

suggest that the innovation of mutual funds, index funds, and ETFs likely were beneficial for

investors, relative to other reasonable counterfactuals.




d) Securitization



          Pooling is a timeless function of financial systems, and our first two case studies focus on

pooling vehicles using different forms of intermediation. Over the past four decades, another

major innovation that performs the pooling function has been securitization.14




          Like other pooled vehicles, which assemble portfolios of assets (stakes in new

companies, shares in firms, or holdings of bonds) and sell claims against them, securitization

vehicles bundle a variety of financial claims, often in the form of retail IOUs (mortgages, auto

loans, student loans, credit card receivables) and sell claims against them. In venture capital and

private equity, there are often multiple classes of claims (general partners and limited partners),

in open-end funds a single claim (equity holders), and in closed-end funds often multiple

claimants (equity and debt, sometimes.) Securitized vehicles can have a single class of investors

(if purely pooled vehicles) or can create multiple classes of investors. While early securitization

used the former method, much of modern securitization gives different investors varying

exposures to credit or prepayment risk. Even more complicated structures create tranched

structures using already pooled structures (CDO-squareds) or using derivatives (synthetic

14
     For a general discussion of the pooling function, see Sirri and Tufano (1995).
                                                   71
CDOs). For the purpose of this discussion, we will focus on “simple” securitization structures,

recognizing that some of the most vociferous criticism was directed at the more complex

structures.




i.        The history and extent of securitization15




          While there was securitization of a sort in the 1920s, the practice as we know it came into

widespread adoption in the 1970s and 1980s, beginning with the securitization of home

mortgages. Before that time, most home mortgages were originated, funded, and serviced by

banks and credit unions or, if they were government-insured mortgages, were bought by

government-owned Fannie Mae.16 In some instances, loans were sold from one party to another,

but this whole loan market was fairly illiquid.




          The first major development in securitization was the introduction of the pass-through

mortgage backed security (MBS), first issued by Ginnie Mae in 1970. In a pass-through, a

portfolio of mortgages are bundled together and investors receive all principal and interest

payments. Pass through MBS or participating certificates combined the sale of loans, the

bundling of mortgages into a pool, and the use of an off-balance-sheet structure. Unlike later




15
     The material in this section draws heavily upon Ryan, Trumbull, and Tufano (2010).
16
     http://www.fundinguniverse.com/company-histories/Fannie-Mae-Company-History.html.

                                                  72
securitizations, these instruments had a single class of investors, who shared proportionally in the

portfolio’s risks and returns, including prepayment risks.




         The next major innovation in securitization was the development of tranched structures,

first used in the Collateralized Mortgage Obligation (CMO) issued by Freddie Mac in 1983. In

this multi-class security, a set of rules predetermined which investors got which cash flows. A

major concern in these structures was to allocate prepayment risk among investors. Because

borrowers have the right to prepay their mortgages and would tend to do so when it was to their

advantage (and to the disadvantage of the lenders), prepayment risk (or the embedded call option

in mortgages) was an unattractive feature from the perspective of investors. Under CMO

structures, certain investors willing to take on greater prepayment risk would accordingly earn

higher promised returns, while other investors would be the last to be prepaid and therefore earn

lower promised returns. Other structures would modify the division of prepayment risk (and

credit risk) among investors in more complex ways. With the passage of the Tax Reform Act of

1986, which allowed the Real Estate Mortgage Investment Conduit (REMIC) tax vehicle, CMO

issuance and securitization expanded dramatically.




         The volume of securitized home mortgages grew from $28 billion in 1976 to $4.2 trillion

in 2003.17 Government-sponsored entities (i.e., Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac) played an

important role in this process by standardizing mortgage products, pooling mortgages into



17
     Loutskina and Strahan (2009).

                                                73
mortgage-backed securities, and guaranteeing investors against losses.18 Securitization supported

the development of mortgage brokers and specialized mortgage originators who developed a new

“originate-to-distribute” model, as well as third-party servicing.




         Other lending activities also used securitization as a financing technique. Automobile

loans were first securitized in 1985; credit card loans followed in 1986.19 By 2006, approximately

55 percent of all mortgages, 45 percent of all credit card loans, and 16 percent of non-revolving

loans (many of which are auto installment loans) were securitized.20 Over time, these networks of

firms and investors displaced traditional lenders. For a more complete discussion of the history

of securitization, see the definitive treatise by Frankel (2006).




ii.      Assessing the social welfare implications of securitization




18
     Frame and White (2005).
19
     Asset Securitization Comptroller's Handbook (1997).
20
     Mortgage data from Rosen (2007). Revolving and non-revolving debt data from Federal

Reserve Statistical Release, Series G19, http://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/g19/Current/.

                                                  74
         Much attention has been focused on the way in which changes in financial

intermediation, especially in mortgages, have influenced the national and global economy.21 The

difficulty with assessing the impacts of securitization, however, stems from the many different

elements associated with this class of innovations. These elements include, but are not limited to,

the following:




            The sale of a loan from the original lender to another investor(s).

            The bundling of loans from a single or multiple lenders, with subsequent sale to

             investors.

            The standardization of the underlying assets encouraged by parties putting together or

             guaranteeing pools.

            The guaranteeing of assets, fully or partly, by government or private parties.

            Other credit enhancement, for example, through overcollateralization.

            The tranching of claims to create multiple securities differentiated by credit or

             prepayment risk.

            The creation of stand-alone loan originators (mortgage brokers) who tended not to

             have an economic interest in the long-term viability of originated loans.

            The creation of stand-alone servicers with a complex set of incentives as agents of

             diffuse shareholders.

21
     Ashcraft and Schuermann,(2008), Berndt and Gupta (2008), Coval, Jurek, and Stafford (2009),

Hoffman and Nitschka (2008), Mayer, Pence, and Sherlund (2009), Mian and Sufi (2008),

Purnanandam (2009), and Shiller (2008).

                                                  75
          The creation of securitized structures using other securitized structures (or

           derivatives) as underlying assets.

          The creation of securitized structures using high-risk (subprime) loans as the

           underlying assets.

          The use of and reliance upon credit ratings that may fail to take into account the level

           of risks in some of these structures.


Critiques of the innovation of “securitization” must acknowledge that a pass-through

securitization of prime mortgages originated by banks is quite a different phenomenon from a

CDO-squared issue where the underlying asset is a low-ranked tranche of a different CDO,

whose underlying assets, in turn, are a portfolio of no-documentation subprime loans originated

by mortgage brokers.




       The second challenge with analyzing the welfare impacts of securitization, say of home

mortgages or student loans, is to assess the appropriate outcome metric. There are a variety of

legitimate measures. For example, some early studies suggest that the first decades of

securitization led to lower interest rates for borrowers. (See Hendershott and Shilling (1989),

Sirmans and Benjamin (1990) and Jameson, Dewan and Sirmans (1992).) Others point to the

wider availability of credit, leading in turn to considerably higher home ownership rates, which

rose from about 62 percent in 1960 to almost 69 percent in 2004, with the strongest gains among




                                                   76
non-white American households.22 Against these positive metrics of lower rates, expanded credit

availability, and broader homeownership, we must consider the cost of higher levels of

foreclosure, especially among subprime borrowers, putatively the primary beneficiaries of this

increased lending.



          We can quantify the benefits of lower costs of financing, but how would one quantify the

benefits of having an additional 1 percent of households owning homes, or the costs of 1 percent

of homeowners losing their homes through foreclosure? Neither direct measurements, nor a

counterfactual approach, can overcome the problem of multiple metrics, some of which do not

lend themselves to quantitative measurement.



iii. Identifying counterfactual alternatives



          Which counterfactual history might we use to compare against the actual past where

securitization has financed much consumer debt? Using the mortgage market as the primary

research site, these alternatives might include the following:



             Depositories continue to originate and hold mostly prime loans, with limited whole

              loan sales to other depositories or to specialized mortgage investors.




22
     See http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/housing/hvs/annual05/ann05t12.html for the national

figures and http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/housing/hvs/annual05/ann05t20.html for the

breakdowns by race.

                                                   77
          Depositories continue to originate mostly prime loans, but some are bundled in the

           form of pass-through (single class) MBS securities.

          Depositories continue to originate mostly prime loans, but some are bundled in the

           form of either pass through (single class) securities or multi-class (CMO) structures—

           but not more complex structures (synthetic CDOs or CDO squared structures).




Of course, these three alternatives are just a few of the nearly unlimited number of

counterfactuals, which could be made by layering on (a) subprime lending; (b) the originate–to-

distribute model using independent mortgage brokers, reimbursed through yield spread premia;

(c) the existence of less-optimistic credit ratings by rating organizations. Even beyond these

variants, we would need to consider even broader counterfactuals. For example, a world in which

depositories originate and hold mortgages would likely operate quite differently in a setting

where branching and intrastate banking were prohibited versus one in which national banking

organizations could create diversified portfolios of loans by virtue of their scope.




       Comparing the first (no pooling) to the second (pass-through MBS) and third (simple

CMO) phases of securitization, there is some evidence that the early securitization gave rise to

measurable benefits. As noted above, mortgage rates fell in the first phase, and homeownership

rose from 61.9 percent to 64.4 percent from 1960 to 1980, and then to 66.2 percent in 2000.

Elmer and Seelig (1998) document and study the general rise in foreclosure rates from 1950

through 1997. They examine the empirical determinants of this time series, and conclude that

securitization and the ancillary activity of third-party servicing does not explain the trend in


                                                 78
foreclosures. (Rather, they find that measures of household debt and savings are better predictors

of foreclosures.) While this evidence is far from complete, it is suggestive that the roughly first

three decades of securitization were not likely welfare-reducing. Indeed, having deep pools of

capital to fund national mortgage markets was a likely improvement over local mortgage lenders.



       The more recent history of securitization is probably a different matter. It is not clear that

the economy unambiguously benefited from ever more complex structures, higher-risk

underwriting of subprime borrowers, sloppier underwriting standards in general, and an

increasing role for mortgage originators with few long-term incentives. In almost textbook

fashion, we see an innovation more widely diffused, used by a new population (riskier

borrowers) in new ways (in securitizations of securitizations) and purchased by less experienced

investors (relying on ratings).




       While determining social welfare implications of securitization is difficult, even

establishing simpler facts about the phenomenon is not simple. A large body of papers, including

a number of recent working papers, examine aspects of securitization and attempt to measure the

direct impacts of the practice. For example, studies reach contradictory conclusions about

whether riskier banks use securitization, whether they have lower funding costs, or whether

securitization increases loan supply. (For a summary of some of these studies see Panetta and

Pozzolo (2010), who study credit risk transfer in over 100 countries.) For example, a recent

working paper, using propensity scoring techniques to try to determine a counterfactual (had

banks not chosen to securitize) finds that after controlling for whether banks choose to securitize,

there is no statistically significant impact of securitization on banks’ funding costs, credit

                                                79
exposure, or profitability. (Sarkisyan, et al, 2010) While the authors frame the work in terms of a

counterfactual, it addresses a far narrower question: How would banks have performed had they

not used securitization (but implicitly assuming that securitization exists and is used by other

institutions)? Even so, using similar data but an instrumental variables approach using bank size

as an instrument, Jiangli and Pritsker (2008) conclude that securitization played a positive role in

reducing insolvency risk among banks. There are numerous papers that empirically analyze the

effect of securitization on bank stability, as measured by Z-scores, systemic risk, and other

measures. Not surprisingly, they, too, reach contradictory results. For a recent survey—and

evidence of a negative relationship between securitization and bank financial soundness, see

Michalak and Uhde (2010).




        The extant literature largely attempts to address how securitization affects individual

banks, but to assess the social welfare implications of this innovation, one needs a broader frame.

Gorton and Metrick (2010) summarize the reasons for the growth of modern securitization

(reduction in bankruptcy costs, tax advantages, reduction in moral hazard, reduced regulatory

costs, transparency, and customization). They, along with Adrian and Shin (2010), highlight how

securitization was part of a larger set of innovations that constitute the so-called shadow banking

system in which market-based financial intermediaries replaced traditional banks. These other

elements include money market mutual funds and repo contracts. Together, these papers

demonstrate another challenge with analyzing the innovation of securitization: it is closely linked

to a network of innovations, so it is difficult, if not impossible, to separate their effects.




                                                   80
       Where does this leave us? Certainly, the existing work on securitization, even if

ambiguous, provides a useful first step to understanding this innovation. The precise details of

securitization, in conjunction with other trends that make up the shadow banking system, will

probably thwart any definitive scientific study of the phenomenon. However, one can imagine

projects, similar to Fogel’s—with all of the same critiques, that consider the following

counterfactuals:




          What if only prime mortgages had been securitized?

          What if no “no-doc” mortgages would have been allowed to be securitized?

          What if rating agencies would have rated more poorly (or refused to rate) certain

           highly structured transactions?




For example, Fogel examined access to non-rail transportation modes to understand the

constraints on trade had there been no railroads. In theory, one could examine the holders of

various securitized products and their investment charter restrictions to determine what fraction

of holdings realistically could have been placed into the market were the issues not rated. While

other institutions might have emerged with an appetite for unrated securities, the exercise would

provide a meaningful boundary on the problem. Similarly, if one were to constrain the

securitized pools by excluding subprime and no-doc loans, what would the pro forma default

rates have been and how might they have rippled through the economy? We suspect that a

thoughtful, step-by-step counterfactual approach, inspired by Fogel’s 250 page masterpiece,

would provide many insights not available from more traditional studies. While a counterfactual


                                               81
approach does not simplify matters much, it has the tangible benefit of forcing us to focus on

which elements of securitization are most problematic.




IV.    Conclusions and other research directions



       As we have highlighted here, while existing empirical evidence and conceptual

frameworks can tell us much about financial innovation, there are substantial unanswered

questions. In this final section, we discuss some of the promising avenues for future research.

While no method is without problems, these approaches complement one another.



       The first approach is to examine settings where there are constraints on financial

innovation. The exploitation of exogenous constraints is by now a well-accepted technique in

empirical economic research. In particular, a classic example of such constraints that might

present an opportunity for careful study is Islamic finance, particularly as practiced in Saudi

Arabia and the Persian Gulf. As commonly interpreted, sharia-compliant financial structures

exclude the use of debt and multiple classes of equity. Such a setting may provide a “natural

experiment” for gauging impact of financial innovation or its absence. Unfortunately, while these

economies may have fewer financial innovations that relate to those more common in Western

economies, other differences may preclude them from providing the type of natural experiments

that would sharply identify the impacts of innovation.




                                               82
       A second avenue may be the greater exploitation of experimental techniques. A number

of efforts have attempted to gauge the consequences of new securities, with an almost exclusive

focus on those geared toward the developing country’s poor. Examples of such experimental

studies have included assessments of new products such as rainfall insurance (Giné, Townsend,

and Vickery (2007) and Cole, et al. (2009)), novel rules for institutions (such as Giné and

Karlan’s (2009) analysis of microcredit lending rules), and new institutions (for instance,

Bhattamishra’s (2008) study of rain banks). The focus on such innovations is easy to understand:

one can gain statistically meaningful results for a very modest investment. But the methodology

could be more generally applied, particularly if researchers were to work in conjunction with

financial institutions. One problem with such methodologies, however, is that small-scale

experiments are almost surely unable to measure the systemic costs or benefits that we

highlighted above, and are likely to focus primarily on the experience of early adopters.



       The same concern—an inability to assess broader externalities—is likely to be a barrier

to our third suggested avenue as well: to apply the tools of structural estimation of the social

impact of new products to financial innovations. While these models have assessed many classes

of product innovations, financial innovations have been largely neglected. But complex

dynamics outlined above may make such empirical assessments challenging.



       Detailed histories or case studies of financial innovation can offer additional evidence to

help uncover the social welfare implications of systemically important new products. By

judicious selection of research sites, we can put appropriate attention on innovations that had

major impacts on society. The historical or case study approachforces us to examine each


                                                83
innovation in its entirety, both in terms of the full time span of its adoption and the many ripples

in the economy.



       Finally, the use of counterfactuals—where we invent our own data—perversely may

discipline us to be explicit about our implicit assumptions and metrics. The decades of debates

over counterfactuals has sensitized us to the need to think in terms of general equilibrium rather

than partial effects, to consider complementaries and path dependencies, and to carefully

measure outcomes. Despite all of these problems, we believe that this less “scientific” method

may add new insights into understanding financial innovation.




                                                84
                                      Literature Cited


Adrian T, Shin H. 2010. The Changing Nature of Financial Intermediation and the Financial
Crisis     of     2007-09,    FRB      of    New     York  Staff  Report     No.    439.
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1576590

Alexander J. 1991. Do the Merits Matter? A Study of Settlements in Securities Class Actions,
Stanford Law Review, 43, 497-598

Allen F, Gale D. 1994. Financial Innovation and Risk Sharing, Cambridge. MIT Press

Andrade G, Kaplan S. 1998. How Costly is Financial (Not Economic) Distress? Evidence from
Highly Leveraged Transactions that Became Distressed. Journal of Finance, 53, 1443-93

Asset Securitization Comptroller’s Handbook. 1997. Washington, DC, U.S. Department of
Treasury

Ashcraft AB, Schuermann T. 2008. Understanding the Securitization of Subprime Mortgage
Credit. In Staff Reports, New York, Federal Reserve Bank of New York

Axelson U, Strömberg P, Jenkinson T, Weisbach M. 2009. Leverage and Pricing in Buyouts: An
Empirical      Analysis.     EFA     2009     Bergen     Meetings      Working      Paper.
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1344023

Barber B, Odean T. 2000. Trading is Hazardous to Your Wealth: The Common Stock Investment
Performance of Individual Investors. Journal of Finance, 55: 773-806

Barber B, Odean T. 2001a. The Internet and the Investor. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 15
(1): 41-54

Barber B, Odean T. 2001b. Boys will be Boys: Gender, Overconfidence, and Common Stock
Investment. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116: 261-92

Barber B, Odean T. 2002. Online Investors: Do the Slow Die First? Review of Financial Studies,
15: 455-87

Barber B, Odean T. 2004. Are Individual Investors Tax Savvy? Evidence from Retail and
Discount Brokerage Accounts. Journal of Public Economics, 88: 419-42

Ben-Horim M, Silber W. 1977. Financial Innovation: A Linear Programming Approach. Journal
of Banking and Finance, 1: 277-96

Bergstresser D, Chalmers J, Tufano P. 2009. Assessing the Costs and Benefits of Brokers: A
Preliminary Analysis of the Mutual Fund Industry. Review of Financial Studies, 22: 4129-56



                                             85
Berndt A, Gupta A. 2008. Moral Hazard and Adverse Selection in the Originate-to-Distribute
Model of Bank Credit. http://ssrn.com.ezp-prod1.hul.harvard.edu/abstract=1290312

Berry S, Levinsohn J, Pakes A. 1995. Automobile Prices in Market Equilibrium. Econometrica,
63: 841-90

Bhattamishra R. 2008. Grain Banks: An Institutional and Impact Analysis, Doctoral
Dissertation. Cornell University, Ithaca, NY

Bloom N, Sadun R, Van Reenen J. 2009. Do Private Equity-Owned Firms Have Better
Management Practices? In Gurung A, Lerner J. (eds.) Globalization of Alternative Investments
Working Papers Volume 2: Global Economic Impact of Private Equity 2009. New York, World
Economic Forum USA, 2009, pp. 1-23

Bresnahan T. 1986. Measuring the Spillovers from Technical Advance: Mainframe Computers in
Financial Services. American Economic Review, 76: 742-55

Bresnahan T, Trajtenberg M. 1995. General Purpose Technologies ‘Engines of Growth’? Journal
of Econometrics, 65: 83-108.

Bunzl M. 2004. Counterfactual History: A User’s Guide. American Historical Review, 109: 845-58

Burt R. 1987. Social Contagion and Innovation: Cohesion versus Structural Equivalence.
American Journal of Sociology, 92: 1287-335

Campbell J, Jackson H, Madrian B, and Tufano P. 2010. The Regulation of Consumer Financial
Products: An Introductory Essay with Four Case Studies. http://ssrn.com/abstract=1649647

Cameron, R. ed., 1972. Banking and Economic Development. New York: Oxford University
Press.

Cameron R., Crisp O, Patrick H, Tilly R. 1967. Banking in the Early Stages of Industrialization.
New York: Oxford University Press.

Carr E. 1987. What is History? London: Vintage

Central Intelligence Agency. 2009. CIA Factbook. Washington, Government Printing Office

Chevalier J. 1995. Capital Structure and Product Market Competition: An Empirical Study of
Supermarket LBOs. American Economic Review, 85: 206-56

Cole S, Giné X, Tobacman J, Topalova P, Townsend R, Vickery J. 2009. Barriers to Household
Risk Management: Evidence from India. Staff Report Number 373, Federal Reserve Bank of
New York



                                              86
Coleman J, Katz E, Menzel H. 1966. Medical Innovation: A Diffusion Study. New York: Bobbs-
Merrill

Coval J, Jurek J, Stafford E. 2009. The Economics of Structured Finance. Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 23: 3-25

Cowan R, Foray D. 2002. Evolutionary Economics and the Counterfactual Threat. Journal of
Evolutionary Economics, 12: 539-62

Crane D, et al. 1995. The Global Financial System, Boston: Harvard Business School Press

Coy P. 2009. Financial Innovation Under Fire. Business Week, (September 16)

Dasgupta P, Stiglitz J. 1980. Industrial Structure and the Nature of Innovative Activity.
Economic Journal, 90: 266-93

David P. 1969. Transport Innovation and Economic Growth: Professor Fogel on and off the
Rails. The Economic History Review, 22, 3: 506-525

Davis G. 1994. A History of Money. Cardiff: University of Wales Press

Davis S, Haltiwanger J, Jarmin R, Lerner J, Miranda J. 2008. Private Equity and Employment, In
Globalization of Alternative Investments Working Papers Volume 1: Global Economic Impact of
Private Equity 2008, ed. Gurung A, Lerner J. New York: World Economic Forum USA, 2008,
pp. 43-64

Davis S, Haltiwanger J, Jarmin R, Lerner J, Miranda J. 2009. Private Equity, Jobs and
Productivity. In Globalization of Alternative Investments Working Papers Volume 2: Global
Economic Impact of Private Equity 2009, ed. Gurung A, Lerner J. New York: World Economic
Forum USA, 2009, pp. 25-44

Elmer P, Seelig S. The Rising Long-Term Trend of Single-Family Mortgage Foreclosure Rates.
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Working Paper 98-2. http://ssrn.com/abstract=126128 or
doi:10.2139/ssrn.126128

Fang L, Ivashina V, Lerner J. 2010. Unstable Equity? Combining Banking with Private Equity
Investing. Unpublished working paper, Harvard University

Ferguson N, ed. 1997. Virtual History: Alternatives and Counterfactuals, London UK: Picador

Fink M. 2008. The Rise of Mutual Funds: An Insider’s View. New York: Oxford University
Press

Fogel R. 1964. Railroads and American Economic Growth: Essays in Econometric History.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press


                                             87
Frame W, White L. 2004. Empirical Studies of Financial Innovation: Mostly Talk and Not Much
Action? Journal of Economic Literature. 42: 116-44

Frame S, White L. 2005. Fussing and Fuming About Fannie and Freddie: How Much Smoke, How
Much Fire? Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19: 159-184

Frankel T. 2006. Securitization. New York: Fathom Publishing Company. 2nd ed.

French K. 2008. Presidential Address: The Cost of Active Investing. Journal of Finance, 63:
1537-73

Gennaioli N, Shleifer A, Vishny R. 2010. Financial Innovation and Financial Fragility. Working
paper no. 16068, National Bureau of Economic Research

Giné X, Karlan D. 2009. Group versus Individual Liability: Long Term Evidence from
Philippine Microcredit Lending Groups. Unpublished working paper, World Bank

Giné X, Townsend R, Vickrey J. 2007. Patterns of Rainfall Insurance Participation in Rural
India. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 4408

Goetzmann W, and Rouwenhorst G, ed. 2005. The Origins of Value: The Financial Innovations
that Created Modern Capital Markets. New York: Oxford University Press

Goldin, C. 1995. Cliometrics and the Nobel, The Journal of Economic Perspectives. 9, 2: 191-
208

Gorton G, Metrick A. 2010. Regulating the Shadow Banking System. Yale School of
Management working paper. http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1676947

Granovetter M. 1978. Threshold Models of Collective Behavior. American Journal of Sociology,
83: 1420-43

Greenspan A. 1995. Remarks at a Conference on Risk Measurement and Systemic Risk. Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, DC

Hausman J. 1997. Valuing the Effect of Regulation on New Services in Telecommunications.
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics, 26, pp. 1-39

Hellmann T, Puri. M. 2002. Venture Capital and the Professionalization of Start-Up
Firms: Empirical Evidence. Journal of Finance, 57: 169-97

Helpman, E ed. 1998. General Purpose Technologies and Economic Growth. Cambridge MA:
MIT Press

Hendershott P, Shilling J. 1989. The Impact of Agencies on Conventional Fixed-Rate Mortgage
Yields. Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics, 2: 101-15

                                              88
Hoberg G, Goldfarb B, Kirsch D, Triantis A. 2009. Does Angel Participation Matter? An
Analysis of Early Venture Financing. Robert H. Smith School Research Paper No. RHS 06-072.
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1024186

Hoffman M, Nitschka T. 2008. Securitization of Mortgage Debt, Asset Prices, and International
Risk Sharing. Working Paper Series, Institute for Empirical Research in Economics, University of
Zurich

Jameson M, Dewan S, Sirmans C. 1992. Measuring Welfare Effects of “Unbundling” Financial
Innovations: The Case of Collateralized Mortgage Obligations. Journal of Urban Economics, 31:
1-13

Jensen M. 1989. The Eclipse of the Public Corporation. Harvard Business Review, 67
(September/October): 61-74

Jiangli W, Pritsker M. 2008. The Impacts of Securitization on US Bank Holding Companies.
SSRN working paper series. http://ssrn.com/abstract=1102284

Johnson S, Kwok J. 2009. http://baselinescenario.com/2009/06/17/more-financial-innovation
(accessed September 12, 2010)

Kane E. 1977. Good Intentions and Unintended Evil: The Case Against Selective Credit
Allocation. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 9: 55-69

Kaplan S, Schoar A. 2005. Private Equity Performance: Returns, Persistence and
Capital Flows. Journal of Finance, 60: 1791-1823

Kaplan, S, Stein J. 1993. The Evolution of Buyout Pricing and Financial Structure in the 1980s.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108: 313-57

Khandani A, Lo A, Merton R. 2009. Systemic Risk and the Refinancing Ratchet Effect. Harvard
Business School Working Paper, No. 10-023

Khorana A, Servaes H, Tufano P. 2005. Explaining the Size of the Mutual Fund Industry Around
the World. Journal of Financial Economics, 78: 145-85

Kindleberger, C. 1984. A Financial History of Western Europe. London: George Allen and
Unwin.

Kortum S, Lerner J. 2000. Assessing the Contribution of Venture Capital to Innovation.
Rand Journal of Economics, 31: 674-92

Krugman P. 2007. Innovating Our Way to Financial Crisis. New York Times, December 3



                                              89
Lamoreaux N, Levenstein M, Sokoloff K. 2007. Financing Invention During the Second
Industrial Revolution: Cleveland, Ohio, 1870-1920, ed. Lamoreaux N, Sokoloff L, Financing
Innovation in the United States, 1870 to the Present. Cambridge: MIT Press

Lerner J. 2002. Where Does State Street Lead? A First Look at Finance Patents, 1971-2000.
Journal of Finance, 57: 901-30.

Lerner J. 2006. The New New Financial Thing: The Origins of Financial Innovations. Journal of
Financial Economics, 79: 233-55

Lerner J. 2010. The Litigation of Financial Innovations. Journal of Law and Economics,
forthcoming

Lerner J, Sorensen M, Stromberg P. 2008. Private Equity and Long-Run Investment: The Case of
Innovation. Working paper no. 14623, National Bureau of Economic Research

Litan R. 2010. In Defense of Much, but Not All, Financial Innovation. Unpublished working
paper, Brookings Institution

Loutskina E, Strahan P. 2009. Securitization and the Declining Impact of Bank Finance on Loan
Supply: Evidence from Mortgage Originations. Journal of Finance, 64: 861-89

Mason S, Merton R, Perold A, Tufano P. 1995. Cases in Financial Engineering: Applied Studies
of Financial Innovation. New Jersey: Prentice Hall

Mayer C, Pence K, Sherlund S. 2009. The Rise in Mortgage Defaults. Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 23: 27-50

McClelland, P. 1968. Railroads, American Growth, and the New Economic History: A Critique
The Journal of Economic History 28, :1 102-123

Merton R. 1992. Financial Innovation and Economic Performance. Journal of Applied Corporate
Finance, 4 (Winter): 12-22

Mian A, Sufi A. 2008. The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence from the 2007
Mortgage Default Crisis. Working Paper 13936, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Michalak T, Uhde A. 2010. Credit Risk Securitization and Banking Stability: Evidence from the
Micro-Level       for   Europe.     University    of   Bochum   Working       Paper    Series.
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1383469

Michalopoulos S, Laeven L, Levine R. 2010. Financial Innovation and Endogenous Growth.
Unpublished working paper, Brown University

Miller M. 1986. Financial Innovation: The Last Twenty Years and the Next. Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis. 21: 459-71

                                             90
Mishra P. 2010. Financial Innovation in Financial Markets: A Reassessment. Unpublished
working paper, Indian Institute of Technical Education and Research

Mollica M, and Zingales L. 2007, The Impact of Venture Capital on Innovation and the Creation
of New Business. Unpublished working paper, University of Chicago

Murray G. 1998. A Policy Response to Regional Disparities in the Supply of Risk Capital to
New Technology-based Firms in the European Union: The European Seed Capital Fund Scheme.
Regional Studies, 32: 405-19

Nerlove, M. 1966. Review: Railroads and American Economic Growth. The Journal of
Economic History 26, 1: 107-115

Odean T. 1999. Do Investors Trade Too Much? American Economic Review, 89: 1279-98

Panetta F, Pozzolo A. 2010. Why Do Banks Securitize Their Assets? Bank-Level Evidence from
Over       One       Hundred      Countries.     Bank    of    Italy   Working      Paper.
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1572983

Persons J, Warther V. 1997. Boom and Bust Patterns in the Adoption of Financial Innovations.
Review of Financial Studies, 10: 939-67

Petrin A. 2002. Quantifying the Benefits of New Products: The Case of the Minivan.
Journal of Political Economy, 110: 705-29

Purnanandam A. 2009. Originate-to-Distribute Model and the Subprime Mortgage Crisis. AFA
2010 Atlanta Meetings Paper. http://ssrn.com.ezp-prod1.hul.harvard.edu/abstract=1167786

Rogers E. 1962. Diffusion of Innovations. New York: Free Press

Rosen R. 2007 The Role of Securitization in Mortgage Lending. In Chicago Fed Letter: Essays on
Issues. Chicago: Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago

Ross S. 1976. Options and Efficiency. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 90: 75-89

Ryan A, Trumbull G, Tufano P. 2010. A Brief Post-War History of Consumer Finance.
unpublished manuscript

Sarkisyan A, Casu B, Clare A, Thomas S. 2010. Securitization and Bank Performance. Sir John
Cass     Business     School    Working      Paper    Series, City   University    London.
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1490925
Schwarcz S. 2008. Systemic Risk. Georgetown Law Journal, 97: 193-249

Shiller R. 2008. The Subprime Solution: How Today’s Global Financial Crisis Happened and
What to Do About It. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press

                                              91
Silber W, ed, 1975. Financial Innovation. Lexington MA:. Lexington Books

Silber W. 1983. The Process of Financial Innovation. American Economic Review Papers and
Proceedings, 73: 89-95
Sirri E, Tufano P. 1995. The Economics of Pooling, ed. D Crane, The Global Financial System,
Boston: HBS Press

Sirmans C, Benjamin J. 1990. Pricing Fixed Rate Mortgages: Some Empirical Evidence. Journal
of Financial Services Research, 4: 191-202

Slater R. 1997. John Bogle and the Vanguard Experiment. Chicago IL: Irwin

Stein J. 1997. Internal Capital Markets and the Competition for Corporate Resources. Journal of
Finance, 52: 111-33

Strömberg P. 2008. The New Demography of Private Equity. In Globalization of Alternative
Investments Working Papers Volume 1: Global Economic Impact of Private Equity 2008, eds
Gurung A, Lerner J. New York: World Economic Forum USA, pp. 3-26

Sylvan D, Majeski S. 1998. A Methodology for the Study of Historical Counterfactuals.
International Studies Quarterly, 42: 79-108

Tetlok P, Lebow R. 2001. Poking Counterfactual Holes in Covering Laws: Cognitive Styles and
Historical Reasoning. American Political Science Review, 95: 829-43

Trajtenberg M. 1990. A Penny for Your Quotes: Patent Citations and the Value of Inventions.
Rand Journal of Economics, 21: 172-87

Tufano P. 1989. Financial Innovation and First-Mover Advantages. Journal of Financial
Economics, 25: 213-40.

Tufano P. 1995. Securities Innovations: A Historical and Functional Perspective. Journal of
Applied Corporate Finance, 7 (Winter): 90-103

Tufano P. 2003. Financial Innovation. In Handbook of the Economics of Finance (Volume 1a:
Corporate Finance), eds. Constantinides G, Harris M, and Stulz R. New York: Elsevier, 307-36

Tufano P, Kyrillos B. 1994. Leland O’Brien Rubinstein Associates Incorporated: SuperTrust.
Case Study 294-050: Harvard Business School




                                              92
