NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SPECULATORS AND MIDDLEMEN:
THE STRATEGY AND PERFORMANCE OF INVESTORS IN THE HOUSING MARKET
Patrick Bayer
Christopher Geissler
Kyle Mangum
James W. Roberts
Working Paper 16784
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16784
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2011

Previously circulated as "Speculators and Middlemen: The Role of Flippers in the Housing Market"
and as "Speculators and Middlemen: The Role of Intermediaries in the Housing Market." We thank
Ed Glaeser, Matt Kahn, Chris Mayer, Fernando Ferreira, Donghoon Lee, Andy Haughwout, Wilbert
Van der Klauww, Steve Ross, Amine Ouazad, Todd Sinai, Joe Gyourko, the seminar participants at
Harvard University, University of California at Berkeley and the Haas School of Business, London
School of Economics, Mannheim, Toulouse, Zurich, University of Georgia, INSEAD, CREST, Northwestern
University and Kellogg Business School, Duke-ERID Housing Market Dynamics Conference, HULM
conference and the UCLA Housing Market Conference for their useful feedback on the paper. We
are grateful for Duke University’s financial support. Any errors are our own. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Patrick Bayer, Christopher Geissler, Kyle Mangum, and James W. Roberts. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Speculators and Middlemen: The Strategy and Performance of Investors in the Housing Market
Patrick Bayer, Christopher Geissler, Kyle Mangum, and James W. Roberts
NBER Working Paper No. 16784
February 2011, Revised February 2015
JEL No. E3,G01,G1,G12,G14,G28,H7,R0,R21,R31,R51
ABSTRACT
Housing market transactions are a matter of public record and thus provide a rare opportunity to analyze
the behavior, performance, and strategies of individual investors. Using data for all housing transactions
in the Los Angeles area from 1988-2009, this paper provides empirical evidence on investor behavior
that is consistent with several rationales for speculative investment in the finance literature, including
the roles of middlemen and naïve speculators. Speculative activity by novice investors increased sharply
in the recent housing boom. These investors earned little more than the market rate of appreciation
and demonstrated no ability to foresee market price movements.
Patrick Bayer
Department of Economics
Duke University
213 Social Sciences
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
patrick.bayer@duke.edu

Kyle Mangum
Department of Economics
Andrew Young School of Public Policy Studies
Georgia State University
P.O. Box 3992
Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
kmangum104@gmail.com

Christopher Geissler
Duke University
Department of Economics
Box 90097
Durham, NC 27708
christopher.geissler@duke.edu

James W. Roberts
Duke University
Department of Economics
213 Social Sciences Building
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
j.roberts@duke.edu

1

Introduction

Modern finance theory permits speculators to play a more nuanced role than that of the classic
arbitrageurs of efficient markets theory (e.g. Friedman (1953) and Fama (1965)). Numerous
models in the literature include a class of naı̈ve agents that participate in the market despite
a limitation in some aspect of decision-making such as myopia, bounded rationality, limited
information processing, or the use of simple trading rules.1 In the presence of such naı̈ve
investors, well-informed rational speculators may develop strategies that go beyond acting
to immediately correct instances of mis-pricing. And, as a result, these models support
equilibria in which prices may deviate significantly from market fundamentals over extended
periods, with the frequency, duration, and extent of these deviations varying with the mix of
different classes of investors in the market.
The implications of this important class of models in theoretical finance are closely linked
to the behavior and strategies of individual investors in the market. How well-informed
actual investors are, whether they behave in a manner consistent with naı̈ve or rational
decision-making, and whether the activity of various types of investors is sufficient to be
quantitatively important for equilibrium price dynamics emerge as key empirical questions.
In most financial markets, the confidential nature of trades and investment accounts makes it
impossible to study the behavior of the individual investors active in the market in any detail.
Because all transactions are a matter of public record, however, the housing market provides
a rare opportunity to examine the investment decisions of the full set of market participants.
Using comprehensive transaction data from the Los Angeles metro area between 1988-2009
(more than three million transactions in all), the main goal of this paper is to characterize
the behavior, performance, and apparent strategies of speculative investors in the housing
market. In so doing, we seek to provide an empirical foundation for the large theoretical
literature in finance that uses various kinds of investors as important elements of the theory.
We view the housing market as an attractive area to study investor behavior not simply
because of data availability. Rather, existing evidence, which we supplement in this paper,
suggests that investors were involved in a large fraction of the transactions during the recent
rise and crash in the housing market. For example, a recent study by Haughwout, Lee,
Tracy, and van der Klaauw (2011) suggests that there was a flood of amateur investment
that occurred late in the housing boom of the 2000s, as a large number of homeowners
began buying second homes with the intention of quickly re-selling or “flipping” them for a
profit. Using detailed data drawn from credit reports, Haughwout, Lee, Tracy, and van der
Klaauw (2011) document that, in the states that experienced the largest booms and busts,
1

See, for example, De Long, Shleifer, Summers, and Waldmann (1990), Abreu and Brunnermeier (2002)
and Abreu and Brunnermeier (2003).

2

over 50 percent of the homes sold at the height of the boom were purchased by individuals
who already had a mortgage on another property. Chinco and Mayer (2012) use housing
transactions merged with tax assessor data to document a similar pattern for out-of-town
buyers, as identified by the property tax billing address, with their share rising as high as 17
percent in some boom markets. The sheer number of homeowners who began investing in
real estate raises the real possibility that such speculation may have helped to fuel the boom,
driving prices to record heights in many markets and default and foreclosure rates to record
levels in the subsequent bust.2
The possible contribution of real estate investors to a housing bubble has led some policymakers to propose restrictions on their activity.3 Yet, such restrictions may inadvertently
hamper the many welfare-enhancing roles that intermediaries play in markets that are subject to important search and informational frictions. In the housing market, intermediaries
that buy with the intention of re-selling after a short holding period may (i) provide liquidity
to the market as middlemen, purchasing from motivated sellers with high holding costs and
waiting more patiently for the right buyer, (ii) make substantial physical improvements to
homes, thereby helping to restore the housing stock in older neighborhoods and (iii) seek
to exploit superior information about market fundamentals as rational speculators. In this
last role, intermediaries may improve market efficiency by keeping prices more in line with
market fundamentals (Fama (1965)).
It is entirely possible, however, that most of the investors that entered the real estate
market near the recent peak played none of these welfare-enhancing roles. With access to
equity in their primary homes or easy mortgage credit more generally, many of these investors
may simply have been betting that the boom would continue for a while longer, gambling
in many cases with only a limited amount of their own money. As Glaeser (2013) noted
in his Richard T. Ely lecture, speculation is a natural and common feature of real estate
markets and does not, in and of itself, indicate irrationality on the part of investors or signify
a problem with the functioning the market.
Instead, it is the information content of this speculation that matters. If, in fact, this
new class of speculators bought homes without exploiting any meaningful information about
2

A number of recent papers document general facts about housing booms and busts (e.g. Himmelberg,
Mayer, and Sinai (2005), Glaeser (2013), Sinai (2013)). While a variety of factors certainly contributed to the
recent rise and fall in housing prices, there is no current consensus as to the primary sources (e.g. Landvoight,
Piazzesi, and Schneider (2011), Ferreira and Gyourko (2011), Glaeser (2013) Glaeser, Gottlieb, and Gyourko
(2013)).
3
For example, a 2006 HUD regulation (Federal Register, volume 71, page 33,138) prevented FHA financing
for houses sold within 90 days of purchase. Partly in response to the weak housing market, HUD waived
this restriction in 2010 (Federal Register, volume 75, page 28,633). More broadly, anti-speculative policy
prescriptions such as transaction taxes have been suggested in other speculative markets. See, for example,
Tobin (1974), Tobin (1978), Eichengreen, Tobin, and Wyplosz (1995) or Summers and Summers (1988).

3

market fundamentals, there is much more limited scope for their activity to have improved
market efficiency, regardless of whether they behaved rationally. Thus, whether speculators’
acted with superior information emerges as a key question for understanding their likely
impact on the market during the recent boom.
Therefore, given the extant evidence that investors purchased a large fraction of homes
during the recent boom and bust in the housing market, the ambiguity over the ultimate
effect these investors had on the housing market, and the fact that how well-informed these
investors are is key in resolving this ambiguity, the central aim of this paper is to study the
behavior of individual investors in great detail. In particular, using transaction data from the
Los Angeles metro area between 1988-2009, we marshal three key broad forms of evidence
about the role of investors in this market.
(1) We begin by documenting that a large share of the properties that were purchased
in the Los Angeles market late in the boom were bought by those already holding another
property in the area, presumably as an investment property. These findings are consistent
with Haughwout, Lee, Tracy, and van der Klaauw (2011) cited above. The sheer magnitude
of the activity of novice investors suggests they play a non-negligible role in the market and
supports their use in theory at a basic level.
(2) We next show that two very distinct types of investors are generally active in the real
estate market corresponding to the roles of middlemen and speculators described above. For
this portion of our analysis, we focus primarily on the behavior of a set of individuals that
we observe re-selling two or more properties after short holding periods, using the common
colloquial name “flippers” to refer to investors employing any of the investment strategies described above. Relative to most financial products, tracking investment behavior in a durable
good, like housing, is complicated by the fact that owners may invest in the good before reselling. In that event, a portion of any price appreciation is likely due to such improvements,
not any particular ability of the investor to buy cheap, or sell dear. To address this challenge, we introduce a novel research design using properties that sell repeatedly during the
study period to decompose the observed price growth during the flipper’s holding period into
four components: (i) the discount relative to market price at the time of purchase, (ii) the
premium relative to market at the time of sale, (iii) the market return during the holding
period, and (iv) physical improvements made to the property by flippers. Our research design
distinguishes any costly improvements that a flipper may have made (which are not directly
observed in the data) by measuring the extent to which any above-market appreciation that
a flipper earns at sale persists through a subsequent sale of the same property.
The behavior and sources of returns for those that we identify as middlemen closely mirror
those predicted by economic theory. In particular, they purchase properties at prices well4

below market value and re-sell them quickly at, or above, market prices. The steep discount
that they receive by buying from (presumably) desperate or “motivated” sellers accounts for
the majority of their returns. Market timing, on the other hand, is not an important source
of their returns; in fact, they operate more intensely during periods when prices are stagnant
or declining and systematically target submarkets that are appreciating slower than the rest
of the metro area.
This contrasts sharply with the behavior and apparent strategy of the novice investors
that entered the market in large numbers during the boom. Relative to market prices, these
investors do not buy at much of a discount or sell at much of a premium, suggesting that most
are not inordinately skilled real estate professionals. Instead these novice investors earn most
of their return through the market appreciation over the period that they hold the property.
Speculators operate primarily during boom times and purchase homes in submarkets of the
Los Angeles area that experience both an above average rate of appreciation in the short
term (next 1-2 years) and a sharp decline in the intermediate term (3-5 years).
(3) Having established that these latter investors rely almost exclusively on market timing,
we explore whether they show any signs of being able to foresee market price movements. In
particular, we examine whether the novice investors that purchased homes late in the boom
were able to anticipate the market peak, or instead seem to exhibit trend chasing behavior.
Remarkably, not only did they continue to purchase homes at near record rates right up to the
peak,4 there is also no change in the rate at which they sold their existing holdings, despite a
clear financial incentive to do so. The latter result holds even for properties purchased many
quarters before the peak, which had appreciated considerably before the peak. This portion
of our analysis is very much in the spirit of Temin and Voth (2004) and Brunnermeier and
Nagel (2004). Quite in contrast to our results for novice investors, Temin and Voth (2004)
study a sophisticated investor who successfully profited from “riding” the South Sea bubble
and Brunnermeier and Nagel (2004) find that hedge funds were able reduce their exposure
to tech stocks before the dotcom bubble burst.
Taken as a whole, the evidence that we present provides a comprehensive picture of the
activity of novice investors in the housing boom that is consistent with the typical portrait
of naı̈ve behavior captured in many theoretical models of financial markets. We find no
indication that the speculators that poured into the market late in the boom had access to
superior information, which is consistent with the notion that many of these investors had
very limited experience and may have simply been swept up in the exuberance of the boom.
This is of course also consistent with famous accounts of speculative activity by Charles
4
While some of this activity may have been fueled by easy mortgage credit access, the average loan-to-value
(LTV) ratio for speculators at the market peak remained near 80 percent, suggesting that many investors
did have some of their own money at stake.

5

Mackay5 and Kindelberger (1978), who in his “anatomy of a typical crisis” notes that bubbles
are frequently characterized by “More and more firms and households that previously had
been aloof from these speculative ventures” beginning to participate in the market. That
these speculators were not particularly well-informed also casts doubt on the likelihood that
they improved efficiency by transmitting any valuable information to the market. In short,
not only do these investors have very little prior experience in real estate investing, but
they also showed no signs of being especially proficient at real estate bargaining or wellinformed about market movements. That these agents were party to such a large number of
transactions during the final few years of the housing boom not only justifies their use as a
theoretical device but also suggests that their activity may be of first-order importance from
a policy perspective.
Our paper brings together the literature on housing market dynamics and speculation.
Housing comprises a large share of individuals’ wealth: by one recent account (Bostic, Gabriel,
and Painter (2009)), by 2004 housing had grown to make-up more than 50 percent of a
typical household’s wealth. Yet in comparison to the existing empirical literature that studies
the role of individual investors in traditional financial markets during bubble-like episodes,6
scant research directly studies real estate investors’ behavior during, and potential impact
on, housing bubbles.7 In so doing, our paper improves our understanding of the micro
foundations of housing price dynamics, which economists increasingly recognize as having
meaningful effects on real economic activity (Iacoviello (2005), Campbell and Cocco (2007),
Mian and Sufi (2010), Liu, Wang, and Zha (forthcoming), Glaeser (2013)).
The paper proceeds as follows. To frame the empirical analysis, Section 2 presents a
simple theoretical discussion of the economic roles of flippers as middlemen and speculators.
Section 3 describes the data. Section 4 outlines the research design that will allow us to
identify flipper returns and their sources. Section 5 gives our primary empirical results.
Section 6 studies the robustness of our findings. Section 7.1 relates speculator activity to
local housing bubbles. Section 7.2 presents evidence that the increased activity of these
investors even as housing prices neared their peak does not reflect these speculators acting
on the basis of superior information about housing fundamentals. Section 8 concludes.
5

In his well-known description of the boom and bust in the 1637 Dutch tulip market Mackay commented
that at its peak, “Nobles, citizens, farmers, mechanics, seamen, footmen, maid-servants, even chimney-sweeps
and old clotheswomen, dabbled in tulips” (see Mackay (1841), page 94).
6
E.g. Temin and Voth (2004) who study the South Sea bubble, Garber (1989) who studies the Dutch
tulip bubble or Brunnermeier and Nagel (2004), Greenwood and Nagel (2009) or Griffin, Harris, Shu, and
Topaloglu (2011) who, along with others, study investor behavior during the dotcom bubble.
7
Recent work, developed independently of our own, that also investigates investor behavior during the
recent housing bubble includes Haughwout, Lee, Tracy, and van der Klaauw (2011) and Chinco and Mayer
(2012). Glaeser (2013) provides a detailed overview of a number of other interesting episodes of real estate
speculation in American history and the corresponding academic literature.

6

2

A Conceptual Framework

To frame the empirical analysis, it is helpful to present a conceptual discussion that highlights
the potential economic roles of flippers as middlemen and speculators.

2.1

Flippers as Middlemen

Housing markets are a classic example of a thin market for high-valued durable goods and,
as a result, the home-selling problem is generally modeled in a search theoretic framework.8
When selling a home, a household lists the property for sale and waits for offers from buyers
to arrive, determining its reservation price (i.e., minimum acceptable offer) as a function of
market conditions and its motivation to sell or holding costs. In general, holding costs for
comparable properties vary across sellers depending on how quickly they need to relocate,
their consumption value from residing in the house (if they continue to do so), and their
borrowing costs.
Flippers who purchase a property with plans to immediately put the house back on the
market face an analogous home-selling problem to that of other home-owners. As a result,
flippers will be able to profitably bid above the seller’s reservation price only when their
holding costs are lower than that of the seller. The holding costs of flippers will generally be
governed by their borrowing costs or, more generally, their cost of capital.
Because flippers do not receive consumption value from residing in the home, their holding
costs will generally be greater than those of a large fraction of sellers who can continue
to reside in their home while waiting for offers to arrive and face little pressure to sell
quickly. A motivated seller, however, may have a holding cost that exceeds those of flippers
if, for example, the seller needs to relocate to a new city or sell a house quickly to settle a
divorce.9 When transaction costs are sufficiently low, a flipper’s maximum bid will exceed
the reservation price of sufficiently motivated sellers, and flippers will be able to purchase
the property with the intention to immediately re-list it for sale, waiting more patiently than
the existing home-owner for a strong offer to arrive.
The economic function of flippers that buy properties from especially motivated sellers,
hold them for a short period, and then sell them to a buyer that places a sufficiently high value
on the property is that of a middleman. When flippers operate as middlemen, motivated
sellers are dynamically matched to future buyers that place a higher value on the property
(on average) than those who the seller would have sold to in the absence of flippers. In this
8

For example, see Goetzmann and Peng (2006).
Springer (1996) finds that distressed sellers deal more quickly and sell for less than other sellers. Glower,
Haurin, and Hendershott (1998) find that when a seller takes a new job, she sells faster than average,
indicating a higher holding cost.
9

7

capacity, flippers provide liquidity to the market, essentially providing a price floor that is a
function of their cost of capital and market conditions, and their presence generally improves
the economic efficiency of the market.

2.2

Flippers as Speculators

The theoretical finance literature supports (at least) two broad rationales for the existence
of speculators in the housing market. Most obviously, efficient market theory admits an
economic role for speculators that have access to better information than the broad set of
agents participating in a market. Given the decentralized nature of the housing market, with
many individuals taking part in the home buying or selling process only a handful of times
during their lives, it is straightforward that some market professionals might be especially
well-informed or be able to process information in a sophisticated way that generates arbitrage
opportunities. In the classic theory of efficient markets, speculators, acting on the basis of
their superior information, serve to align prices more closely with market fundamentals,
generally improving the efficiency of the market (Fama (1965)).
Modern finance theory admits a wider range of strategies for speculators and a more
ambiguous understanding of their impact on welfare and efficiency.10 A starting point for
much of modern finance theory is the presence of a set of naı̈ve market actors, noise traders,
who are subject to expectations and sentiments that are not justified by information about
market fundamentals. By following simple strategies, such as chasing trends, or by sticking to
rules of thumb, noise traders can create distortions between prices and market fundamentals.
In this setting, potential arbitrageurs face multiple risks. Even if they are aware that prices
have temporarily deviated from fundamentals, there is a risk that they may deviate further
in the short-run (depending on the beliefs and activity of the noise traders) before eventually
falling back in line with fundamentals. It is not always optimal, therefore, for arbitrageurs
to simply take a short position on any observed market deviations from fundamentals.
In fact, it can be optimal to pursue a much wider range of strategies. If, for example, noise
traders engage in positive feedback trading - i.e., have a tendency to extrapolate or to chase
the trend, it can be optimal for rational speculators to jump on the bandwagon (DeLong,
Shleifer, Summers, and Waldmann (1990)). By buying as noise traders begin to get interested
in a market, speculators actually fuel the positive feedback trading that motivates the noise
traders. And, by selling as the market nears a peak, speculators speed the return of the
market to the fundamentals. In this case, rational speculators take advantage of the noise
traders by strategically selling before the noise traders realize the bubble is about to burst.
10

See Shleifer and Summers (1990), Barberis and Thaler (2003) and Shiller (2003) for summaries of this
literature.

8

In this way, the welfare consequences of the existence of speculators need not be positive. To
the extent that their actions fuel bubbles and increase volatility in the market, speculators
tend to decrease welfare and market efficiency.
The strategies used by these distinct types of investors directly influence when and where
they operate. Flippers, who generally do not reside in the property while holding it, will
only purchase properties when their expected returns, whether achieved by buying low from
motivated sellers or speculating on market appreciation, exceed their expected holding and
transactions costs. For middlemen, opportunities to buy may occur under any market conditions, provided they are able to identify especially motivated sellers (those with higher
holding costs than their own). Speculators will require expected market appreciation to be
sufficiently high to justify their purchases and, therefore, will be active in only those times
and places where conditions are right.

3

Data

The primary data set that we have assembled for our analysis is based on a large database of
housing transactions compiled by Dataquick Information Services, a national real estate data
company. Dataquick acquires data from public sources like local tax assessor offices, and they
have provided us with the complete census of housing transactions in the five largest counties
in the Los Angeles metropolitan area (Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside, San Bernardino, and
Ventura), between 1988 and 2009. For each transaction, the data contain the names of the
buyer and seller, the transaction price, the address, the transaction date, and numerous
characteristics including, for example, square footage, year built, number of bathrooms and
bedrooms, lot size and whether the house has a pool. While we are able to observe the date,
price and names of the buyer and seller for every transaction in the data, a drawback of
the data is that Dataquick only maintains a current assessor file and overwrites historical
information on house characteristics. This means that because the data were purchased in
2009, we observe housing characteristics as they were that year, and consequently we cannot
see how they may have evolved over time. This data limitation will partially motivate our
research design to control for unobserved investment in houses that is explained below.11
From the original census of transactions, we drop observations if a property was subdivided or split into several smaller properties and re-sold, the price of the house was less
11

A research design to address the possibility of unobserved improvements to properties would be necessary
even if Dataquick kept track of housing attributes on a continuous basis, as many home improvements (e.g.,
a renovated kitchen or bathroom) would not generally affect the more basic attributes of the home (e.g., lot
size, square footage) collected by the tax assessor.

9

than $1,12 the house sold more than once in a single day, the price or square footage was in
the top or bottom one percent of the sample, there is a potential inconsistency in the data
such as the transaction year being earlier than the year the house was built, or the sum of
mortgages is $5,000 more than the house price, as this may indicate that the buyer intends
to do substantial renovations.
Mean
Price
280,823
Square Footage
1,605
Transaction Year
1999.8
Year Built
1970.2
Has Loan?
0.908
LTV
0.786
Number of Transactions
2.20

Std. Dev
195,478
615
4.99
21.2
0.289
0.288
1.17

Table 1: The table shows transaction-level summary statistics for data that cover five counties
in the Los Angeles area (Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside, San Bernardino, and Ventura) based
on 3,544,615 transactions from 1988-2009. LTV is measured relative to the price paid at the
time of initial purchase.
Table 1 provides summary statistics for our primary data set based on a full sample of
over 3.5 million transactions between 1988-2009. Homes in Los Angeles tend to be newer and
more expensive than those in many other American cities. The vast majority of buyers take
out a mortgage, with an average LTV of 78.6 percent. Finally, the homes that were sold at
least once during the sample period turned over on average every 9 to 10 years.
Figure 1 shows the basic dynamics of prices and transaction volume for the Los Angeles
metropolitan area over the study period. The price index is computed with our data using
a standard repeat sales method that we describe in Section 4. Following a rapid increase
in prices in the late 1980s, the early 1990s were a “cold” market period for Los Angeles,
with prices declining by roughly 30 percent between 1992 and 1997 and transaction volume
averaging only a little more than 30,000 houses per quarter during this period. Starting in
the late 1990s and continuing until early 2006, the Los Angeles housing market experienced
a major boom, with house prices more than tripling and transaction volume nearly doubling.
Just two years later almost all of the appreciation in house prices from the previous decade
had evaporated and transaction volume had fallen to record low levels (less than 20,000
houses per quarter). In the analysis below, we will reference the three key market periods
evident in Figure 1: the “cold” market period in the early 1990’s (1992-1998), the “hot” or
12
A price of zero suggests that the seller did not put the house on the open market and instead transferred
ownership to a family member or friend.

10

boom market period in the late 1990’s and early 2000’s (1999-2005) and the “post-peak”
period (2006-2009).

Figure 1: Quarterly transaction volume in five counties in the Los Angeles area (Los Angeles,
Orange, Riverside, San Bernardino, and Ventura).

3.1

Flippers

A basic measurement challenge for anyone wishing to study the behavior of investors in the
housing market in these data is identifying such agents in the first place. One clever approach
utilized by Haughwout, Lee, Tracy, and van der Klaauw (2011) is to examine credit reports
and look for cases where the same individual is observed to hold mortgages on multiple
properties. While some instances of second home purchases may be motivated by reasons
other than pure investment (e.g., vacation properties, first homes purchased for children), by
carefully documenting the pattern of new home purchases by individuals who own multiple
properties, these authors are able to provide a reasonable proxy for the amount of investor
activity in the market at a given point in time. Haughwout, Lee, Tracy, and van der Klaauw
(2011) document that a large fraction of new mortgage originations (over 50 percent in some
markets) in 2004-2006 in the states that experienced the largest housing booms/busts were
made to individuals who already owned at least one house.
Figure 2 reports the time series for three distinct proxies for flipper behavior in the
Los Angeles market between 1991-2009 derived from our transaction data set. The first of
11

these, labeled “Second Homes”, is constructed in the spirit of Haughwout, Lee, Tracy, and
van der Klaauw (2011) by identifying individuals that own two homes at the same time. In
particular, we categorize a home as a second home if the buyer’s name matches that of an
individual that we also observe to be simultaneously holding another property in our data
set. A fundamental problem with this definition, of course, is that for an individual to be
observed as a home-owner at all, they need to have purchased a home since the beginning
of our study period in 1988. Thus, our measure of “Second Homes” is likely to substantially
understate the amount of actual second home purchases, especially near the beginning of
the sample period. For this reason, it is important not to over-interpret the trends in the
measure. However, even subject to this limitation, our measure of second home purchases
closely tracks that of Haughwout, Lee, Tracy, and van der Klaauw (2011), rising to a peak
of nearly 30 percent of the market in 2006.13
Many housing market investors ought not to be considered flippers since there are motivations aside from speculation, arbitrage or property improvement that can drive investment
in housing. One concrete example is the aim to rent the property. To identify flippers, therefore, we look for evidence that an individual is generally engaged in a strategy of purchasing
homes with the intention of re-selling the property after a relatively short holding period. In
this spirit, we generate a second time series shown in Figure 2, “Purchases Re-Sold in Two
Years” which simply reports the fraction of all homes (regardless of the buyer) purchased in a
given quarter that are re-sold within two years. Well over 15 percent of all homes purchased
near the peak of the boom in 2003-2005 were re-sold within two years, a rate that is more
than triple the corresponding rate for the cold market period of 1991-1994, when home prices
were declining. While certainly a portion of the buyers that re-sell homes within two years
of purchase are owner-occupants rather than investors, this time series provides a proxy for
flipper-like behavior in the market throughout the cycle and is economically significant.
For the vast majority of our analysis, we focus not on flipped homes per se, but on a set
of individuals and firms that we identify as flippers. We identify flippers using two pieces of
information in our data set: the period of time that a house was held and the names of buyers
and sellers. We define a flipper to be anyone that we observe buying and selling at least X
different properties while holding them for less than Y years. For most of our analysis we
set X=2 and Y=2, (i.e., flippers are those who have bought and sold at least two properties,
each with a holding period of less than two years), but we also explore in detail how flipper
behavior, strategy, and returns are affected by variation in X and Y.
13

A second limitation of our definition of second home purchases is that it is based on name matches and,
therefore, might be overstated because of false matches of different individuals with the same name. The
qualitative pattern of a sharp peak in the presence of second home purchasers in 2004-2006, however, is not
meaningfully affected by the exclusion of the most common names observed in the data set.

12

Figure 2: The figure plots three data series that serve as proxies for investor and flipper
activity. “Purchases Re-Sold in Two Years” plots the fraction of all homes purchased in a
given quarter that are re-sold within two years. “Second Homes” plots the fraction of new
purchases by individuals with names matching those of a current home-owner in the data
set. “Purchases by Flippers” plots the fraction of homes purchased by individuals that are
identified as flippers, defined in the text, for the purposes of our analysis. The data cover
five counties in the Los Angeles area (Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside, San Bernardino, and
Ventura).
Limiting our definition of flippers to individuals that we observe buying and selling multiple homes after a short holding period provides a conservative measure of flipper activity,
as we certainly miss any individuals who engage in this activity only once during the sample
period or who tend to hold properties for slightly longer periods of time. We do so to make
sure that we avoid (as much as possible) counting normal owner-occupants as flippers. The
final data series, “Purchases by Flippers” shown in Figure 2 reports the fraction of housing
transactions in each quarter that were made by individuals that we define as flippers. Note
that this measure includes all homes purchased by flippers regardless of how quickly these
homes are re-sold. This time series generally tracks housing market conditions, peaking at
over 5 percent of all purchases in 2006, a rate that is 4-5 times higher than the rate of flipper
activity in the early 1990s.
Overall, the three broad metrics of aggregate investor or flipper activity shown in Figure
2 show a consistent pattern of pro-cyclical behavior, with purchases by these agents reaching
a maximum at the peak of the housing boom, at levels that are roughly three times the level
13

activity observed during the market trough in the early 1990s. Below we will identify investor
types whose strategies and participation over the housing cycle will differ from one another.

3.2

Purchase Activity by Flippers

In the analysis that follows, we document considerable heterogeneity in flipper behavior,
strategy, and outcomes that is strongly associated with experience. Figure 3 shows the
percentage of all homes purchased in a given quarter by flippers in four experience categories.
We define the category Flipper 1 as those flipping 2 or 3 houses, Flipper 2 as those flipping
4-6 houses, Flipper 3 as those flipping 7-10 homes, and Flipper 4 as those flipping 11 or more
homes. For the purposes of this definition, we count a purchase as a flipped home if it was
re-sold within two years and we categorize flippers on the basis of their activity over the full
sample period. The sum of all four data series presented in Figure 3 produces the total count
of flipper purchases shown in Figure 2.

Figure 3: Flipper sales over time by type: The figure plots flipper sales by year. Flipper 1:
2-3 flips in study period, Flipper 2: 4-6 flips, Flipper 3: 7-10 flips, Flipper 4: 11 or more
flips. The data cover five counties in the Los Angeles area (Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside,
San Bernardino, and Ventura).
Figure 3 clearly illustrates that the dynamics of flipper activity depends on experience.
The purchase activity by more experienced flippers (Flipper 3 and Flipper 4) is relatively
constant over the study period, actually peaking in the colder market period of the mid1990s. This pattern of activity is consistent with the view that the more experienced flippers
14

tend to operate as middlemen, looking for opportunities to buy from motivated sellers with
higher holding costs than their own, opportunities that are just as (or perhaps more) likely
to arise in cold versus hot market conditions.
The purchase activity by inexperienced flippers (Flipper 2 and especially Flipper 1) is
highly pro-cyclical, rising from a very small percentage of the overall market in the early-mid
1990s to almost 5 percent of the market in 2004-2006. This pattern of activity is consistent
with the view that many inexperienced investors were drawn into the market during the
boom period. While this measure of activity is not enough to establish the motives of these
flippers, the timing of their purchases is certainly consistent with a view that they are seeking
to make a quick speculative gain on the basis of market appreciation.
It is worth noting at the outset that our definition of flipper experience is far from perfect.
In particular, our measure of experience is based on activity over the full study period. Thus,
many of the flippers that we categorize as inexperienced may, in fact, ultimately become more
experienced if they continue to flip homes after our study period ends. Moreover, survival
in the flipping business is likely to be non-random, with more profitable flippers being more
likely to survive long enough in the business to reach the higher experience categories. In
our analysis below, we will explicitly address these and other issues that arise due to our
definition of flipper experience.
A final aspect of flipper purchase activity that is important to describe at the outset of
our analysis is the heterogeneity in the attributes of homes purchased by flippers of each
type. To this end, Table 2 summarizes some basic characteristics of the homes purchases by
flippers of each type.
Flipper Type
Year Built
Year Bought
Square Feet
N

1
1965.1
(23.2)
2001.9
(3.19)
1,504
(592)
25,181

All Flips
2
3
1959.8 1955.4
(23.6) (23.6)
2001.4 2001.0
(3.56) (3.71)
1,438 1,360
(513) (516)
5,678 2,322

4
All Houses
1949.6
1971.0
(22.6)
(20.9)
1999.6
2000.2
(3.81)
(5.00)
1,284
1,563
(440)
(592)
2,596
2,187,081

Table 2: The table shows house-level summary statistics by type of flipper for data that cover
five counties in the Los Angeles area (Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside, San Bernardino, and
Ventura). Standard deviations are shown in parentheses. The right hand column includes
only those homes that sell at least twice.
As the table makes clear, flippers, especially experienced flippers, generally purchase
properties that are somewhat older and smaller than the homes that sell at least twice
15

during our study period. The research design that we present below for estimating the
sources of flipper returns is motivated in large part by the very real possibility that flippers
may systematically purchase older homes or “fixer-uppers” that can benefit from substantial
renovations or improvements before being re-sold. We also take additional steps to ensure
that we compare the sources of returns for flippers for comparable houses.

3.3

Flipper Holding Times

Before turning to our analysis of the sources of flipper returns, we present a final descriptive
characterization of the heterogeneous behavior of flippers at each experience level. Table 3
reports the fraction of homes sold by the investors we have classified as flippers of each type
within 1-4 years of the purchase. The table reports these statistics for our main study period
of 1992-2005 and separately for purchases made in the cold market period of 1992-1998 and
the hot market period of 1999-2005. To measure holding periods of up to four years, it is, of
course, necessary to restrict attention to homes that were purchased at least four years from
the end of the sample in 2009.

Flipper Type
Sell Within:
1 Year
2 Years
3 Years
4 Years

1
0.263
0.447
0.512
0.556

All
1992-2005
2
3
0.269
0.370
0.443
0.490

0.321
0.410
0.474
0.519

4

1

0.571
0.636
0.676
0.705

0.227
0.367
0.425
0.486

Cold
1992-1998
2
3
0.312
0.379
0.435
0.488

0.429
0.487
0.532
0.576

4

1

0.684
0.738
0.763
0.789

0.308
0.531
0.597
0.643

Hot
1999-2005
2
3
0.302
0.429
0.504
0.560

0.328
0.438
0.507
0.566

4
0.562
0.633
0.679
0.714

Table 3: The table reports the fraction of the homes purchased by flippers of different types
sold with 1, 2, 3, and 4 years, respectively, in the Los Angeles area (Los Angeles, Orange,
Riverside, San Bernardino, and Ventura counties).
The figures reported in Table 3 show that flippers of all types hold a significant fraction
of the properties that they purchase for more than four years. This may reflect the fact that
these investors intend to hold some properties as rental units or may reflect the fact that one
of the purchases that we observe in the data is the flipper’s primary residence.
Table 3 also reveals significant heterogeneity in holding periods by both flipper type and
market conditions. Experienced flippers, in particular those in category Flipper 4, are much
more likely to re-sell homes after very short holding periods. In fact, they sell close to 57
percent of all of the homes they purchase within the first year and more that 70 percent
within four years. During the cold market, this pattern is even more pronounced as Flipper
4’s sell almost 70 percent of their purchases within a year and almost 80 percent within four
years. This pattern is consistent with the notion that Flipper 4’s purchase many homes with
the intent to put them immediately back on the market and that these experienced flippers
16

serve the economic function of middlemen, seeking to buy cheaply from motivated sellers and
re-sell quickly.
By contrast, the figures for inexperienced flippers are very different. Flipper 1’s, for
example, sell only 26 percent of their purchases within a year of purchase, a figure that
steadily rises to 56 percent by the four year mark. This pattern of behavior is more consistent
with a strategy of buying properties with the intention of capturing market appreciation, a
strategy which, of course, requires a reasonable holding period.

4

Measuring the Sources of Flipper Returns - Research
Design

Having documented time series pattern of purchase activity by flippers and experiences,
we turn next to an analysis of the sources of their returns. At the outset, it is important
to note several key limitations that shape the interpretation of the results of our analysis.
In particular, we do not observe whether a home is rented to a tenant during a holding
period, any transactions costs that a flipper might pay while buying and selling a house, and
the borrowing costs that a flipper faces when procuring a mortgage in order to purchase a
property. Thus, we will not be able to calculate the actual profit that a flipper earns on each
investment.
Instead, we will focus only on the components of the returns that are associated directly
with the purchase, holding, and sale of the property. In particular, we seek to identify
(i) the discount that flippers get (relative to the average sales price in the market in the
corresponding period at the time of purchase), (ii) the market return that they earn over the
period that they hold the property and (iii) the premium that they get at the time of sale
(again relative to the average sales price in the market at the time). By measuring these
sources of flipper returns, we seek to categorize flippers on the basis of their motivation and
strategy to identify whether they appear to be operating as middlemen or speculators.
An important complicating factor is that flippers may systematically make physical improvements to the properties that they purchase, improvements which are unobserved in our
data set for the reasons mentioned in Section 3. The concern is that a naı̈ve analysis of
the sources of flipper returns from buying, holding, and selling a property might wind up
counting money that flippers invested in improving a property as part of their return. This
would be especially worrisome if flippers of different types modified the properties in different
ways.
To address this problem, we develop a research design that aims to uncover the sources

17

of flipper returns from buying, holding, and selling a property in the (potential) presence of
unobserved investment. The method is based on a repeat sales index which we first review.
Case and Shiller (1987) introduced the repeat sales regression to generate a price index:
log(pit ) = αt + γi + εit

(1)

In equation 1, αt are quarter fixed effects and γi are house-level fixed effects. Exponentiating
the estimated time fixed effects gives the price index for each quarter, which can be normalized
to 1 in any quarter. This framework requires that quality is constant for each house across
sales. Additionally, it assumes that the market evolves homogeneously across different regions
of a metropolitan area.
We modify this framework by first introducing controls for whether the buyer or seller is
a flipper as follows
log(pit ) = αt + γi + β1k bkit + β2k skit + εit .

(2)

In equation (2), bkit is a dummy for if the buyer is a flipper of type k = {1, 2, 3, 4} and skit is
a dummy equaling one if a flipper of type k is the seller. This estimated coefficients related to
flipper activity will provide estimates of the discount that flippers get when buying (should
β̂1k < 0) and the premium they command when selling (should β̂2k > 0), provided that
house quality is constant over time. If, however, flippers purchase houses and then invest
heavily to improve them before putting them back on the market, these parameter estimates
will be biased. In particular, we would expect β1k to be negative because the true house
quality in this period would be less than the estimated quality. Similarly, β2k would likely be
positive because the true quality in this period would be greater than the quality estimated.
The researcher may, therefore, infer that flippers are buying at a discount and selling at a
premium when they are simply investing more than the average homeowner.
Because of this concern, we adapt this framework to control for the possibility of unobserved investment in the property by the flipper by estimating
log(pit ) = αt + γi + β1k bkit + β2k skit + β3k akit + εit .

(3)

Here we introduce akit , which is equal to one if, in any previous period, we see a flipper of
type k purchase house i. This variable, therefore, controls for any improvements made by the
flipper that extend beyond average homeowner investment since β3k captures the change in
house quality between when the flipper purchased and sold the home. This is the specification
we estimate to compute the price index that appeared in Figure 1.

18

In the standard repeat sales framework, a house only helps to identify the time series of
market appreciation when it sells at least twice; otherwise it can only identify its corresponding house fixed effect. However, to identify the coefficients corresponding to sources of flipper
returns and investment, β1k , β2k and β3k in equation 3 homes must sell at least four times,
with at least one non-flipper to non-flipper transaction before and after a flipper buys and
sells the house. To see why, consider Figure 4, which gives two examples of houses that sell
four times, at instances A, B, C and then D. Suppose that at A both transacting parties are
non-flippers; at B the house is sold to a flipper by the non-flipper; at C the flipper sells the
house to a non-flipper; and at D it is sold to a non-flipper by the non-flipper. The observation
before the flipper buys is used to identify the original house quality and the observation after
the flipper sells is used to identify the new house quality. The two panels differ in terms of
the inference one would make about the existence of unobserved investment in each home.
The left panel shows a flipper who buys below market price in period B and is able to sell
above market price in C without making any improvements. The right panel, on the other
hand, gives an example where the flipper makes improvements, which can be seen by noting
that the price at D continues to stay above its expected price, conditional on the price at A.
If we did not account for this improvement, it would appear that the flipper sold the house
for above market value when in fact he sold it for exactly market value.
45"6(*+52)()7&8"

6(*+52)()7&8"

*+',)"

*+',)"
$"

%"

!"

$"

%"

#"
&'()"

!"

#"
&'()"

Figure 4: The left panel depicts a case in which the flipper did not make improvements
between periods B and C and the right panel provides an example in which the flipper did.
Several important features of this research design are worth noting. First, because our
estimates of the sources of flipper returns will be based on houses that have sold at least
four times during the sample period and fit this ABCD structure, then by construction, the
period of time that the previous owner held a property before selling to a flipper is limited
(as the sale at point A must be within the study period). This excludes a set of houses that
may have been neglected over a long period of time by an owner (i.e., “fixer-uppers”) from
19

contributing to our estimates of the sources of flipper returns.14 While flippers, especially
those seeking to make significant physical improvements, may in fact target such homes for
purchase, they will not generally be the ones that identify the sources of returns given our
research design.15
A related concern is that flipper improvements may be underestimated if these improvements depreciate significantly under the care of the next home-owner, that is, between C and
D. Of course, once again by construction, the length of time between when a flipper sells the
house and when the house is re-sold by the subsequent buyer is limited by the fact that the
sale at point D needs to take place within the study period. This provides a limited window
for any physical improvement made by the flipper to have depreciated between points C
and D. As a robustness check, we also report results when we restrict the duration between
periods C and D to test how sensitive are the results to varying lengths of time over which
investments may depreciate.
In the analysis that follows, we report results for two slight adjustments to the specification
shown in equation 3. First, we include a series of dummy variables for how many times we
have seen a given property previously transacted in the study period. In general, sellers
make some home improvements at the time of a sale so that a house will show well. Thus,
we include these additional sales number dummy variables in order to make sure that we do
not systematically overstate the performance of homes that meet the ABCD structure simply
because they sell at least four times during the study period.
Secondly, as shown in Table 2, flippers (especially experienced flippers) tend to purchase
homes that are slightly older and smaller than the average homes that are sold in the market.
Therefore, to ensure that we are comparing apples to apples, we report results for a second
specification of equation 3 that interacts the three key flipper variables with de-meaned
measures of housing attributes, reporting the flipper coefficients at the mean attributes of
the homes sold in the study period. This ensures that all comparisons of sources of returns
are done for the same type of property, even though flippers with different levels of experience
purchase properties that are somewhat heterogeneous.
Finally, it is worth stressing that while only flipped houses that sell at least four times
and meet the ABCD structure will be helpful in identifying the three key flipper coefficients
14

In fact a comparison of the housing attributes of homes that meet the ABCD structure reveals considerably less heterogeneity in the houses that flippers purchase versus the average homes that sell in the market
as a whole. The average year built of the homes purchased by Flipper 4’s increases from 1949 to 1956, for
example, when the sample is limited to just homes that meet the ABCD structure.
15
For the analysis of the sources of flipper returns (but, importantly, not the counts presented throughout
the paper), we drop any purchases from banks or firms that might be associated with a foreclosure. We do
this because of concerns that these homes may have been systematically run-down by the previously owners
or vandalized, leading to large real declines in house quality between sales at points A and B, even if the
time period between points A and B is short.

20

in equation 3, all of the counts presented in the paper are based on the full set of homes
purchased by flippers. This is important because the set of homes that fit the ABCD structure
will systematically result in a flipper purchase and sale closer to the middle of the study period
(so that at least one sale can occur before and after the flipper’s holding period).

5

The Sources of Flipper Returns - Baseline Results

We now provide estimates of the sources of flippers’ returns using the above research design.
Our baseline results are presented in Table 4 which presents estimates of equation 3 when
flipper types are not controlled for using all years between 1992 and 2005, as well as conditioning on the flipped house transactions occurring during either the cold (1992-1998) or the
hot periods (1999-2005). We exclude the end of the sample from these regressions because
we need to follow the property for at least two years from the purchase date to estimate its
return in our baseline definition of a flip. As mentioned above, for each sample period, results are presented for a basic specification and for one that interacts the key flipper variables
with de-meaned housing attributes to ensure that the estimates are reported for comparable
houses.
Flipper Buyer (bit )
Flipper Seller (sit )
Flipper Investment (ait )
First Sale
Second Sale
Third Sale
Fourth Sale
Interact House
Characteristics?
Time Period
N
R2

(1)
-0.058
(0.003)
0.054
(0.003)
0.029
(0.004)
-0.132
(0.003)
-0.075
(0.003)
-0.042
(0.002)
-0.020
(0.002)

(2)
-0.053
(0.003)
0.054
(0.003)
0.006
(0.004)
-0.130
(0.003)
-0.074
(0.003)
-0.041
(0.002)
-0.020
(0.002)

(3)
-0.129
(0.014)
0.087
(0.006)
0.070
(0.014)
-0.141
(0.003)
-0.081
(0.003)
-0.047
(0.002)
-0.023
(0.002)

(4)
-0.107
(0.013)
0.063
(0.007)
0.040
(0.013)
-0.140
(0.003)
-0.081
(0.003)
-0.047
(0.002)
-0.023
(0.002)

(5)
-0.035
(0.003)
0.045
(0.003)
0.013
(0.004)
-0.144
(0.003)
-0.082
(0.003)
-0.047
(0.002)
-0.023
(0.002)

(6)
-0.036
(0.003)
0.048
(0.003)
-0.008
(0.004)
-0.142
(0.003)
-0.082
(0.003)
-0.047
(0.002)
-0.023
(0.002)

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

1992-2005
2,187,081
0.947

1992-2005
2,187,081
0.948

1992-1998
2,187,081
0.947

1992-1998
2,187,081
0.947

1999-2005
2,187,081
0.947

1999-2005
2,187,081
0.947

Table 4: The table gives estimates of equation 3 for all flippers regardless of experience.
Standard errors in parentheses. Interacting house characteristics indicates that the mean
house characteristics for the sample are subtracted from individual house characteristics and
these values are interacted with the flipper dummies. An indicator variable for 5 or more
sales is omitted.

21

Controlling for unobserved investment, the estimates reported in the first column of Table
4 imply that flippers purchase homes at a discount of about 5.8 percent (s.e. 0.3 percent)
over the full sample period. That is, they purchase the house for approximately 6 percent less
than its expected market price. Flippers also earn a premium of 5.4 percent (s.e. 0.3 percent)
when they sell the property after controlling for potentially unobserved investment. When
the mean-differenced value of house characteristics are interacted with the flipper dummies to
account for potential differences in the types of homes purchased by flippers, the magnitude
of these coefficients changes very little, as shown in the second column.
Specifications (3) and (4) restrict the sample period to the cold market period (19921998), which was characterized by lower transaction volume and declining or flat housing
prices. In general, flippers purchase homes at a much steeper discount, 12.9 percent (s.e. 1.4
percent), and sell at a greater premium, 8.7 percent (s.e. 0.6 percent), during this period.
This is consistent with the idea that flippers make their return by operating as middlemen
during the cold market period, buying low and selling at a premium, relative to the average
sales price in the market at the time.
Specifications (5) and (6) restrict the sample to the hot market period (1999-2005) in
which prices were increasing rapidly and sales volume was much greater. In hot market
conditions flippers have the potential to make returns by purchasing houses at times and in
locations where expected market appreciation is high. Thus, as the parameter estimates in
Table 4 show, flippers on average do not get a particularly low price, a discount of now only
3.5 percent (s.e. 0.3 percent), when buying or a particularly high price, a premium of only
4.5 percent (s.e. 0.3 percent), when selling during this period.
The coefficients on Flipper Investment reported in the first column suggest that flippers
are not investing much more than 3 percent of a house’s value. This number falls to less than
1 percent in column (2), which reports results at mean house characteristics. The coefficients
related to the order of sale reported in the lower half of the table suggest, however, that
these results may understate, to some extent the actual improvements that flippers make.
These coefficients show a clear monotonic pattern of improvements, with all houses that sell
multiple times typically selling at an increasing premium relative to market prices on later
sales. Houses that sell four or five times, which flipped homes are more likely to be, typically
generate a premium that is 10-15 percent higher than the expected market price. Thus, some
of the investment that flippers make in the properties that they buy and re-sell quickly is
being captured by the inclusion of these control variables. As investment does not make up
a sizable portion of flipper returns and is not the focus of the paper, in the subsequent tables
we suppress the estimates of coefficients corresponding to it for exposition sake.
We now investigate the differential sources of returns across flipper experience levels, using
22

the same four categories defined above in Section 3.2. Table 5 presents parameter estimates
for a set of specifications that correspond directly to those reported in Table 4, but that
allow the coefficients related to flipper discount, premium and investment to vary by flipper
experience. The sale order dummy variables are included in the specifications reported in
Table 5, but the parameter estimates (which are similar to those reported in Table 4) are
not reported for ease of exposition. There is a clear heterogeneity in the sources of returns
across flipper types. Looking across flipper types, it is clear that while all flippers buy
relatively cheaply, more experienced flippers buy at a deeper discount relative to expected
market prices. For the sample period as a whole, Flipper 4’s get a discount at purchase
of approximately 21 percent (s.e. 1.5 percent) and this discount is well over 30 percent
in the cold market period. Steep discounts at the time of purchase are consistent with
these experienced flippers operating as middlemen, buying cheaply and operating during any
market conditions. Inexperienced flippers, on the other hand, generally do not buy at much
of a discount, especially in hot market conditions. This, again, is a consistent with the idea
that they are generally seeking profit as speculators rather than middlemen.
Flipper 1 Buyer
Flipper 2 Buyer
Flipper 3 Buyer
Flipper 4 Buyer
Flipper 1 Seller
Flipper 2 Seller
Flipper 3 Seller
Flipper 4 Seller
Interact House
Characteristics?
Time Period
N
R2

(1)
-0.035
(0.003)
-0.075
(0.007)
-0.123
(0.013)
-0.210
(0.015)
0.049
(0.003)
0.060
(0.007)
0.072
(0.011)
0.090
(0.010)

(2)
-0.034
(0.003)
-0.070
(0.007)
-0.129
(0.012)
-0.181
(0.018)
0.051
(0.003)
0.060
(0.008)
0.050
(0.014)
0.055
(0.014)

(3)
-0.062
(0.016)
-0.175
(0.031)
-0.188
(0.052)
-0.330
(0.051)
0.061
(0.008)
0.098
(0.016)
0.137
(0.018)
0.137
(0.013)

(4)
-0.058
(0.015)
-0.160
(0.031)
-0.232
(0.060)
-0.334
(0.071)
0.053
(0.008)
0.073
(0.021)
0.098
(0.026)
0.072
(0.026)

(5)
-0.020
(0.003)
-0.050
(0.008)
-0.090
(0.014)
-0.153
(0.016)
0.045
(0.004)
0.048
(0.008)
0.046
(0.014)
0.054
(0.013)

(6)
-0.023
(0.003)
-0.051
(0.008)
-0.096
(0.014)
-0.134
(0.019)
0.047
(0.004)
0.055
(0.008)
0.034
(0.017)
0.050
(0.016)

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

1992-2005
2,187,081
0.948

1992-2005
2,187,081
0.948

1992-1998
2,187,081
0.947

1992-1998
2,187,081
0.947

1999-2005
2,187,081
0.947

1999-2005
2,187,081
0.947

Table 5: The table gives estimates of equation 3 when the coefficients associated with flipper
activity are estimated separately by type. Standard errors in parentheses. Interacting house
characteristics indicates that the mean house characteristics for the sample are subtracted
from individual house characteristics and these values are interacted with the flipper dummies. Estimates of the investment coefficients, which also vary by flipper type, and the sale
number dummy variables are suppressed for expositional sake.

23

Using the results from the estimates of the specifications reported in Table 5, we can
report the source of a flipper’s return for each flipper type: breaking this into the fraction
that stems from buying cheaply, selling high, and simply earning the market return during
the holding period. These results are in Table 6. We include estimates of flipper rates of
return based on time held, market growth, and the residuals. Again, it is important to
emphasize, that these estimates of sources do not account for flippers’ transaction or holding
costs, meaning actual profits are almost certainly smaller.

Flipper
Flipper
Flipper
Flipper

1
2
3
4

Nominal
Rate of Return
0.234
0.294
0.374
0.531

Buyer
Discount
-0.034
-0.070
-0.129
-0.181

Seller
Premium
0.051
0.060
0.050
0.055

Market Quarters
Growth
Held
0.150
4.01
0.109
3.25
0.089
2.86
0.053
2.17

N
25,181
5,678
2,322
2,596

Table 6: The table shows the sources of returns by flipper type. The discounts, premiums,
and market growth are calculated from specification (2) of Table 5 and quarters held is simply
the mean number of quarters held. The nominal rate of return is generated by dividing the
mean total return (premium - discount + market growth) by the mean years held.
Table 6 further highlights the distinction between flipper types and provides strong evidence that some flippers act as speculators while others operate as middlemen. First, there
is a large disparity in time held. Flipper 4’s quickly re-sell their houses while Flipper 1’s
hold them almost twice as long. Second, Flipper 1’s do not buy at an especially low price
and, as a result, their (nominal) rate of return is primarily driven by overall market growth:
64 percent of their return stems from market growth. Flipper 4’s, on the other hand, earn
most of their return by buying at prices below average market prices (purchasing cheaply
generates 63 percent of their return) and quickly re-selling so that only 18 percent of their
return stems from overall market growth. Taken together, the evidence on purchase activity,
holding times, and sources of returns paints a very consistent picture: experienced flippers
generally act as middlemen and inexperienced flippers as speculators in the Los Angeles
housing market over our study period.

6

Robustness

In this section, we examine the robustness of the results presented above to a number of the
assumptions that underlie our analysis. In so doing, we also address a number of additional
questions regarding the behavior of flippers and foreshadow the analysis of the next section,
which explores how middlemen and speculators target particular locations for their purchases.
24

6.1

Do Flippers Sell Winners and Hold Losers?

In the results presented in Section 5, we examined the sources of returns for houses that were
re-sold in less than two years. Of course, the timing of the decision to re-sell the property
is an endogenous choice made by the investor, likely influenced by the appreciation of the
property and the cost of capital. By limiting the sample to only those homes that were
re-sold in the first two years, we may be inadvertently focusing on a very selected sample of
homes that performed very well in terms of market appreciation. As a simple check on the
sensitivity of our results to the definition of flipped homes as those sold within two years,
we consider the effect of adjusting this time period. In Table 7, the first specification is the
baseline, which uses the estimates from specification (2) in Table 5. Specifications (2)-(4) in
Table 7 vary the amount of time required from eighteen months to four years.

25

26
2,187,081

N

(2)
-0.046
(0.003)
-0.080
(0.008)
-0.143
(0.013)
-0.199
(0.018)
0.054
(0.004)
0.063
(0.008)
0.057
(0.015)
0.054
(0.014)
Flip in <
1.5 Years
2,187,081

(3)
-0.031
(0.003)
-0.065
(0.007)
-0.117
(0.011)
-0.173
(0.017)
0.049
(0.003)
0.058
(0.007)
0.049
(0.013)
0.056
(0.013)
Flip in <
3 Years
2,187,081

(4)
-0.030
(0.003)
-0.060
(0.007)
-0.111
(0.011)
-0.163
(0.016)
0.048
(0.003)
0.056
(0.007)
0.048
(0.013)
0.054
(0.013)
Flip in <
4 Years
2,187,081

(5)
-0.007
(0.004)
-0.044
(0.012)
-0.087
(0.018)
-0.165
(0.029)
0.051
(0.007)
0.083
(0.016)
0.046
(0.031)
0.037
(0.028)
A to B
< 3 Years
2,187,081

(6)
-0.020
(0.005)
-0.045
(0.012)
-0.106
(0.026)
-0.177
(0.035)
0.052
(0.004)
0.063
(0.010)
0.058
(0.017)
0.086
(0.019)
C to D
< 3 Years
2,187,081

(7)
0.003
(0.007)
-0.012
(0.015)
-0.061
(0.031)
-0.172
(0.053)
0.054
(0.007)
0.082
(0.019)
0.067
(0.039)
0.059
(0.034)
Specifications
(5) and (6)
2,187,081

Table 7: The table presents a series of robustness checks. Standard errors in parentheses. Specification (1) is identical to
specification (2) from Table 5. Specification (2) is similar to the baseline, but changes the required holding time from 2 years to
18 months. Specifications (3) and (4) increase the maximum holding time to 3 and 4 years respectively. Specification (5) requires
that the time between transactions A and B is less than 3 years. Specification (6) requires that the time between transactions C
and D is less than 3 years. Specification (7) requires the conditions in both (5) and (6). Estimates of the investment coefficients
that vary by flipper type, which are included in each specification, are suppressed for exposition sake.

Baseline

(1)
-0.034
(0.003)
-0.070
(0.007)
-0.129
(0.012)
-0.181
(0.018)
0.051
(0.003)
0.060
(0.008)
0.050
(0.014)
0.055
(0.014)

Robustness Check

Flipper 4 Seller

Flipper 3 Seller

Flipper 2 Seller

Flipper 1 Seller

Flipper 4 Buyer

Flipper 3 Buyer

Flipper 2 Buyer

Flipper 1 Buyer

The results presented in columns (1)-(4) of Table 7 reveal that the conclusions drawn
from the baseline results regarding the sources of returns - that more experienced flippers
earn a large fraction of their return by buying at especially low prices, while less experienced
flippers do not – are not very sensitive to the choice of threshold holding time. When the
threshold is set to four years instead of two, for example, the estimated discount relative to
expected market price that Flipper 4’s get at purchase is 16.3 percent versus 18.1 percent,
while the estimate for Flipper 1’s remains very low, 3.0 percent versus 3.4 percent.

6.2

Are Results Driven by Flippers Buying Fixer-Uppers?

As we discussed in detail above, a broad challenge in examining the sources of flipper returns
is the possibility that flippers invest significant amounts of money to improve properties,
investment that is unobserved by the researcher. If, for example, flippers purchase fixeruppers at what might appear to be below market prices and then bring them back up to
standard market conditions, we might improperly infer that they were making substantial
returns by buying at low prices relative to market.
Several aspects of our baseline analysis have been designed to minimize this concern. In
particular, our focus on the ABCD structure for identifying the sources of flipper returns not
only provides a way to estimate the amount of unobserved investment that flippers put into
properties (versus typical home-sellers), but also naturally limits the identification of returns
to properties that were transacted within a reasonably small period both before and after
the flipper bought and sold the property.
Specifications (5)-(6) in Table 7 take the logic of this one step further, limiting the time
between sales at point A and B, and C and D, respectively, to less than three years. Specification (7) combines these restrictions. By limiting the times between A and B and C and
D, specifications (5)-(7) not only address the potential concern that flippers may buy homes
which have been run down by their previous owners, but also that flippers invest in houses
only to have their investment depreciate by period D.
The results presented in final three columns of Table 7 again strongly support the conclusions drawn from the baseline results regarding the different sources of returns depending on
experience level. When the time between the transactions preceding and subsequent to the
flippers holding of the property are both limited to three years, for example, the estimated
discount relative to expected market price that Flipper 4’s get at purchase is 17.2 percent
versus 18.1 percent for the baseline case. In fact, the estimated discount at purchase for
Flipper 1’s falls all the way to zero, implying that these inexperienced flippers essentially
purchase houses at expected market prices.
It is worth emphasizing that nothing in our analysis implies that flippers do not purchase
27

fixer-uppers that could be physically improved in a profitable way. Rather, our research
design ensures that such properties do not contribute to the identification of the sources of
flipper returns that stem from buying cheaply and selling at a premium.

6.3

Selective Survival - The Dynamic Pattern of Returns

Another potential concern with our baseline results is that our examination of the heterogeneity in flipper returns is not based on a time-invariant attribute of flippers, but instead on
their experience. It is important to keep in mind that we are not interested in identifying the
effects of flipper experience per se. Instead, as it turns out, conditioning on experience revealed striking differences in the patterns of purchases, holding times, and sources of returns
for experienced versus inexperienced flippers that map neatly into the roles of middlemen and
speculators, respectively. This does not imply, however, that some of the inexperienced flippers are middlemen just launching their careers or that some of the inexperienced speculators
might not eventually become more experienced if they survive in the profession.
One way to examine the dynamics of experience and flipper type is to measure the source
of returns over time within flipper type. In particular, instead of just examining the sources
of returns for all houses flipped by Flipper 4’s, for example, we consider separately the sources
of returns for the first three flipped houses that they flipped, the 4th-6th houses, 7th-10th
houses, and all houses after their first ten. These results are presented in Table 8.
The results reveal a consistent pattern of sources of returns for the more experienced
flippers observed in the data. On their first three houses flipped in the data, Flipper 3’s
received a discount at purchase of 13.4 percent and premium at sale of 9.5 percent relative
to expected market prices. For Flipper 4’s these numbers were even higher: for their first
three houses flipped in the data, they received a 25.4 percent discount when buying and a
17.3 percent premium when selling. The magnitude of these numbers reflects, of course, the
fact that an experienced flipper’s first three flipped homes were more likely to have occurred
during the cold market period (1992-1998), during which flippers required larger margins on
purchase and sales prices in a market with declining home prices. Taken as a whole, Table
8 supports the notion that the more experienced flippers observed in our data set have been
acting in the economic role of middlemen throughout the sample period, while the ranks of
inexperienced flippers are dominated by those pursuing a more speculative strategy in their
limited careers in the market to date.16
16

The pattern of results shown in Table 8 is quantitatively similar when flippers are restricted to those
observed making their first purchase in the data after 1993, which makes it very likely that the first three
flips observed in the sample are indeed the flipper’s actual first three experiences flipping homes.

28

Flip Number
Buyer Coefficients
Flipper 1
Flipper 2
Flipper 3
Flipper 4
Seller Coefficients
Flipper 1
Flipper 2
Flipper 3
Flipper 4

1 to 3

4 to 6

7 to 10

11+

-0.035
(0.003)
-0.080
(0.011)
-0.134
(0.034)
-0.254
(0.074)

-0.072
(0.009)
-0.123
(0.018)
-0.208
(0.035)

-0.113
(0.020)
-0.173
(0.034)

-0.216
(0.019)

0.049
(0.003)
0.046
(0.010)
0.095
(0.021)
0.173
(0.032)

0.073
(0.010)
0.063
(0.015)
0.102
(0.022)

0.072
(0.024)
0.086
(0.021)

0.069
(0.013)

Table 8: The table presents estimated flipper coefficients that vary with flipper type and
the order in which the flipper purchased the property. Standard errors in parentheses. The
rows correspond to the flipper type (total number of flips) and the columns correspond to
the order of the flip in question. For example, Flipper 1’s only have coefficients for 1 to 3
because the maximum number of flips for this type is 3.

6.4

Neighborhood Targeting

For our baseline results, we estimated a single housing price index for the Los Angeles
metropolitan market and used that to measure the rate of market appreciation while flippers
held on to properties, as reported in Table 6. A concern with using a single aggregate price
index for our analysis is that flippers might be able to identify and target submarkets or
neighborhoods that appreciate faster than the metropolitan area as a whole. This might
lead to an understatement of market appreciation and an overstatement of sale premium as
sources of flipper returns.
To address this concern, we divide the Los Angeles metropolitan area into forty submarkets based on California state assembly voting district. We use voting districts because they
are both large enough to have a reasonable number of flipper observations in each district and
small enough to characterize a meaningful submarket. It is then straightforward to estimate
an extended version of equation 3 that allows the coefficients on the time dummies to vary
by submarket in order to estimate separate price indices for each submarket. The results of

29

this analysis are presented in Table 9 which has the same format as Table 6.

Flipper
Flipper
Flipper
Flipper

1
2
3
4

Nominal
Rate of Return
0.240
0.310
0.407
0.640

Buyer
Discount
-0.037
-0.079
-0.125
-0.209

Seller
Premium
0.047
0.058
0.071
0.082

Market Quarters
Growth
Held
0.156
4.01
0.115
3.25
0.094
2.86
0.056
2.17

N
25,114
5,672
2,313
2,596

Table 9: This table shows the sources of returns by flipper type. This table has the same
format as Table 6 but is based on a specification that estimates a separate price index for
each of the 40 submarkets of the Los Angeles metro area defined by state assembly lower
voting districts.
The results presented in Table 9 strengthen our qualitative conclusions for both experienced and inexperienced flippers, as inexperienced flippers target submarkets experiencing
faster than average appreciation and experienced flippers actual target submarkets that are
appreciating slower than average. Overall, the estimated total returns, as well as the source
of returns, remain similar in Table 9 to the case where we treat the Los Angeles metropolitan
area as one market.

7
7.1

Speculation, Local Price Dynamics and Information
Local Price Dynamics and Flipper Activity

We begin this by section by exploring the relationship between speculator activity and housing
price dynamics in the regions of the market in which they are active. For exposition sake, we
group flippers into two categories based on experience. Experienced flippers, or middlemen,
are those who engage in four or more flips over our sample (in the language above, these
are Flipper 2-4’s) and inexperienced flippers, or speculators, are those who flip two or three
times during our sample (Flipper 1’s). Given the findings above, this categorization divides
flippers according to two very distinct strategies for earning returns.17
The main aim of our analysis is to study what happens to housing prices in the sub-regions
of the Los Angeles metropolitan area that experienced greater levels of speculator activity.
To do so, we regress annual neighborhood-level price appreciation, where neighborhoods
are defined by the California state assembly voting districts introduced above and price
appreciation at the neighborhood-level is computed using the neighborhood-level price indices
17

The qualitative results in this section are robust to altering the flip-thresholds on which the dichotomy
is based.

30

constructed in Section 6.4, on lagged quarterly purchases by speculators and middlemen, as
well as lagged annual neighborhood-level price appreciation. The regressions also include
neighborhood and quarter fixed effects. The results for differing lags appear in Table 10.18
It is well known (e.g. Case and Shiller (1989)) that lagged price appreciation predicts
future price appreciation in housing markets. This can be seen in the bottom part of Table
10 which establishes positive short-term persistence and long-term mean reversion in house
price appreciation at the neighborhood level.19 However, purchase activity of speculators
also predicts future price appreciation. The first two columns show that a greater number
of purchases by inexperienced, speculative flippers are associated with above average rates
of price appreciation over the following one and two years, respectively, while the last three
columns show that these short-term gains are followed by below average returns over the
following three years.
Middlemen, on the other hand, operate in areas where prices are not rising as quickly as
the rest of the metropolitan area, and so their activity is not predictive of future prices. As
discussed above, since middlemen earn their returns by finding “good deals” when purchasing
and selling for high prices relative to the market, it is not surprising to find them operating
in hot and cold neighborhoods just as they operate in hot and cold portions of the housing
cycle.

7.2

How Well-Informed Are Speculators?

The evidence presented so far establishes that a substantial number of amateur speculators
entered the market in the recent housing boom and that their entry into a submarket was
associated with the formation, and bursting of local price bubbles over the next several years.
In this subsection of the paper, we ask whether the fact their purchases predict future price
appreciation in the short- to medium-term reflects their ability to predict and take advantage
of short-term price spikes due to superior information about local market fundamentals. If
not, and speculators do not transmit valuable information to the market or act with any
special knowledge about market fundamentals, then there is essentially no scope for them
to improve market efficiency, and their activity may have, in and of itself, further fueled the
mispricing in the housing sector.20
While some might take the inexperience of the speculators in the data as prima facie
evidence that they are not especially well-informed, we offer a more formal analysis of their
18

We obtain similar results if lagged flipper holdings are used instead of purchases.
To our knowledge, the fact that, even at the neighborhood-level, lagged appreciation strongly predicts
future price appreciation is undocumented elsewhere in the literature.
20
Our analysis in this subsection is similar in spirit to that of Griffin, Harris, Shu, and Topaloglu (2011),
who study the activity of institutional and individual investors around the peak of the dotcom bubble.
19

31

(1)
Quarterly Neighborhood-Level Purchases by:
Speculators
Lagged 1 Year

(2)

(3)

(4)

1.466
(0.170)

Lagged 2 Years

1.513
(0.266)

Lagged 3 Years

0.449
(0.262)

Lagged 4 Years

-0.776
(0.222)

Lagged 5 Years
Middlemen
Lagged 1 Year

-0.727
(0.279)
0.377
(0.183)

Lagged 2 Years

-0.308
(0.248)

Lagged 3 Years

-0.498
(0.208)

Lagged 4 Years

-0.391
(0.190)

Lagged 5 Years
One Year Neighborhood-Level Appreciation:
Lagged 1 Year

0.585
(0.320)
0.583
(0.068)

Lagged 2 Years

0.023
(0.063)

Lagged 3 Years

-0.335
(0.079)

Lagged 4 Years

-0.480
(0.084)

Lagged 5 Years
Neighborhood Fixed Effects
Quarter Fixed Effects
N
R2

(5)

Yes
Yes
2,820
0.892

Yes
Yes
2,660
0.910

Yes
Yes
2,500
0.907

Yes
Yes
2,340
0.905

-0.327
(0.115)
Yes
Yes
2,180
0.909

Table 10: Regressions of neighborhood yearly price appreciation on quarterly speculator and
middlemen purchase activity and neighborhood-level yearly price appreciation. Standard
errors in parentheses are clustered by neighborhood.

32

behavior in this subsection.21 In particular, we present evidence from the timing of purchases
and sales by speculators as the Los Angeles market neared and went over its peak in 2006 that
suggests that speculators failed to anticipate the market’s peak in any way. That speculators
could not anticipate the peak makes it difficult to rationalize the timing and location of their
activity as being driven by superior information and instead makes it much more likely that
the causation runs in the opposite direction – that their substantial presence in a market
helped to fuel the run-up in housing prices.22
For the following analysis we construct a sample of all homes purchased by speculators,
regardless of whether the homes were sold within two years. If speculators had anticipated the
downturn in housing, they should have curtailed their purchasing activity in advance of the
market’s peak. As Figure 5 shows, however, speculators did not reduce their buying activity
ahead of the market’s decline. During the housing boom speculator activity increased from
well under 3 percent of all purchases at the start of 2002 to nearly 5 percent by 2005. While
the rate of speculator purchases declined slightly from these 2005 levels, at the market’s
peak in early 2006, they were still responsible for 4 percent of all purchases, well above their
historical average. Given the time involved in both buying and selling properties, had they
anticipated the market slowdown, they certainly should have curtailed their buying activity
much sooner and more extensively by early 2006.
While Figure 5 suggests that speculators did not anticipate the market’s peak, a confounding factor is that many of them might not have been putting much of their own money
at risk. If banks were making mortgage loans without requiring these investors to contribute
much of a downpayment, they may simply have been gambling with the bank’s money and,
consequently, had little to lose should it turn out that they bought too late in the boom. To
investigate this possibility, we examined the average combined LTV for all mortgages held by
speculators on the properties that they purchased in the boom. While the average LTV did
rise for speculators in the boom (as it did for traditional home buyers), it remained below 80
percent at the peak, a rate that was below that of traditional homebuyers. Thus, speculators
were putting a significant amount of their own money at risk and certainly had a financial
incentive to stop making new purchases ahead of the peak.
The dynamics of speculator selling activity provides even stronger evidence that they
did not anticipate the market peak. Figure 6 shows the fraction of homes purcahsed by
21

Other researchers (e.g. Greenwood and Nagel (2009)) have found that inexperienced traders engage in
the type of trend chasing behavior exhibited here. There is also a multitude of evidence of this phenomenon
from lab and retail investor survey settings. See, for example, Smith, Suchanek, and Williams (1988), Haruvy,
Lahav, and Noussair (2007) or Vissing-Jorgensen (2003).
22
Our conclusion that speculators helped fuel the bubble is consistent with and complements the evidence
presented in Chinco and Mayer (2012) who develop a research design that makes use of data from multiple
MSAs to identify the impact of long-distance investors on metropolitan price bubbles.

33

!#!("

Fraction of Purchases by Speculators

!#!'"

!#!&"

!#!%"

!#!$"

!"
%!!%"

%!!&"

%!!'"

%!!("

%!!)"

%!!*"

%!!+"

Year and Quarter

Figure 5: The figure displays the percent of total purchases made by speculators over time.
The grey vertical band reflects the market’s peak.
speculators in each quarter that were sold within one and two years from that quarter,
respectively. Recall that the market peaked in the second quarter of 2006. Following the
market peak, not only did prices begin to decline rapidly, but transaction volume slowed
considerably, making it difficult to unload any remaining inventory.
The solid line indicates that, of the homes that were purchased in any quarter prior to
the second quarter of 2004, speculators typically sold about 65 percent within two years
of purchase. However, starting with homes purchased in the second quarter of 2004, this
percentage declined steadily, just the opposite of what well-informed agents should have
been doing! If speculators had anticipated the market peak, we would have expected them
to have sold a much greater percentage of the homes that they purchased in that quarter of
2004, for example, within two years in order to avoid holding inventory as the market peaked.
The dashed line in Figure 6 shows analogous result for the likelihood that speculators sold
properties within a year of purchase. Again, if they had anticipated the peak, we would have
expected speculators to have sold a much higher fraction of the homes that they purchased
in early 2005 before prices began to fall. Instead, the propensity to sell within a year began
34

+!"!#

*!"!#

Sold Within One Year
Sold Within Two Years

% Sold Within One or Two Years

)!"!#

(!"!#

'!"!#

&!"!#

%!"!#

$!"!#

!"!#
%!!%#

%!!&#

%!!'#

%!!(#

%!!)#

%!!*#

%!!+#

Year and Quarter Homes Were Purchased

Figure 6: The figure displays the percent of homes bought in any quarter that were sold
within one or two years after that quarter. The grey vertical band reflects the market’s peak.
to decline precipitously for homes purchased in the quarters beginning in 2005.
The evidence on selling activity is more compelling than that on purchase activity because
speculators stood to lose even more of their own money by continuing to hold homes that
they purchased in 2004 and 2005 past the market peak. Not only did they stand to lose the
20-plus percent that they put down on these properties at the time of purchase, but also all
of the gains that they had accumulated through the substantial market appreciation in the
final years of the boom. Simply put, these investors lost a tremendous amount of their own
equity by failing to anticipate the market peak.
Taken together, the evidence presented here regarding their activity near, at, and following
the peak, paints a clear picture that speculators did not have any better information about
Los Angeles housing price dynamics than traditional home buyers, consistent with the notion
that many were novices participating in real estate speculation for only the first or second
time.
The fact that speculators do not appear especially well-informed or sophisticated strongly
suggests that the positive relationship between their purchase activity and local price bubbles,
documented in Section 7.1, is not attributable to any special ability on their part to anticipate
where and when short-term gains were available. Instead, it is much more likely that the
35

causation runs the other way: that speculators may have contributed to local housing prices
bubbles. By amplifying price volatility without transmitting any meaningful information
to the market, the impact of this speculative activity is likely to have a negative effect on
social welfare in the market. We know of no economic theory that implies that uninformed
speculation might be welfare-enhancing. Instead, the presence of excess trading by underinformed agents (e.g., noise traders) often serves as a catalyst for excess market volatility in
many theoretical models of speculation.
Finally, it is worth emphasizing that our tests for the quality of speculator information do
not directly indicate whether speculators behaved rationally in the housing boom. Returns
in a financial market during any historical period provide only a single ex post realization of
the range of outcomes that might have been anticipated and, thus, it is generally difficult to
use returns to gauge whether market participants behaved rationally from an ex ante perspective. Regardless of their rationality, knowing whether speculators had access to superior
information provides the key to understanding their likely impact on the market and, thus,
helps to inform our understanding of the role that they played in the housing bubble of the
2000s.

8

Conclusion

Making use of a large transactions database and a novel research design, this paper provides
the first comprehensive study of intermediaries (middlemen and speculators) in the housing
market: identifying their activity, their sources of the returns and apparent strategies, the
quality of their information with and the extent to which their activity is a potential driver
of local price dynamics.
A main contribution of our analysis is a detailed characterization of the role that speculators played in Los Angeles’ recent housing bubble. In particular, we document substantial
entry by amateur speculators at the height of the boom, entry that was strongly associated
with sharp short-term increases and intermediate-term declines in local housing prices. Their
collective inexperience and complete inability to anticipate the market peak by either curtailing their purchases or selling their inventory suggests that these speculators were not acting
with superior information, but were instead simply betting that the boom would continue
for a while longer. The lack of any special informational advantage suggest that their substantial purchases and holdings may have contributed to local housing price bubbles rather
than reflected superior information about where such short-term gains were available.
Our analysis goes beyond a detailed re-telling of the role of speculation in the recent
boom and bust. By examining the behavior of intermediaries over a 20-year period, we also
36

identify real estate investors clearly operating in the role of middlemen. In this capacity, we
document investors buying homes at prices well below market value and quickly re-selling
after short holding periods at, or above, market value. These middlemen operate in all market
conditions and, if anything, are more active during busts, when the liquidity they provide to
the market is likely to be especially valuable.
In this way, our analysis suggests that the impact of real estate investors on the market
– especially whether their activity increases or decreases social welfare – likely depends critically on the market cycle. In busts, middlemen almost certainly help to stabilize the market,
effectively putting a floor on price declines and providing liquidity for many homeowners who
may be desperate to sell quickly following economic shocks. In booms, rampant speculation
may have a de-stabilizing role that significantly amplifies price volatility. Even well-informed
speculators may have deleterious effects on the market if they use their informational advantage to fuel and ride the bubble as in DeLong, Shleifer, Summers, and Waldmann (1990). But
if they are no better informed than traditional homeowners (if most indeed are traditional
homeowners rather than real estate professionals), it is essentially impossible to rationalize
their activity from the perspective of market efficiency. In fact, we know of no theoretical
model in which uninformed speculation improves social welfare.
Taken together, our results suggest that substantial care should be taken in regulating
the behavior of short-term investors in the real estate market. In busts, restricting investor
activity may significantly harm the functioning of the market. The FHA’s 2010 reversal of
their 2006 restrictions on financing for homes that were quickly re-sold suggests that they
may have come to this realization several years into the recent bust. In booms, however,
substantial increases in investor activity, especially by amateur investors, may contribute to
speculative bubbles, which can have important negative consequences for the real economy.
While regulating investor behavior as a function of the market cycle may be difficult, other
policy tools may be available in the future. For example, by tracking investor activity as in
our paper and Haughwout, Lee, Tracy, and van der Klaauw (2011), it may be possible to
generate real-time measures of speculative activity based on data from housing transactions
and mortgages. Such measures might provide an indication that a speculative boom was
underway in a given market, providing the just the kind of warning that was not available
during the 2000s.

References
Abreu, D., and M. Brunnermeier (2002): “Synchronization Risk and Delayed Arbitrage,” Journal of Financial Economics, 66, 341–360.
37

(2003): “Bubbles and Crashes,” Econometrica, 71, 173–204.
Barberis, N., and R. Thaler (2003): “A Survey of Behavioral Finance,” in Handbook of
the Economics of Finance, ed. by G. Constantinides, M. Harris, and R. Stulz, vol. 1.
Bostic, R., S. Gabriel, and G. Painter (2009): “Housing Wealth, Financial Wealth,
and Consumption: New Evidence from Micro Data,” Regional Science and Urban Economics, 39(1), 79–89.
Brunnermeier, M. K., and S. Nagel (2004): “Hedge Funds and the Technology Bubble,”
Journal of Finance, 59(5), 2013–2040.
Campbell, J., and J. F. Cocco (2007): “How Do House Prices Affect Consumption?
Evidence from Micro Data,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(3), 591–621.
Case, K. E., and R. J. Shiller (1987): “Prices of Single-Family Homes Since 1970: New
Indexes for Four Cities,” New England Economic Review, pp. 45–56.
(1989): “The Efficiency of the Market for Single-Family Homes,” American Economic Review, 79(1), 125–137.
Chinco, A., and C. Mayer (2012): “Distant Speculators and Asset Bubbles in the Housing
Market,” Columbia Business School Working Paper.
De Long, B., A. Shleifer, L. Summers, and R. Waldmann (1990): “Noise Trader
Risk in Financial Markets,” Journal of Political Economy, 98, 703–738.
DeLong, J. B., A. Shleifer, L. H. Summers, and R. J. Waldmann (1990): “Positive Feedback Investment Strategies and Destabilizing Rational Speculation,” Journal of
Finance, 45(2), 379–395.
Eichengreen, B., J. Tobin, and C. Wyplosz (1995): “Two Cases for Sand in the
Wheels of International Finance,” Economic Journal, 105(428), 162–172.
Fama, E. F. (1965): “The Behavior of Stock-Market Prices,” Journal of Business, 38(1),
34–105.
Ferreira, F., and J. Gyourko (2011): “Anatomy of the Beginning of the Housing Boom:
U.S. Neighborhoods and Metropolitan Areas, 1993-2009,” Wharton School of Business
Working Paper.
Friedman, M. (1953): Essays in Positive Economics. University of Chicago Press.
38

Garber, P. M. (1989): “Tulipmania,” Journal of Political Economy, 97(3), 535–560.
Glaeser, E. L. (2013): “A Nation of Gamblers: Real Estate Speculation and American
History,” American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, 103(3), 1–42.
Glaeser, E. L., J. D. Gottlieb, and J. Gyourko (2013): Housing and the Financial
Crisis chap. Can Cheap Credit Explain the Housing Boom? University of Chicago Press.
Glower, M., D. R. Haurin, and P. H. Hendershott (1998): “Selling Time and Selling
Price: The Impact of Seller Motivation,” Real Estate Economics, 26(4), 719–740.
Goetzmann, W., and L. Peng (2006): “Estimating House Price Indexes in the Presence
of Seller Reservation Prices,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 88(1), 100–112.
Greenwood, R., and S. Nagel (2009): “Inexperienced Investors and Bubbles,” Journal
of Financial Economics, 93(2), 239–258.
Griffin, J. M., J. H. Harris, T. Shu, and S. Topaloglu (2011): “Who Drove and
Burst the Tech Bubble?,” Journal of Finance, 66(4), 1251–1290.
Haruvy, E., Y. Lahav, and C. N. Noussair (2007): “Traders’ Expectations in Asset
Markets: Experimental Evidence,” American Economic Review, 97(5), 1901–1920.
Haughwout, A., D. Lee, J. Tracy, and W. van der Klaauw (2011): “Real Estate
Investors, the Leverage Cycle, and the Housing Market Crisis,” Federal Reserve Bank of
New York Working Paper.
Himmelberg, C., C. Mayer, and T. Sinai (2005): “Assessing High House Prices: Bubbles, Fundamentals, and Misperceptions,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19(4), 67–92.
Iacoviello, M. (2005): “House Prices, Borrowing Constraints, and Monetary Policy in the
Business Cycle,” American Economic Review, 95(3), 739–764.
Kindelberger, C. P. (1978): Manias, Panics and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises.
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2005 edn.
Landvoight, T., M. Piazzesi, and M. Schneider (2011): “The Housing Market(s) of
San Diego,” Stanford University Working Paper.
Liu, Z., P. Wang, and T. Zha (forthcoming): “Land Price Dynamics and Economic
Fluctuations,” Econometrica.

39

Mackay, C. (1841): Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds. Richard
Bentley, 1932 edn.
Mian, A., and A. Sufi (2010): “Household Leverage and the Recession of 2007-2009,” IMF
Economic Review, 58(1), 74–117.
Shiller, R. J. (2003): “From Efficient Markets Theory to Behavioral Finance,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 17(1), 83–104.
Shleifer, A., and L. H. Summers (1990): “The Noise Trader Approach to Finance,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 4(2), 19–33.
Sinai, T. (2013): Housing and the Financial Crisis chap. House Price Moments in BoomBust Cycles. University of Chicago Press.
Smith, V. L., G. L. Suchanek, and A. W. Williams (1988): “Bubbles, Crashes, and
Endogenous Expectations in Experimental Spot Markets,” Econometrica, 56(5), 1119–
1151.
Springer, T. M. (1996): “Single-Family Housing Transactions: Seller Motivations, Price,
and Marketing Time,” Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics, 13(3).
Summers, L. H., and V. P. Summers (1988): “When Financial Markets Work Too Well: A
Cautious Case for a Securities Transactions Tax,” Journal of Financial Services Research,
3(2-3), 261–286.
Temin, P., and H.-J. Voth (2004): “Riding the South Sea Bubble,” American Economic
Review, 94(5), 1654–1668.
Tobin, J. (1974): “The New Economics One Decade Older,” in The Eliot Janeway Lectures
on Historical Economics in Honor of Joseph Schumpeter. Princeton University Press.
(1978): “A Proposal for International Monetary Reform,” Eastern Economic Journal, 4(3-4), 153–159.
Vissing-Jorgensen, A. (2003): “Perspectives on Behavioral Finance: Does Irrationality
Disappear with Wealth? Evidence from Expectations and Actions,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual. MIT Press.

40

