NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTERNATIONAL RISK SHARING IN THE SHORT RUN AND IN THE LONG
RUN
Marianne Baxter
Working Paper 16789
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16789

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2011

I am grateful for stellar research assistance from Hirozaku Ishise and Timothy Layton. Helpful comments
were provided by Akito Matsumoto, participants in the CEPR Conference on International Risk-Sharing,
seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
and the members of the NBER IFM group. Remaining errors are my own. The views expressed herein
are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Marianne Baxter. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

International Risk Sharing in the Short Run and in the Long Run
Marianne Baxter
NBER Working Paper No. 16789
February 2011
JEL No. E2,E21,E32,F11,F15,F2,F4,F41
ABSTRACT
International risk-sharing has far-reaching implications both for economic policy and for basic research
in economics. When countries do not share risk, individuals in those countries experience fluctuations
in their consumption levels that are undesirable and possibly unnecessary. This paper extends and
refines the study of international risk-sharing in two dimensions. First, this paper investigates risk-sharing
at short vs. long horizons. Countries might, for example, pool risks associated with high-frequency
shocks (e.g., seasonal fluctuations in crop yields) but might not share risks associated with low frequency
shocks (e.g., different long-run national growth rates). Second, this paper studies bilateral risk-sharing,
which is different from the approach taken in most previous studies. We find that there is evidence
of substantial international risk-sharing at medium and low frequencies. There is evidence of high
and increasing risk-sharing within Europe that is not apparent for other regions of the world.

Marianne Baxter
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
mbaxter@bu.edu

International capital markets are becoming increasingly integrated across
countries. Their development throughout the last half of the 20th century was
aided by rapid advances in communications and computing technology. It is
natural, therefore, to ask whether the increase in "globalization" has led to
an increase in international risk-sharing. This paper contributes to the large
existing literature on international risk-sharing by investigating two facets of
risk-sharing that merit closer attention. The first is the temporal dimension
to risk-sharing. Countries might, for example, pool risks associated with highfrequency shocks (e.g., seasonal fluctuations in crop yields or demands for raw
materials) but might not share risks associated with low frequency shocks (e.g.,
diﬀerent long-run national growth rates). This paper explicitly investigates risksharing at diﬀerent horizons. Second, this paper studies bilateral risk-sharing
and the way in which bilateral risk-sharing varies with the risk-sharing horizon.
Due to factors such as financial linkages, common cultural linkages, or simply
proximity, countries might share risks with some countries, but not with others.
By studying bilateral risk-sharing, we may be able to determine which economic
or other forces are associated with greater risk-pooling.
This paper builds on and is inspired by many contributions in this research
area. Early tests were conducted by Obstfeld (1994), Lewis (1996,1999) and
Canova and Ravn (1996). Building on that early work, the literature has developed several interesting strands of research, including a comparison of withincountry vs. cross-country risk sharing; the eﬀects of European unification on
risk-sharing; the eﬀect of country size and openness on risk-sharing, and a host
of other related questions.1

1

A Framework for Studying International RiskSharing

This section develops a framework for studying international risk-sharing. Most
of the existing research on risk-sharing has been based on variations of this
framework. Other variables may also enter the utility function.

1.1

Time-separable, constant-relative-risk-aversion preferences

The most common specification of utility employed in the risk-sharing literature
is the specification in which each agent wishes to maximize a time-separable,
CRRA utility as a function of aggregate consumption. The discount factor and
the rate of relative risk aversion are assumed to be identical across countries.
1 A review of the recent literature can be found in Kose, Prasad and Torrones (2007). See
also Becker and Hoﬀman (2006) and Flood, Marion and Matsumoto (2009) for recent papers
that discuss aspects of long-run risk sharing.

2

The country- expected utility function is:
 = 0

∞
X

   ( ) = 0

=0

∞
X
=0



1−


1−

This problem of finding an optimal allocation of consumption across countries can be found by solving a planner’s problem. The planner assigns a weight,
 , to utility in country  = 1 2  . The world social welfare function at time
t is thus:
 =


X

  

=1

Each country is populated by a large number of identical, infinitely-lived
individuals,   .The world resource constraint is:

X
=1

   ≤


X

   =  (  )

=1

where   denotes exogenous shocks at date . We will not focus on the process by
which consumption goods arrive on the planet. They could arrive as stochastic
endowments in each country; under this interpretation   would be a vector of
country-specific endowments. Alternatively, output could be produced using
capital and work eﬀort. Under this interpretation,   would be a vector of
productivity shocks. For the present purpose, it is enough that output has a
stochastic component and can be allocated contemporaneously by the planner.
Let  be the current-valued multiplier for the world resource constraint.
The first-order condition for the planner’s optimal assignment of consumption
goods to country  at time  is:
   = 

( )


(1)

This equation has formed the basis for many empirical investigations of
aspects of risk-sharing. In the next section, we describe two main approaches
to testing risk-sharing and discuss the advantages and disadvantages of each.

2

Methodology and Prior Research

This section addresses the methodological issues involved in testing risk-sharing
or, indeed, testing any other prediction of an economic model as summarized in
an Euler equation or functions of Euler equations. We will distinguish between
‘direct’ tests and ‘indirect’ tests, as elaborated below. Subsequently, we address
the relationship between tests of risk-sharing and tests of the permanent income
hypothesis.
3

2.1

A Direct Test of Risk-Sharing

A direct approach to testing risk-sharing is to test the risk-sharing condition
implied by the first-order conditions. The ratio of the first order conditions
at date  for countries  and  (one of which could be the "world") yields the
following implication of complete risk-sharing:

 −

=

 −

This equation is not ready to take to the data for two reasons. First, the planner
weights  are not known. Second, the time-series for aggregate consumption
shows strong evidence of I(1) behavior leading to problems of estimation and
inference if consumption is used in levels. Therefore, the risk-sharing condition is usually expressed in a log transformation that emphasizes changes in
consumption, not levels of consumption:
(log + − log  ) = (log + − log  )

(2)

For the class of CRRA preferences which depend on consumption alone, direct testing of risk-sharing includes testing whether the k-period diﬀerences of
log consumption are perfectly correlated across countries. Of course, no economic relationship ever holds in the data without error. The deviation from
the implied function of the first-order conditions must therefore be given some
economic interpretation. A natural interpretation might be that it represents
measurement error. As such, the error should have mean zero (which it will,
by construction, in a regression setting); it should also be serially uncorrelated
absent issues of time-aggregation that could induce persistence in the error. A
regression estimate of (2) should lead to a high 2 . Alternatively, the correlation between consumption growth in countries  and  should be very high;
it will be diﬀerent from 1 (under this interpretation of the regression residual)
only to the extent that there is measurement error.

2.2

An Indirect Test of Risk-Sharing

An indirect test of the empirical validity of the Euler equation tests whether
variables that ought not to be correlated with the error in the Euler equation
do, in fact, explain a significant amount of variation in the error. Although a
bilateral test could be formulated, more typically the researcher begins with a
transformation of equation (1), as follows:

ln   + ln  = ln  + ln

4

µ

( )


¶



(3)

The world marginal utility of consumption,  , is proportional to the world
consumption level, 
 , which means that:
ln  − ln 
 = ln   − ln   

(4)

Thus the country  consumption level diﬀers from the world consumption level
only to the extent that the planner weight is diﬀerent from the country’s share
of world population. In any case, fluctuations in country  consumption will
move in lockstep with world consumption. The model implies that ln  − ln 

is stationary so there is no reason to filter the data to achieve stationarity.
Early examples of indirect tests in the context of risk-sharing can be found
in the work of Obstfeld (1994) and Lewis (1996), which in turn are based on
earlier work by Cochrane (1991) and Mace (1991). Each of these contributions
began with the observation that consumption growth in a particular country
should be uncorrelated with country-specific risks if risk-sharing is complete. In
implementing this test, Lewis used the deviation of lagged national output from
global output as a measure of country-specific risk that should carry a regression
coeﬃcient of zero. Thus the simplest version of her tests involves running the
following regression:

ln  − ln 
 =  + (ln −1 − ln −1 ) + 

Lewis tested risk-sharing by testing the null hypothesis  = 0.
Obstfeld’s ‘workhorse’ equation is the first-diﬀerenced version, below, because he was concerned about stochastic trends (he did not want to embed the
cointegration assumption of the null hypothesis):
∆ =  + ∆
 +  .
Obstfeld estimated this equation on Penn World Tables data for 1950-1988.
Part of his paper is devoted to calculation of the correlation between ∆ and
∆
 . He finds higher correlations in the 1973-1988 period than in the earlier,
1950-1972 period. This would be interpreted as a “direct” test of risk-sharing.
Obstfeld then explores whether other variables, such as GDP growth and
government spending growth explain idiosyncratic variation in   His investigation into these other variables is partly motivated by a desire to see whether
these other variables can explain (in an R-squared sense) consumption growth,
and whether they are plausibly stand-ins for preference shocks. He also argues,
convincingly, that government spending shocks are uninsurable internationally
given the concomitant moral hazard issues, and provides some support for this
hypothesis. These tests are “indirect” because they test whether something
that should not explain consumption movements does, in fact, have predictive
content for consumption. If there is complete risk-sharing, the country-specific

5

variables, such as the national component of output, should not matter for
national consumption.2
An important problem with the indirect approach to testing risk-sharing
is that every single economic variable that does not enter the Euler equation
should be uncorrelated with the growth rate of marginal utility. The candidates
include state and local fiscal variables; monetary policies; exchange rates, unemployment. . . the list is endless. In fact, foreign “country-specific” variables
should not matter either. It is an impossible task to collect the data and then
test whether every one of these variables carries a zero coeﬃcient. One can
never, with this approach, claim to have verified the existence of risk-sharing.
All that can be said is that, with respect to a particular set of variables, there
is (or is not) strong evidence against risk-sharing.

2.3

Risk-Sharing and the Permanent Income Hypothesis

This section considers the relationship between tests of international risk-sharing
and tests of the permanent income hypothesis. Many tests of risk-sharing, both
across countries and across individuals, have been conducted using specifications
very similar to tests of permanent income theory. A typical test of the permanent
income theory regresses consumption growth on (i) a measure of the real rate
of interest, capturing the eﬀect of intertemporal substitution on consumption
growth, and (ii) the lagged growth rate of income. The null hypothesis implied
by permanent income theory is that lagged income growth should carry a zero
coeﬃcient. Typically, this null hypothesis is rejected by the data. Cochrane
(1991) and Mace (1991) used similar specifications to study interpersonal risksharing. Lewis (1996) uses a modification of this approach to study international
risk-sharing. In each case, the test of risk-sharing amounted to a test that the
coeﬃcient on lagged income growth was zero.
This raises a natural question: ‘Is the concept of risk-sharing inextricably
linked with the concept of the permanent income hypothesis?’ The answer is
‘no,’ as a simple example will illustrate. Suppose that there are two countries,
and output is produced using capital and labor. Each period, a constant fraction of world output is allocated to investment, and the rest is allocated to
consumption. The investment and consumption amounts are allocated to the
two countries according to a constant sharing rule; say, 12 for each country. In
this situation, the risk-sharing condition (2) would hold. However, so long as
there is persistence and cross-country correlation in output growth (which is
true in the data), the test of the PIH would fail, since lagged output growth
would predict current-period output growth which would, in turn, be correlated
with current-period consumption growth. Thus risk-sharing does not imply the
2 Although most versions of Lewis’s tests rejected risk-sharing, she found that she could
not reject risk sharing when conditioning on no capital market restrictions and including the
eﬀects of nonseparabilities.

6

PIH. Showing that the PIH does not imply risk-sharing is straightforward; the
two countries can simply behave as autarky economies, but following the PIH
within each country. These examples show that there is no necessary connection
between the permanent income hypothesis and risk-sharing. Either of these hypotheses can be true in the absence of the other. This is fortunate, since many
economists believe that there is abundant empirical evidence against the PIH. If
risk-sharing required that the PIH hold, there would be little point to studying
risk-sharing.

3

Empirical Results

This sub-section presents results for direct tests of risk-sharing in the case in
which preferences are of the constant-relative-risk-aversion, time-separable form.
This is the specification that has received the most study in prior investigations.
Our data are quarterly, from 1960:1 through 2009:2 for 21 countries. Nominal
variables are translated to constant US dollars using the nominal exchange rate
vis-a-vis the US together with the US GDP deflator. The risk-sharing condition says that k-period growth rates of consumption should be equalized across
countries for all values of k. That is: these k-period growth rates should be
perfectly correlated across all pairs of countries. The majority of empirical risksharing papers focus on the k=1 case, i.e., the data are first-diﬀerenced. The
reason for using the first-diﬀerence filter is rarely explicit (Obstfeld (1994) is
an exception). One likely reason is that first-diﬀerencing achieves stationarity
of an I(1) consumption series. However, if consumption is I(1), diﬀerencing at
any horizon will achieve stationarity, as will any of a large set of common filters
such as one- or two-sided moving averages, the Hodrick-Prescott filter, or the
band-pass filters of Baxter and King (1999). Some of these filters have desirable
properties while others, such as the Hodrick-Prescott filter with asymmetric
treatment of the endpoints, are well known to distort the data. In the present
paper, we make contact with current practice by studying growth rates of marginal utility. However, we extend the typical focus of quarterly diﬀerences to
study diﬀerences extending to a maximum of 24 quarters.
We begin by illustrating the typical pattern of correlation between consumptions across countries and the relationship between bilateral consumption correlations and output correlations. The first fact that emerges from the data is
that consumption correlations for first-diﬀerenced data (k=1) are typically the
lowest of all correlations computed for various values of k. The diﬀerence can
be substantial. Figure 1 shows a scatter plot of consumption correlations for all
pairs of countries (210 pairs) for the k=1 case and the k=16 case (k=16 corresponds to four-year diﬀerences—16 quarters). This figure shows that there is
just one country pair for which the quarterly first-diﬀerence correlation is just a
tiny bit larger than the four-year diﬀerence correlation. For the 209 other pairs
7

of countries, the correlation of 16-quarter diﬀerences is substantially larger than
the correlation of first diﬀerences. The median first-diﬀerence correlation is
0.50; the median for the 16-quarter diﬀerences is 0.78.

3.1

Trading partner correlations

Figure 1 also indicates the bilateral correlation for each country with its largest
trading partner as a solid, filled "o" on the graph. One might expect that
consumption correlations with one’s trading partner would plausibly be higher
than consumption correlations with other countries because international trade
in goods is one important way that countries can smooth marginal utility. The
figure suggests that trading partner correlations are not obviously diﬀerent from
the distribution of all pairwise correlations.
We wish to formally test the null hypothesis that the correlation of a given
country with its major trading partner is not drawn from a diﬀerent distribution
from the correlations with all other countries in the sample (holding k fixed).
Because of the small sample size and because the distribution requirements for
use of a t-statistic are not satisfied in this context, we used the Mann-WhitneyWilcoxon U-test (see Mann-Whitney (1947), Wilcoxen (1945)). In our context,
where we are comparing the correlation of one partner country (1 = 1) with
the correlations of the other nineteen countries in the sample (2 = 19) the Ustatistic on which this test is based is simply the number of countries in sample
2 with correlations greater than the correlation with the partner country. The
-statistic below is asymptotically standard normal for ‘large’ samples (greater
than about 20):
 − 
≡

where
 = 1 2 2
and

r

1 2 (1 + 2 + 1)

12
Table 1 presents the results of this test. The table lists each country in
the sample in the first column, followed by its largest trading partner in the
second column. The remaining columns indicate the results of the U-test for
diﬀerencing horizons k=1, 4, 8, 12, 16, 20, and 24.3 An asterisk, *, indicates
that the trading partner correlation is significantly larger than the other pairwise
 =

3 Note that the test is not symmetric, i.e., country A can be more correlated with its largest
trading partner, country B, than with A’s other trading partners while country B may not be
more highly correlated with A, its largest trading partner, than it is with B’s other trading
partners.

8

correlations at the 10% significance level.4 The top part of the table presents
results for the large group of countries whose largest trading partner is Germany.
Austria, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, and to a smaller extent, Belgium, show
significantly higher correlations with Germany than with the rest of the countries
in the sample. These are four of the smallest countries in the group of German
trading partners and also are among the closest to Germany geographically.
Germany’s larger or more distant trading partners—Finland, France, UK, Italy,
and Sweden—do not show significantly higher correlations with Germany than
with other countries.
Among the rest of the European countries (those for which Germany is not
the largest trading partner), we find some countries that have significantly higher
correlations with their main trading partner. These are Spain (with France);
Ireland (with the UK); and Portugal (with Spain). We do not find higher
trading partner correlations for Germany (with France); Norway (with the UK),
and Iceland (with the Netherlands). These findings reinforce the results above,
where Germany was the main trading partner, that smaller countries tend to
have higher correlations with their largest trading partner if that trading partner
is also nearby.
When we look at the Australiasia group, the same finding emerges. New
Zealand is more highly correlated with Australia than with other countries in
our sample, but Australia and Japan are not more highly correlated with their
respective trading partners than with the group of countries as a whole. New
Zealand is small relative to Australia and is also much closer to Australia than
any other trading partner. For North America, however, the pattern is diﬀerent.
The two large countries, US and Canada, are highly correlated with each other
(the US is more highly correlated with Canada than with other trading partners
at all values of ), but Mexico and Canada are more correlated with the US
only for low values of . This may be consistent with the evidence above if we
consider that the US and Canada, while both large countries, have no other large
trading partners nearby as do France, Germany, Italy, etc. in Europe. This
could explain why the US-Canada correlations are high, but the correlations
between large European countries are not particularly high relative to other
trading partners. Also, Mexico is an outlier in this sample of countries, having
consumption and output movements much less correlated with the world cycle
than the other countries. Thus the finding that Mexico’s comovement with the
US is higher only at low frequencies is understandable.
4 Because of the structure of our hypothesis (with  = 1), the asterisk also indicates that
1
the trading partner correlation exceeded all but 2 or fewer of the other correlations. It should
be carefully noted that this test does not take into account the serial correlation in the kdiﬀerences of consumption that are used to construct the cross-country correlation coeﬃcients.

9

3.2

Kernel estimates of the distribution of correlations

Another way to gauge the eﬀect of the diﬀerencing interval, k, on consumption
correlations, is to look at the distribution of correlations as k varies. Figure
2 plots a kernel density of the pairwise consumption correlations for k=1,2,
16, 24. The kernel density for k=1 has substantial mass at low correlations,
roughly between zero and 0.5, and also has a mode at about 0.8. The country pairs represented in the region of the right-hand mode (correlations about
0.8) are mainly the European countries. As the diﬀerencing interval rises, the
distributions of consumption correlations show increasing mass at high correlations and much less mass at low correlations. For k=1, the modal correlation is
0.50. By contrast, for the longest diﬀerencing interval that we consider, k=24
quarters, the modal correlation is 0.85.
Why are consumption correlations so low for the k=1 case compared with
longer horizons? The first reason that springs to mind is that this finding is an
artifact of the first-diﬀerence filter. The first-diﬀerence filter downweights low
frequencies and business-cycle frequencies while putting greater than one-for-one
weight on high frequencies. Specifically, the reweighting of the first-diﬀerence
filter toward low frequencies—the ’noise’ frequencies—will result in a low measured
correlation for first-diﬀerenced data. This was illustrated by Baxter and King
(1999). A graphical illustration of this eﬀect is shown in Figure 3.
The use of the first-diﬀerence filter on highly persistent time series will lead
to low correlations of the filtered data. This was demonstrated by Baxter (1994)
in the context of the relationship between real exchange rates and real interest
rates, and was shown for a large number of macroeconomic time series by Baxter
and King (1999). The fact that we find low correlations in the present context
is to be expected. This finding is not necessarily a sign of low risk-sharing.
It is more likely an artifact of reweighting the time series to emphasize noise
components.
There is also the possibility of measurement error in the data. The presence
of classical (white noise) measurement error in the consumption series would
naturally lead to a low correlation of first-diﬀerenced data. The next sub-section
explores this possibility.

3.3

Measurement error: An example

Classical measurement error is white noise added to the ‘signal’—the true measure of consumption. To take a concrete example, suppose that consumption in
each country follows identical random walk processes, so that true consumption
growth is perfectly correlated across countries at all horizons. To this random
walk process, add independent white noise error to each country-level observation. The innovation standard deviation of the white noise (the "measurement
error") is set equal to .25 times the innovation standard devation of the con-

10

sumption process.
Next, simulate this economy for 200 periods—approximately the same length
as the available sample length of 198 periods. Then compute the correlation
coeﬃcients of k-diﬀerences of the simulated processes, for k=1 to 40. Although
the true correlation is 1 for all values of k, the eﬀect of this measurement error is
to reduce the value of the correlation coeﬃcient for small values of k, as shown
in the top panel of Figure 4.
As Figure 4 shows, the eﬀect of the measurement error is most pronounced
for k=1. The influence of these white noise processes on the correlation of
the k-diﬀerenced data dies out by about k=8, or about 2 years for quarterly
data. This panel also shows a 95% confidence interval constructed using den
Haan and Levin (1997, 2000) VAR-HAC estimates of the standard deviation of
the correlation coeﬃcient at each value of k. The measurement error has its
largest eﬀect at the  = 1 horizon, as expected, since the measurement error
is white noise and is amplified by the first-diﬀerence filter as demonstrated
above. What is more surprising is that the white-noise measurement error
continues to aﬀect the estimated correlations at longer horizons. Although
the true correlation is 10 the correlation of the series with measurement error
remains below 098 until   10 That is: the measurement error aﬀects
measured correlations at horizons of two to three years which is within typical
definitions of business-cycle frequencies. Thus, measurement error influences
high frequencies most profoundly, but also aﬀects lower frequencies in a way
that is somewhat surprising.
The confidence intervals implied by the 2-standard-error bands in the top
panel of Figure 4are noticeably jagged. This is an artifact of the implementation
of the VAR-HAC procedure in a small sample characterized by high persistence
in the underlying process.
Conceptually, the idea is the same as finding the variance of the following
process:
 = −1 + 
with 0    1 and  ˜  (0  2 ). The variable  is zero mean with variance
 2 1 −  2  The estimate of the variance of  will be sensitive to small changes in
the value of , especially if the process is highly persistent. In the context of our
k-diﬀerenced consumption data, we have two factors leading to large standard
errors and also volatile estimates of the standard errors as k changes. First, the
process for consumption is itself highly persistent. Second, even if consumption
itself were white noise, the k-diﬀerences would be highly persistent because each
of the observations for a particular diﬀerencing horizon, k, contains (k-1) of the
same sample points as the preceding observation. Thus, persistence is built in
via the diﬀerencing process. In a small sample, the estimated persistence of a
component of the correlation coeﬃcient, say the mean, can change dramatically
as k changes. This will translate into highly volatile standard errors. We will
11

observe this volatility in ‘real-world’ data for the same reasons that we observe
it in the artificial data presented above.
The bottom panel of Figure 4 shows the estimated correlations and confidence interval for a sample of 20,000 observations. The jaggedness in the
confidence intervals disappears. In fact, the standard deviations have shrunk
to nearly zero as we would expect for such a large sample. However, the low
estimated values of the correlation coeﬃcient for small values of k does not disappear since it depends on the innovation variance of the measurement error,
not the sample size.

3.4

Confidence intervals for bilateral correlations

This sub-section presents results for consumption correlations for each country
against two natural benchmarks: (i) world consumption; and (ii) consumption
of the country’s largest trading partner. All variables continue to be in per
capita terms in real US dollars. If there is complete risk-sharing, individual
country growth rates of consumption will be correlated with the growth rate of
world consumption at all horizons. If there is a lack of complete risk sharing,
or if risk sharing is complete only at certain frequencies, then we may observe
that the consumption correlations diﬀer across horizons. In a world with costly
trade, it may be the case that risk sharing is higher with a country’s major
trade partner than it is with the world as a whole. If so, this finding could also
reflect industrial structure or linkage in financial institutions, as investigated
empirically in Baxter and Kouparitsas (2003,2005). However, it remains an
interesting empirical question whether a country’s correlation is higher with the
world as a whole or its one’s largest trading partner.
As shown above, the confidence intervals for the correlations are likely to be
wide and quite jagged. A major problem arises when there is a high correlation
between two series since the sample estimate of the correlation coeﬃcient does
not have a normal distribution, being bounded in the interval [-1,1]. Under the
typical assumption on the normality of the error terms in the driving process for
consumption, the standard error bands for consumption using the VAR-HAC
standard errors can exceed the theoretical bounds of [-1,1]. For this reason,
we construct the Fisher (1915, 1921) z-transform of the correlation coeﬃcient.
This statistic was originally designed precisely to produce a normal distribution
for a monotonic transformation of the correlation coeﬃcient.5
The Fisher
−transformation is as follows, where  denotes the sample estimate of the
correlation coeﬃcient:
=
5 Akito

1 1+
ln
= arctan ()
2 1−

Matsumoto suggested the use of the Fisher z-transform.

12

Fisher (1915, 1921) showed that, if variables  and  are have a bivariate normal distribution, then  is approximately normally distributed and is unbiased
for the population correlation coeﬃcient, . We therefore apply the VAR-HAC
approach to estimation of the mean and standard error of , constructing twostandard-error bands for this variable, and then reporting the implied mean and
standard error bands for  using the inverse of the function above that defines
:6
exp(2) + 1

=
exp(2) − 1

Figure 5 presents results on risk-sharing for several of the countries in our
sample. The countries in the sample are taken from three broad geographic
areas: Europe; North America; and Australasia. Considering Europe first, we
find that the correlations of the consumption growth rates of European countries
with their largest trading partner (most frequently Germany or France) tends
to be higher than their correlation with the world aggregate. This also tends
to be true at all horizons. However, the standard error bands (shown only for
the world aggregate) are large enough that one could not say that there is a
significantly higher correlation with the trading partner than with the world.
The results are nevertheless suggestive of a stronger degree of risk-sharing within
Europe than for European countries vis-a-vis the world as a whole. We take a
closer look at this in the next sub-section.
We do not find a similar pattern of strong geographic risk-sharing for the
other two groups. The correlations among the three North American countries
are much lower than for the European countries, even for Canada vs. the US.
The correlation between Canadian consumption growth and that of the US is
only about 0.50 for the first-diﬀerenced data, but rises to about 0.80 for long
diﬀerences. Mexico’s correlation with the US is very low—only about 0.25 for all
horizons. There is no evidence of strong North American risk-sharing as was
found for Europe.
The pattern of low regional risk-sharing continues with the Australia/New
Zealand/Japan group—admittedly an odd combination when one considers the
large distances between the first two countries and Japan. Still, Japan is Australia’s largest trading partner in our sample (China is currently Australia’s
largest trading partner, but China is not in our sample). One might therefore expect that Australia’s consumption correlations would be more correlated
with Japan’s than with the world’s. This is not the case, however. For the
first-diﬀerenced data, the correlation is only about 0.20, rising to about 0.60 for
the longest horizons considered. Australia’s correlation with the world cycle is
substantially higher—about 0.55 at k=1, rising to nearly 0.90 for k=24. New
Zealand, by contrast, shows consumption correlations more highly correlated
with its largest trading partner, Australia, than it does with the world cycle.
6 The

confidence interval for  is symmetric but the implied confidence interval for  is not.

13

Japan’s largest trading partner is the US (not part of Asia, so the regional link is
broken here.) We find that Japan’s correlation with the world is higher than it is
with the US—substantially higher for short horizons. For the k=1 case, Japan’s
correlation with the US is only 0.20, while its correlation with the world cycle is
nearly 0.70. The gap narrows as k rises, but at the longest horizon considered,
the correlation with the world is just over 0.90, while the correlation with the
US is about 0.75.

3.5

Risk-sharing within Europe

We can formally test the hypothesis that risk-sharing between pairs of European
countries is higher than between pairs of countries in which one or both lies
outside of Europe. The U-test described earlier can be applied to the two
groups. There are 13 European countries (we drop Iceland from the European
group for these calculations), and 7 non-European countries. This leads to a
total of 91 within-Europe correlations and 119 correlations in which one or both
countries are not in Europe. The U-statistic computed for the hypothesis that
the European correlations are no diﬀerent from the non-European correlations
is significantly diﬀerent from zero at the 1% level for all values of . In fact,
the European correlation exceeds the non-European correlation in 88%-100%
of cases when we perform the pairwise calculations required for the U-test (the
range 88%-100% covers all values of ).

4

Is it the exchange rate?

Thus we are left with the finding that there is substantial risk-sharing between
trading partners, and substantial regional risk-sharing within Europe, but little
evidence of regional risk-sharing within other geographic groups. One potential
explanation that springs immediately to mind is the stability of the exchange
between European countries in contrast to the more-volatile exchange rates
between the countries of the non-European groups. To explore whether this
possibility could explain the foregoing results, consider the following thought
experiment. Suppose that we assume that there is purchasing power parity, so
that the price of goods is the same in all currencies. We could then construct a
measure of real consumption in each country by deflating each country’s nominal
consumption expenditure by an appropriate deflator. This would remove the
eﬀect of exchange rate volatility on measured consumption completely. The
truth probably lies somewhere between the consumption measured in exchangerate-adjusted terms and consumption measured in own-currency constant units.
Without detailed sectoral information, we can only bound the results that would
be obtained under the assumptions of (1) perfect tradability without purchasing
power parity, so that the appropriate construct is the one previously used; or

14

(2) the assumption that local currency prices are correct either because goods
are nontraded or because purchasing power parity holds. This experiment thus
allows us to bound the results for risk-sharing for these two polar cases. Further,
and perhaps most importantly, this analysis allows us to determine whether the
European-risk-sharing finding is an artifact of exchange-rate stability in this
region.
One interesting finding is that the exchange rate has an important eﬀect on
the distribution of correlations at varying horizons, as summarized earlier in the
kernel densities. The kernel density estimates for real consumption, unadjusted
for the exchange rate, is shown in Figure 6. One would probably have expected
the eﬀects of exchange rate volatility to be manifested at the high frequencies
emphasized by low values of k since exchange rates are commonly viewed as approximately a random walk. However, what is really most striking about these
kernel densities is that the exchange rate aﬀects the longer diﬀerencing horizons,
k=16 and k=24. Without the exchange rate adjustment, the distributions of
the long diﬀerences show much more concentrated distributions at high correlations. The scatter plot of consumption correlations for k=1 and k=24 in this
"PPP" case also illustrate this finding.The results for the "PPP" data continue
to exhibit strong European risk-sharing, while most of the prior findings remain
qualitatively similar. Figure 6 shows a set of graphs similar to those of Figure
4. We conclude that the strong intra-European risk-sharing is not an artifact of
relatively smooth European exchange rates.

5

Is it recent?

Numerous empirical investigations of the character of national and international business cycles have documents changing patterns of statistical relationships over the past fifty years. For the purpose of this paper, we ask whether
the two halves of our sample period exhibit diﬀerent behavior with respect to
estimated consumption correlations and their confidence intervals. The sample was split in half, with the first period encompassing 1960:1-1984:4, and the
second period including 1985:2-2009:2. Shortening the sample to end in 2007:2
would not materially aﬀect the results.
Rather than report tests for the full set of countries, we continue to
focus on two places where changes in correlation would be important: (1) with
the world aggregate; and (2) with a country’s largest trading partner. For
each subsample, the sample means of the k-diﬀerenced consumption data were
calculated, and t-statistics were formed by subtracting the correlation from the
second subsample from the first-period correlation, then dividing by the secondperiod variance-covariance matrix of the correlations. The first-period VCV
could have been used instead with no important changes.
Table 1 presents the results for k=1, 4, 8, 16. There are several signifi15

cant negative t-statistics for the k=1 case, but the majority of countries do not
have significant diﬀerences with either the world or their major trading partner.
There are only two positive t-statistics indicating higher correlation in the pre1985 period. For k=4,8,16, significant diﬀerences across the time periods are
rare. Thus, the finding of high risk-sharing is not a phenomenon driven by the
most recent 25 years of data.

6

Is it risk sharing?

Certainly, if "risk sharing" means only highly correlated consumption growth
rates, there is strong evidence for risk sharing at all but short horizons. The low
correlations at short horizons may well be an artifact of measurement error, as
shown earlier. However, if one means by risk sharing the deliberate pooling of
consumption risks so that consumption profiles are more correlated across countries than would be the case in autarky, the case is much less clear. Consumption
correlations are very tightly related to output correlations, as illustrated in Figure 7. (In this figure, consumption is measured in real US dollars.) The circles
represent correlations with major trading partners. The first plot is for the k=1
case; the second is for k=16.
The point of these plots is to illustrate that the high correlation of consumption growth rates across countries might arise simply because outputs are so
highly correlated. Myopic consumers who consume a fixed fraction of national
GDP would look like individuals engaged in a high degree of risk sharing in
a world where GDP growth rates are highly correlated. The hypothesis that
consumption correlations are equal to output correlations for fixed k and fixed
country pairs was tested using the HAC-VAR covariance matrix for consumption described earlier. The consumption covariance matrix was used because, a
priori, it was expected to yield lower variance terms, thus biasing the test toward
finding diﬀerences between consumption correlations and output correlations.
In fact, the estimated covariance matrix was not very diﬀerent for the output
measure.
Of the 210 x 24 = 5040 test statistics constructed, fewer than 2% showed a
significant diﬀerence between cross-country output growth rates and consumption growth rates. Spefically, only 17 country pairs yielded statistically significant (at the 1% level) t-statistics for the null of no diﬀerence between consumption and output correlations. Of these, nine had significant diﬀerences only for
k3. For all but two of the remaining country pairs, the significant diﬀerences
disappeared between k=5 and k=10.
Why do the few significant correlations show up for low values of k? Marginal utility growth rates would likely be positively correlated–even with no
risk-sharing at all–simply because of positive cross-country correlation in consumption and work eﬀort stemming from the world component of the business
16

cycle. Further, output contains high frequency fluctuations in investment that
are not found in consumption, even though the measure of consumption contains purchases of durables. The smoother behavior of national consumption
relative to national output at low frequencies, for the few countries displaying
this pattern, could well be due to the combination of these two eﬀects.
This sub-section began with a question: is it risk sharing? Specifically,
is there evidence that consumption correlations are significantly higher than
output correlations, reflecting the deliberate actions of individuals wishing to
smooth consumption to a greater extent than is possible within their own borders? The evidence is quite negative. Although consumption correlation growth
rates are strongly positively correlated for many country pairs at medium-tolong horizons, consumption correlations do not exceed output correlations. The
conclusion from this analysis, then, is that there is little evidence of "marginal"
risk-sharing, defined as consumption risk-sharing higher than the amount that
would be achieved by autarkic economies smoothing consumption alone in the
presence of capital accumulation technology.

7

Conclusion

This paper extends our understanding of international risk-sharing along both
temporal and bilateral dimensions. We contrast the usual, indirect approach
to risk-sharing to a direct approach based on computation of the correlation of
growth rates of marginal utilities. The fact that most prior research uses the
indirect approach probably stems from the longstanding use of this approach
to studying the permanent income hypothesis. We show that the PIH and
risk-sharing are independent theories and that neither implies the other.
Our results show that the post-1960 era has been characterized by very substantial risk-sharing between most countries and their major trading partners;
between most countries and the world, and indeed between most countries and
other individual countries. We find risk-sharing is lower at shorter horizons
than longer horizons. Thus a focus on k=1 alone, as is the case in Obstfeld
(1994), Lewis (1996) and the majority of subsequent analyses, would bias the
results against finding support for risk-sharing. The strongest evidence in support of risk-sharing occurs at medium and low frequencies. The diﬃculty with
looking at longer horizons is that, for many country pairs, the standard errors
become extremely large. This diﬃculty will extend to any risk-sharing measure
based on low-frequency movements in consumption.
To study the sensitivity of our findings to the emedded assumptions concerning tradability and the law of one price, we tested whether the results were
substantially diﬀerent when consumption was measured in real local currency
units, rather than in real units of a single reference currency. The qualitative
features of our results were not substantially aﬀected. We also investigated
17

whether the data were dominated by the recent 25-year period; this was not
found to be the case. We then asked whether there was substantial evidence
for "marginal" consumption risk-sharing: consumption movements more correlated than output movements. We found very little evidence to support this
hypothesis.
Overall, our conclusion is that international risk sharing may be greater than
you think. This paper’s aim was to refocus attention on the extent of international risk sharing and to highlight the problems of inference when looking at
measures of long run risk sharing.

18

References
[1] Baxter, Marianne (1994) “Real exchange rates and real interest diﬀerentials: Have we missed the business-cycle relationship?” Journal of Monetary
Economics 33:1 (February 1994), 5-37.
[2] Baxter, M. and and R. King (1999) “Measuring business cycles: Approximate band-pass filters for economic time series”, Review of Economics and
Statistics 81:4, November 1999, 575-593.
[3] Baxter, M. and M.Kouparitsas (2003) “Trade Structure, Industrial Structure, and International Business Cycles,” American Economic Review 51:2
(May 2003), 51-56.
[4] Baxter, M. and M.Kouparitsas (2005) “Determinants of Business Cycle
Comovement: A Robust Analysis”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 52:1
(January 2005) 113-147.
[5] Becker, S. O. and Mathias Hoﬀmann (2006). “Intra- and International Risk
Sharing in the Short-Run and the Long-Run,” European Economic Review
50, 777-806.
[6] Botev, Z.I., J. F. Grotowski and D. P. Kroese, "Kernel Density Estimation
Via Diﬀusion" Annals of Statistics, 2010.
[7] Canova, Fabio and Morten Ravn (1996). “International Consumption Risk
Sharing,” International Economic Review 37, No. 3, August, 573-601.
[8] Cochrane, John (1991) “A Simple Test of Consumption Insurance,” Journal
of Political Economy 99:5 (October 1991), 957-976.
[9] den Den Haan, Wouter and Andrew Levin (1997) A practitioner’s guide
to robust covariance matrix estimation, in Handbook of Statistics 15, G.S.
Maddala and C.R. Rao, eds., Elsevier (Amsterdam), pp.299-342.
[10] den Haan, Wouter J. & Andrew T. Levin (2000). "Robust Covariance Matrix Estimation with Data-Dependent VAR Prewhitening Order," NBER
Technical Working Papers 0255, National Bureau of Economic Research.
[11] Flood, Robert; Nancy Marion and Akito Matsumoto (2009) "International
Risk Sharing During the Globalization Era," IMF Working Paper 09/209.
[12] Kose, M. Ayhan, Eswar Prasad, and Marco Terrones (2007) "How Does
Financial Globalization Aﬀect Risk Sharing? Patterns and Channels",
IMF Working Paper 07/238.

19

[13] Lewis, Karen (1996) “What Can Explain the Apparent Lack of Consumption Risk-Sharing?” Journal of Political Economy 104:2 (April 1996), 267297.
[14] Lewis, Karen (1999) “Trying to Explain Home Bias in Equities and Consumption,” Journal of Economic Literature 37:2 (June 1999), 571-608.
[15] Mace, Barbara (1991) “Full Insurance in the Presence of Aggregate Uncertainty,” Journal of Political Economy 99 (October 1991), 928-956.
[16] Mann, H. B.; Whitney, D. R. (1947). "On a Test of Whether one of Two
Random Variables is Stochastically Larger than the Other". Annals of
Mathematical Statistics 18 (1): 50—60.
[17] Obstfeld, Maurice (1994) "Are Industrial Country Country Risks Globally
Diversified?" in L. Leiderman and A. Razin, Eds., Capital Mobility: The
Impact on Consumption, Investment, and Growth, Cambridge University
Press, 1994.
[18] Wilcoxon, F. (1945). "Individual comparisons by ranking methods". Biometrics Bulletin 1 (6): 80—83.

20

Table 1: Correlations with Largest Trading Partner
* indicates that correlation with trading partner is significantly higher than correlations with
other countries using Whitney-Mann U-test, 10% critical value
k: Differencing Horizon
Largest trading
Region/ Country partner
Europe
Austria
Germany
Belgium
Germany
Finland
Germany
France
Germany
UK
Germany
Italy
Germany
Luxembourg
Germany
Netherlands
Germany
Sweden
Germany
Spain
France
Germany
France
Ireland
UK
Norway
UK
Iceland
Netherlands
Portugal
Spain

1

4

8

12

16

20

24

*
*

*

*

*

*

*
*

*
*

*
*

*
*

*
*

*
*

*
*

*
*

*
*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*
*

Australasia
Australia
Japan
New Zealand

Japan
US
Australia

*

*

*

North America
Canada
Mexico
USA

US
US
Canada

*
*
*

*
*
*

*
*

*

Note: This test does not account for the serial correlation in the k-differences used to construct
the correlation coefficients.

Table 2: Sub-Sample Test for No Change in Correlation
k: Differencing Horizon

Country

Largest
trading
partner

Australia

Japan

Austria

Germany

Belgium

Germany

Spain

France

Finland

Germany

France

Germany

UK

Germany

Germany
Ireland

1

4

8

12

16

20

24

+
-

-

-

-

-

France
UK

-

-

+

Iceland

Netherlands

-

Italy

Germany

Japan

US

Luxembourg

Germany

Mexico

US

Netherlands

Germany

Norway

UK

New Zealand

Australia

Portugal

Spain

Sweden
USA

Germany
Canada

-

-

-

-

+

+

+

+

Notes:
" - " : correlation with trading partner significantly lower in first sub-period: 1960:1-1984:4
" +" : correlation with trading partner significantly lower in second sub-period: 1985:1-2009:2

Tests performed on z-transform of correlation coefficient using VAR-HAC standard errors.

Figure 3

Figure 4: The effect of measurement error

Figure 5: Correlation with major trading partner (solid line) and world (dashed line)
(99% confidence intervals indicated by dotted lines)

Figure 5, cont'd.

Figure 5 cont'd.

Figure 7

