                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   FISCAL FATIGUE, FISCAL SPACE AND DEBT SUSTAINABILITY IN ADVANCED
                               ECONOMIES

                                           Atish R. Ghosh
                                              Jun I. Kim
                                         Enrique G. Mendoza
                                          Jonathan D. Ostry
                                         Mahvash S. Qureshi

                                        Working Paper 16782
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16782


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2011




We thank Olivier Blanchard, Henning Bohn, David Romer, and participants at the IMF’s Eleventh
Annual Jacques Polak Research Conference for helpful comments and suggestions. Any errors are
the authors’ responsibility. The views expressed herein are those of the authors, and should not be
attributed to the IMF, its Executive Board, its management, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Atish R. Ghosh, Jun I. Kim, Enrique G. Mendoza, Jonathan D. Ostry, and Mahvash S. Qureshi.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Fiscal Fatigue, Fiscal Space and Debt Sustainability in Advanced Economies
Atish R. Ghosh, Jun I. Kim, Enrique G. Mendoza, Jonathan D. Ostry, and Mahvash S. Qureshi
NBER Working Paper No. 16782
February 2011
JEL No. E62,H62,H63

                                              ABSTRACT

How high can public debt rise without compromising fiscal solvency? We answer this question using
a stochastic ability-to-pay model of sovereign default in which risk-neutral investors lend to a government
that displays “fiscal fatigue,” because its ability to increase primary balances cannot keep pace with
rising debt. As a result, the government faces an endogenous debt limit beyond which debt cannot
be rolled-over. Using data for 23 advanced economies over 1970–2007, we find evidence of a fiscal
reaction function with these features, and use it to compute “fiscal space,” defined as the difference
between projected debt ratios and debt limits.


Atish R. Ghosh                                       Jonathan D. Ostry
International Monetary Fund                          International Monetary Fund
700 19th ST NW                                       700 19th Street, N.W.
HQ-1-9-612                                           Washington, DC 20431
Washington, DC 20431                                 jostry@imf.org
aghosh@imf.org
                                                     Mahvash S. Qureshi
Jun I. Kim                                           International Monetary Fund
International Monetary Fund                          700 19th ST NW
700 19th ST NW                                       HQ-1-9-612
Washington DC 20431                                  Washington, DC 20431
jkim2@imf.org                                        mqureshi@imf.org

Enrique G. Mendoza
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
mendozae@econ.umd.edu
                                         I. INTRODUCTION

A key question confronting the world economy today is whether advanced economies have room

for fiscal maneuver—“fiscal space”—or whether they need urgent fiscal adjustment for debt

sustainability. Financial bailouts, stimulus spending, and lower revenues in the Great Recession

have all contributed to produce some of the highest ratios to GDP of public debt and primary

deficits seen in advanced economies in the past forty years (Figure 1). Moreover, many of these

countries are expected to continue facing large financing needs over the coming years, while

credit markets are already concerned about the ability of some of them (most notably Greece,

Ireland, Portugal, and Spain) to service their debts. Whether such countries have any “fiscal

space” remaining is thus a pressing question.

In this paper, we develop a new framework for assessing debt sustainability in advanced

economies. Specifically, we seek to determine a “debt limit” beyond which fiscal solvency is in

doubt. We then define fiscal space as the distance between the current debt level and this debt

limit. Our model incorporates a sovereign borrower that follows a fiscal reaction function in

response to changes in debt, and risk-neutral creditors who arbitrage the expected return on

government debt with the safe interest rate, taking account of the possibility that the government

may default because it is unable to repay. In this setting, rising default risk widens the risk

premium, and a larger risk premium implies a higher debt service burden and therefore a greater

probability of default.

Our analysis begins from the premise that governments in advanced economies usually behave

responsibly, increasing primary (i.e., non-interest) surpluses in response to rising debt service so

as to stabilize the public debt-to-GDP ratio at a reasonable level. This is an empirically relevant

premise consistent with the findings of Bohn (2008) for the United States, and Mendoza and


                                                                                                      3
Ostry (2008) for other industrial countries. Large shocks—such as wars or the fiscal fallout of

financial crises—may cause temporary deviations from this (implicit or explicit) primary balance

“rule.” As long as the subsequent increase in the primary balance is sufficient to offset the higher

interest bill, however, the debt ratio will again converge to its long-run value.

Of course, it cannot literally be true that the primary balance would always increase enough to

offset the interest bill, because at sufficiently high levels of debt this would require primary

balances that exceed GDP.1 If the primary balance does not keep pace with higher interest

payments as debt rises, then—even assuming a constant interest rate so as to abstract from the

endogeneity of the risk premium on government debt—there will be a debt level above which the

debt dynamics become explosive and the government will necessarily default. In fact default will

occur before this point because the rising risk premium—as default becomes imminent—

exacerbates the debt dynamics. In particular, as the probability of default rises, so will the risk

premium, making it less likely that the primary surplus will suffice to meet the interest bill, and

raising the probability of default further.2 Eventually, the “fixed point” problem of a higher

probability of default leading to a larger risk premium, in turn leading to a higher probability of

default, has no solution at a finite interest rate. At this point (which we term the debt limit) the

government loses market access, is unable to rollover its debt, and is forced to default. To




1
 Empirically, we find that while fiscal effort is generally increasing in the debt level, it eventually peters out as it
becomes increasingly difficult to keep raising taxes or cutting non-interest expenditures.
2
  There is a large body of literature on sovereign default, though most of these papers consider strategic default by
developing country governments (see the survey by Eaton and Fernandez (1995) and the recent quantitative studies
along the lines of Arellano (2008) and Aguiar and Gopinath (2006)). Here, we model default as a problem of
inability-to-pay, triggered by an inability to rollover debt in the face of rising interest payments and stochastic
shocks to the primary balance. We believe that inability-to-pay rather than strategic default is more likely to be
relevant for analyzing public debt in advanced economies (see also Cottarelli et al., 2010).




                                                                                                                           4
determine this point, we solve simultaneously for the probability of default, the interest rate

faced by the sovereign, and the debt limit.

                      Figure 1. Primary Balance and Public Debt of Advanced Economies

                (i) Primary balance to GDP (in percent)                                      (ii) Public debt to GDP (in percent)
       6
                                                                               100
       4

       2
                                                                                80
       0

      -2                                                                        60

      -4
                                                                                40
      -6

      -8            USA                                                                                                                  Proj.
                                                                                20           USA
                    G7 (excl. USA)
     -10
                    Non-G7
                                                                 Proj.                       G7 (excl. USA)
                                                                                             Non-G7
     -12                                                                         0
           1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015                         1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015

    Source: IMF's WEO database.
    *Median value for the corresponding year; G7 include: Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, and United States; Non-G7
    advanced countries in the sample include: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, Greece, Korea, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Netherlands,
    New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, and Sweden.




Our theoretical framework, motivated by Bohn (1998, 2008), thus departs fundamentally from

earlier work in pinning down the concept of debt limit. While Bohn shows that a sufficient

condition for the government to satisfy its intertemporal budget constraint is that the primary

balance always reacts positively to lagged debt, this can be thought of as a weak sustainability

criterion that does not, for example, rule out an ever increasing debt-to-GDP ratio (and thus the

need for a primary surplus that eventually exceeds GDP).3 A stricter sustainability criterion,

which we adopt here, is that public debt should be expected to converge to some finite proportion

of GDP. If the primary balance is always a constant proportion of lagged debt, then a sufficient

condition for this stricter definition is that the responsiveness of the primary balance be greater

3
  Bohn (2007) shows that satisfying the government budget constraint requires only that there exist some (arbitrarily
high but finite) degree of differencing at which the time series of the debt-to-GDP ratio becomes stationary—which
is always satisfied in the data. For this reason, he concludes that this sustainability criterion (and the associated
stationarity tests on which it rests) is uninteresting, and suggests that examining the behavioral response of the
primary balance may be a more fruitful way of establishing debt sustainability; this is the tack taken here.




                                                                                                                                                     5
than the interest rate-growth rate differential.4 But once we allow for the possibility of “fiscal

fatigue” whereby the primary balance eventually responds more slowly to rising debt than the

interest rate-growth rate differential, there will in general be a finite debt limit.

Applying our framework empirically to a sample of 23 advanced economies over the period

1970–2007, we find strong support for the existence of a non-linear relationship between the

primary balance and (lagged) public debt that exhibits the fiscal fatigue characteristic.

Specifically, the relationship is well approximated by a cubic function: at low levels of debt there

is no, or even a slightly negative relationship between the primary balance and debt. As debt

increases, the primary balance also increases, but the responsiveness eventually weakens, and

then actually decreases at very high levels of debt. This relationship is robust to the addition of a

long list of conditioning variables and to a variety of estimation techniques.5

Combining the empirical estimates of the primary balance reaction function with actual interest

rate data or with endogenous interest rates obtained from the model, we gauge each country’s

debt limit and corresponding fiscal space. Our results indicate that Greece, Italy, Japan, and

Portugal have the least fiscal space, with Iceland, Ireland, Spain, the United States, and the

United Kingdom also constrained in their degree of fiscal maneuver. By contrast, Australia,

Korea, New Zealand, and the Nordic countries appear to have the most fiscal space to deal with

unexpected shocks.

4
 Intuitively, the debt-to-GDP ratio grows autonomously at a rate given by the interest rate-output growth rate
differential; if the response of the primary balance to rising debt is stronger than this differential, then the primary
adjustment will offset the autonomous dynamics and the debt ratio will converge to a finite ratio.
5
  While we believe this paper is the first to explore the debt sustainability implications of a non-linear response of
primary balance to rising debt, we are not the first to find a non-linear response. For example, using a quadratic
specification for the United States (over 1916–1995 and 1792–2003), Bohn (1998, 2008) considers how fiscal
behavior varies with debt levels, but finds that the primary surplus is more responsive to increases in debt at higher
debt levels. By contrast, Abiad and Ostry (2005) and Mendoza and Ostry (2008), who look at international evidence
(and a more recent sample), find that the response of primary balance to debt weakens at higher debt levels.




                                                                                                                           6
Our contribution to the literature is thus three-fold. First, we provide a simple, intuitive definition

of debt limit (and corresponding fiscal space) that has the reasonable properties of increasing in

the country’s average fiscal effort and decreasing in the interest rate-growth rate differential.

Second, our model can help explain why governments can suddenly lose financing access and

why revisions to market sentiment about a possible shock to the primary balance (even if the

shock is not realized) can abruptly push a country into a situation of unsustainable debt

dynamics. Third, we provide empirical estimates of available fiscal space for advanced

economies, and our approach can quantify the extent to which policy and institutional changes

could help to increase the available space.

In what follows, Section II develops the theoretical framework and derives the debt limit. Section

III presents estimation results for the fiscal reaction function, and reports fiscal space estimates

for our sample of countries. Section IV concludes.

                                 II. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK

2.1 Sovereign Debtor and Creditors

We consider a credit relationship between a sovereign borrower and a large number of atomistic

lenders. The government budget constraint is standard:

                                    dt 1  dt  (rt  g )dt  st 1                            (1)


where d is one-period debt (as a share of GDP) at the end of the period, g is the growth rate of

real GDP which is assumed to be exogenous and constant, s is the primary balance (in percent of

GDP), and rt is the real interest rate on debt contracted in period t and due in period t+1. The

interest rate is endogenous and thus greater than or equal to the risk-free interest rate, r*, which




                                                                                                       7
we assume to be exogenously given (in equilibrium, the interest rate will be an increasing

function of the probability of default, as shown below).

We make three assumptions regarding the behavior of the sovereign debtor and its creditors. In

the remainder of this Section and in Appendix I, we show that these assumptions are sufficient

to guarantee the existence of our debt limit concept.

Assumption I. Fiscal Reaction Function with Fiscal Fatigue

The government is committed to follow a fiscal reaction function:

                                         st 1    f (d t )   t 1                               (2)


where  captures all systematic determinants of the primary balance other than lagged debt,

f (d ) is the response of the primary balance to lagged debt, which is a continuous function with

the properties defined below, and      is an i.i.d. shock to the primary balance with the distribution
function G( ) defined over the finite support [ ,  ] with   0 . We assume that G( )

satisfies standard properties such that G ( )  G ( )  G (0) , G (  0)  0 , and G (  0)  0 .

Assuming a finite support is plausible since the primary deficit or surplus cannot exceed 100

percent of GDP (and, in practice, seldom exceeds more than a few percentage points of GDP).

To capture the idea of fiscal fatigue, the function f(d) is assumed to be continuously

differentiable and have the property that there exists a debt ratio d m   such that:

                   f (d m )    (r *  g )d m and f (d )  r *  g d  d m                    (3)

Hence, at dm and with the worst primary balance shock, debt is non-increasing, and for any

higher debt ratio, the response of primary balance is lower than the growth-adjusted interest rate.




                                                                                                           8
Assumption II. Default due to Inability to Pay

The government defaults if and only if debt exceeds the debt limit, d , where the latter is defined

as the maximum debt level at which the government can roll-over its maturing debt and finance

the primary deficit at a finite interest rate. The default rule of the sovereign thus takes the form:

                                                  1        if d t  d
                                             Dt                                                               (4)
                                                  0        otherwise

where D is an indicator equal to one if the government defaults, and zero otherwise.6

Assumption III. Risk-neutral Creditors

Creditors are atomistic and risk-neutral, who lend to the government under the following

assumptions:

(i)          There is less than unit probability that government debt (as a proportion of GDP) is

on an explosive path (i.e., increasing without bound regardless of all future realizations of  ).

(ii)         There exists a finite interest rate that compensates risk-neutral lenders for the

(endogenous) risk of default:

                                     1  r*  (1  pt 1 )(1  rt )  pt 1  (1  r*) ,                       (5)


where pt 1 is the probability of default in the next period (when current debt matures), and  is

an assumed recovery value in the event of default.7 This arbitrage condition implies the standard


6
 In principle, debt limit could vary over time with the government’s ability-to-pay. The model could be modified
easily to incorporate time varying ability-to-pay as long as  is non-stochastic.
7
  The permissible range of the recovery value needs to be bounded above at a level “sufficiently” less than unity to
ensure that the government has the ability to pay the recovery value in the event of default. A convenient and
sufficient upper-bound is to assume that 0      1   / (1  r*) d m . This assumption ensures that the debt
limit under uncertainty will lie below the debt limit under no uncertainty (see Appendix I), but still allows for large
                                                                                                       (continued…)


                                                                                                                          9
result from sovereign default models that, as long as the default probability is positive but less

than unity, the default risk premium is a positive, increasing, and convex function of default

probability.

(iii)         If there are multiple interest rates that satisfy the above arbitrage condition, then

creditors are assumed to choose the lowest such interest rate. 8

2.2 Rational Expectations Equilibrium and Debt Limit

The rational expectations equilibrium of the model is defined by sequences of interest rates and

public debt such that the government satisfies its budget constraint, its reaction function and its

default rule, and lenders satisfy their arbitrage condition. The key concept we seek to establish

and analyze next is the debt limit that characterizes the largest debt at which the government can

borrow at a finite interest rate. To this end, we first characterize the model’s equilibrium default

probability, and establish the existence of well-defined bounds within which the debt limit is

determined. Appendix I provides a full derivation of the debt limit and its properties.

The probability that the government defaults next period is simply the probability that debt

exceeds the debt limit, which is given by:

                             pt 1  pr[ dt 1  d ]  pr[  t 1  H t ]  G ( H t ) ,                           (6)


where H t  (rt  g )dt    f (dt )  (d  dt ) . The creditors’ arbitrage condition can be rewritten as:




recovery values. For example,    is above 90 percent if  and d m are 5 percent and 60 percent of GDP,
respectively.
8
 In case of two interior solutions, the higher one is not sensible such that the interest rate (and the associated default
probability) falls, not rises, as debt increases. See Appendix I.




                                                                                                                        10
                                                           1   pt 1 
                                         1  rt  (1  r*)             .                                 (7)
                                                            1  pt 1 

Exploiting the time recursive structure of the problem to drop time subscripts, we combine (6)

and (7) to obtain default probability (for a given d ) as the solution to the fixed-point problem:

                                                 p  z ( p; d , d ) ,                                      (8)

where

                                 0                  if H ( p; d , d )   
                          
         z ( p; d , d )         1                  if H ( p; d , d )  
                          G ( H ( p; d , d ))       otherwise
                          

         H ( p; d , d )  [( r *  g ) d    f ( d )]  ( d  d )  (1   )(1  r*) d [ p / (1  p )]


It is possible to show that there always exists at least one corner solution to (8), which is p = 1.

There may be multiple interior solutions to (8), but Assumption III (iii) ensures a unique

equilibrium, given by the lowest interior solution.

Bounds on the debt limit

Next, we establish that d exists within well-defined upper and lower bounds. The upper bound,

d 2 , is given implicitly by the largest root of the following equation (see Appendix I):


                                           f (d 2 )    (r *  g )d 2                                  (9)


The left-hand-side of this expression is the best primary surplus (i.e., the surplus under the best

realization of the shock) that the government can achieve at a debt ratio d 2 . The right-hand-side

is the best (i.e., the lowest) effective interest payment the government would need to make,

which assumes that creditors charge the risk-free interest rate (despite the default risk). By (3), as




                                                                                                                 11
debt increases beyond d 2 , the primary surplus increases at a slower rate than (r *  g ). Hence, if

the debt ratio ever exceeds d 2 , the primary balance would not suffice (even under the best of

circumstances) to cover the interest payment, and debt dynamics would become explosive, thus

violating Assumption III (i) and triggering default.

The lower bound, d1 , is obtained as the largest root of the following equation:


                                     f (d1 )    (r *  g ) d1                             (10)


which states that at d1 , the worst primary surplus (i.e., the surplus under the worst realization of

the shock) suffices to cover the effective interest payment when creditors charge the risk-free

interest rate. Since debt is non-increasing at d1 for all possible realizations of the shock, there is

no risk of default and, therefore, creditors would charge the risk-free interest rate. Since d1 is

equal to the annuity value of the worst realization of the primary balance evaluated at the risk

free rate, it corresponds to the “natural debt limit”, defined in the macro literature on savings

under incomplete markets as the largest debt that the sovereign could take if it wants to ensure

that it will never default (in the next period or at any point in the future), even if the primary

balance remains at its worst realization forever. Appendix I shows that d 2  d1  d m .


Determination of the Debt Limit

To determine d , first we note that, for a given debt limit within the bounds defined above, there

is a threshold debt ratio d̂  d that corresponds to the maximum debt ratio that yields the corner

solution p  0 to (8)—i.e., the largest root of z (0; d , d ) . Thus, d̂ guarantees that the

government will be able to repay next period, and the range of debt ratios ( d̂ , d ] is the range in




                                                                                                      12
which debt with default risk is traded. By construction, the default probability in the next period

is zero for d  dˆ , hence the interest rate charged by the market will be the risk-free rate by

Assumption III (iii).9 It is readily verified that d̂  d1 because d̂ only guarantees ability to repay

one period ahead, while d1 guarantees repayment for any future sequence of realizations of

shocks (see Appendix I for the proof).


As debt rises above d̂ , the market charges a positive risk premium, and the interior solution to

(8) determines the equilibrium probability of default and interest rate. We denote the interior

solution (the lowest one in case of multiple solutions) by p*  p * ( d , d )  (0, 1) . Note that p*

and the associated finite interest rate are a legitimate equilibrium solution only for d  dˆ

because otherwise the corner solution p = 0 and the risk-free interest rate must be the equilibrium

solution by Assumption III (iii). Moreover, the debt limit must be larger than d̂ if p* exists

because it is defined as the maximum level of debt the government can roll-over at a finite

interest rate. Assuming that p* exists, it can be easily shown that:

                                      p * / d  0 and p * / d  0                                            (11)

which makes intuitive sense: the default probability rises with actual debt but falls as the debt

limit rises.

Given the government’s default rule, in the rational expectations equilibrium, the debt limit must

satisfy the following two equilibrium conditions simultaneously:



9
    Given the nonlinearity of f(d), p = 0 may not be supported as the fixed point solution at some levels of debt below
dˆ . Nevertheless, the market will charge the risk-free interest rate because it foresees that the same interest rate is
consistent with higher debt levels.




                                                                                                                           13
                                  (i)    p * must exist for d  (dˆ , d ]
                                                                                                     (12)
                                  (ii)   p * must not exist for d  d


The first condition implies that if debt remains at or below the debt limit, there are always risk-

neutral lenders who are willing to lend to the government at a positive finite risk premium. The

second implies that p = 1 must be the only solution if debt exceeds the debt limit. In this case, no

finite risk premium can fully compensate for the associated default risk, and as a result, the

government effectively faces an infinite interest rate (or a complete loss of market access).10

Since the primary balance is finite given that the debt limit and the support of the shock are both

finite, debt dynamics become explosive and the government necessarily defaults whenever debt

exceeds the debt limit—which is consistent with the assumed default rule. These two conditions

essentially pin down the debt limit at equilibrium.


Denoting the interior solution at d  d by p*  p * (d , d ) , condition (ii), together with the first

result in (11), imply that p * must be the maximum interior solution. Figure 2 illustrates this

point. For a given debt limit and some initial debt ratio below the limit (and above d̂ ), there

would in general be two (or more) interior solutions to (8), the lowest of which is p*. As d

increases, p* also increases while the other (upper) interior solution decreases. As d increases

further, the two interior solutions converge to each other before collapsing into a single interior

solution, which occurs at the tangency point between z ( p; d , d ) and the 45 degree line. The

interior solution at this tangency point is the maximum interior solution that the given debt limit

can sustain: any further increase in debt will lead to the corner solution p = 1, resulting in an



10
  Flood and Marion (2006) follow a similar approach to analyze how emerging market sovereign borrowers can be
shut out of international capital markets in a relatively short period of time.




                                                                                                            14
infinite interest rate. But this is the very definition of debt limit. At the tangency point, therefore,

actual debt must coincide with d or, equivalently, p* is determined by the tangency point.




The debt limit is unique, and fully determined by the risk-free interest rate (adjusted for growth),

the recovery value, and the support of the shock to the primary balance. The interest rate is finite

at d because the associated probability of default, p * , is strictly less than unity. If debt were to

increase beyond d , the equilibrium default probability jumps to unity resulting in an infinite

interest rate (or complete loss of market access for the government). As a result, the primary

balance is insufficient (even with the best realization of the shock) to offset the explosive

autonomous debt dynamics, and the government necessarily defaults for ability-to-pay reasons.

The debt limit obtained here is similar to a well-known result from Eaton and Gersovitz (1981)

showing that risk neutral lenders impose a rationing limit at the debt threshold in each period

above which, for all possible income realizations in the next period, the borrower would default.



                                                                                                      15
The difference is that in their setting the default probability is determined by a strategic default

decision rule, while here it is purely determined by one-period-ahead ability to pay.

2.3 A Deterministic Example

It is instructive to solve a deterministic example where there are no shocks to the primary

balance (i.e.,   0 ). Denoting by d the debt limit, in the deterministic case, z ( p; d , d ) can

take only two discrete values—0 or 1—implying that the fixed-point solution to (8) is

characterized by two corner solutions: p = 0 or p = 1. Given this result, the debt limit is

determined by the following two equilibrium conditions: (i) p = 0 must be the equilibrium

solution for d  d , and (ii) p = 1 must be the equilibrium solution for d  d . As shown in

Appendix I, these conditions yield the debt limit as the largest root of the following equation:


                                        f (d )  ( r *  g )d                                (13)

The deterministic example is useful because the equilibrium debt, debt limit, and interest rate

schedule can be illustrated by means of a simple diagram. In Figure 3, the thick black curve

represents the nonlinear fiscal reaction function, which satisfies the properties defined in

Assumption III, except that there is no stochastic shock to the primary balance (such shocks

would imply upward or downward shifts of the curve). In general, there will be two stationary

equilibria (ignoring the intersection that would occur at d  0 ). The first is given by the lower

intersection between   f (d ) and the (r *  g )d schedule. This lower intersection, denoted d*,

is the long-run public debt ratio to which the economy converges conditionally (as long as debt

does not cross the limit d ). It is readily verified that this equilibrium is dynamically stable.

The second stationary equilibrium corresponds to the debt limit implied by the model, and is

given by the higher intersection between   f (d ) and the ( r *  g ) d schedule. Thus,


                                                                                                        16
convergence to d* is only conditional, because if debt were to ever exceed the higher

equilibrium, then it would not return to d*. If debt were to exceed this limit, there is no finite

interest rate that would compensate creditors for the probability of default (which is unity). To

see this, note that beyond the debt limit the primary balance is insufficient to cover the interest

payment—even at the risk-free interest rate—so the debt ratio would increase without bound.

Therefore, the interest rate becomes infinite beyond the debt limit, with the government

effectively losing market access and unable to roll over its debt. Thus, in the deterministic case,

the probability of default is zero up to the debt limit, d , jumping to unity thereafter. Hence, the

deterministic case is degenerate, with d1  dˆ  d  d 2 .




In the stochastic model, the equilibrium interest rate schedule, r  r ( d , d ) , can be derived from

(7) and (8) once the debt limit has been identified. The interest rate schedule equals the risk-free




                                                                                                      17
rate to the point dˆ after which it is convex and bends upwards, becoming vertical as debt

exceeds its limit d (as in Figure 3).11 The convex segment of the interest rate schedule occurs

over a short interval less than the support of the shock  . This result obtains because, with one-

period debt, the probability of default is zero until debt is within the worst possible overall deficit

from the debt limit. Since dˆ lies in the region where the overall balance is in surplus if there

were no shock to the primary balance, the worst possible overall deficit is less than the support of

the shock. While the relationship is more complicated with multi-period debt, this result suggests

that debt levels initially considered safe could suddenly become unsustainable particularly if  is

small. In general, the precise shape of the interest rate schedule depends on the distribution of the

shock to the primary balance, the recovery rate in the event of default, and the curvature of the

primary balance reaction function.

2.4 Properties of the Debt Limit

The debt limit obtained above has four important properties (here we give a heuristic treatment

based on Figure 3; Appendix I provides a more formal treatment). First, from Figure 3, a

decrease in the economy’s output growth rate or an increase in the risk-free interest rate rotates

the (r *  g )d schedule counter-clockwise, reducing the d and d (while raising the long-run

debt ratio to which the economy conditionally converges, d*). Second, greater willingness to

undertake fiscal adjustment (an upward shift of the intercept of the fiscal reaction function or the

steepening of this schedule as a function of lagged debt) increases the debt limit (while reducing

11
  In the general stochastic case, the point at which the interest payment schedule becomes vertical (i.e., the debt
limit) can occur below, at, or above the point at which the interest rate schedule intersects +f(d), depending upon
the precise shape of the fiscal reaction function, the support of the shock, and the recovery rate in the event of
default. For most parameter values (and all empirically relevant cases considered below), this point will be below
the intersection (as drawn in Figure 3). In the deterministic case, the point at which the interest payment schedule
becomes vertical is necessarily where the risk-free interest payment schedule intersects the fiscal reaction function.




                                                                                                                    18
d*). Third, the equilibrium at the debt limit is dynamically unstable: a positive (and even

moderately negative) shock to the primary balance at that point would likely bring the debt back

toward the long-run debt ratio, d*; a (large) negative shock will push the government to default.

The fourth property is less obvious. In general, a re-evaluation of the support of shocks to the

primary balance (e.g., a symmetric widening of the support  ) leads to an immediate steepening

of the interest rate schedule and a lowering of the debt limit, even if the shock has not been

realized.12 Since uncertainty implies both downside risk and upside potential, it may not be

obvious why uncertainty should reduce the debt limit. The reason is, given the nature of a debt

contract, upside potential cannot fully offset downside risk. Large positive shocks to the primary

balance yield no additional return to creditors (because the interest rate is predetermined)

whereas large negative shocks can cause default. Therefore, downside risk matters more than

upside potential even if creditors are risk neutral (a fortiori if they are risk averse). If debt were

close to d , this could result in a formerly sustainable level of debt becoming unsustainable,

triggering default. In this model, therefore, a data revision that leads to higher debt being

reported to the market could have two effects—in Figure 3, a rightward jump of the debt level

reflecting the new debt that is being recognized and, if this triggered a revision in market

perceptions about the support of the shocks to the primary balance, a counter-clockwise rotation

of the interest rate schedule. Both effects would bring the government closer to default—a

phenomenon that resonates with the recent experience of some southern European countries.
12
   The exception to this is when, in the stochastic case, the interest payment schedule becomes vertical above the
point at which it intersects +f(d), which only occurs if the recovery value is sufficently high. In this case, at the
debt limit, the interest payment is greater than the expected primary balance and, assuming G(ε) is symmetric, the
probability of default exceeds 0.5. This is akin to “gambling for redemption”: default can be avoided only if a
positive shock occurs. Since any negative shock, regardless of size, would result in default while only a sufficiently
large positive shock helps avoid default, a mean preserving increase in the support of ε would (in this case) make
default less likely, and raise the debt limit (see Appendix I); however, as noted above, for most parameter values,
this case does not obtain.




                                                                                                                    19
                                    III. EMPIRICAL IMPLEMENTATION

This section applies the theoretical framework developed above to a sample of 23 advanced

economies using data for the period 1970–2007. The data includes gross public debt and the

primary fiscal balance as shares of GDP as well as a set of control variables discussed below;

data details are provided in Appendix II.13 We proceed in three steps: (i) estimate the primary

balance reaction function; (ii) determine the appropriate interest rate-growth rate differential; and

(iii) calculate each country’s debt limit, and associated fiscal space (defined as the difference

between current debt ratios and the computed debt limit).

                                 A. Primary Balance Reaction Function

A first question is whether the “fiscal fatigue” behavior postulated above holds in the simple

bivariate relationship between the primary balance and lagged debt. The scatter plot in Figure 4

suggests that the nonlinear fiscal fatigue behavior is indeed plausible: at very low debt ratios,

there is little (or even a slightly negative) relationship between lagged debt and primary balance.

As debt increases, the primary balance rises but the responsiveness eventually begins to weaken,

and then actually decreases at very high levels of debt (though the downward sloping portion is

driven by relatively few observations). The fitted line in the Figure is based on the empirical

analysis below, which confirms that fiscal fatigue is a robust, statistically significant feature of

the data that holds even controlling for other determinants of the fiscal reaction function.

The estimation results for the fiscal reaction function relating primary balances to lagged debt

(allowing for a cubic function to capture the two inflexion points in the curvature of the

response) and various control variables, as well as country-specific fixed effects, are presented in
13
  We use gross rather than net debt since the latter is not always comparable across countries due to different
definitions or treatment of asset components, particularly, those of the social security system.




                                                                                                                  20
Table 1. Estimates for two sample periods (1970–2007; 1985–2007) are reported, where data

availability for the latter period allows for the inclusion of a richer set of structural variables as

determinants of the primary balance.

                      Figure 4. Primary Balance and Public Debt, 1970-2007

                                                             (In percent of GDP)


                                                   6
                          Primary balance to GDP




                                                   4

                                                   2
                                (in percent)




                                                   0

                                                   -2
                                                              Median
                                                   -4         Fitted values
                                                              Mean
                                                   -6
                                                        0       50            100      150
                                                            Lagged debt to GDP (in percent)

                                              Source: IMF's WEO database and staff estimates.




Following the literature (for example, Roubini and Sachs, 1988; Gali and Perotti, 2003; Abiad

and Ostry, 2005; Bohn, 2008; and Mendoza and Ostry, 2008), we include a range of variables

such as the output gap to control for the effect of business cycles, the government expenditure

gap to measure the effect of temporary fluctuations in government outlays (such as military

spending), fuel and non-fuel commodity prices, trade openness, and the average inflation rate in

the previous three years to examine the possible effects of inflation (such as bracket-creep

effects, or, greater fiscal effort to counter the effects of higher interest rates accompanying higher

inflation) on the fiscal balance.

The institutional variables consist of a political stability index—which is a composite measure of

the institutional capacity as well as government stability in a country—with higher values


                                                                                                         21
indicating lower risk; a fiscal rules index, which indicates if a country has any type of fiscal rule

(balanced budget, expenditure, revenue, or debt) in a given year; and a dummy variable for IMF

program arrangement as a proxy for international influence on fiscal behavior. We also take into

account the demographic structure, and include the current and projected age dependency ratios.

Estimation of the fiscal reaction function raises some econometric issues stemming from the

dependence of lagged debt on past values of the primary balance. From the debt dynamics

equation, lagged debt is necessarily correlated with the unobserved country specific determinants

of the primary balance—that is, countries able to generate higher primary balances on average

because of favorable fixed effects, would tend to have lower levels of public debt. This negative

association between debt and time invariant country specific features, if not properly accounted

for, could generate a downward bias in the estimated response of primary balance to lagged debt.

In our estimation, we control for this source of endogeneity bias through the inclusion of country

fixed effects in the fiscal reaction function. Furthermore, to the extent that there is persistence in

the error term (), the debt dynamics would render lagged debt in equation (2) endogenous—

even when country fixed effects are included—and induce a downward bias in its estimated

coefficient. To address this potential bias, we allow for serial correlation in the error term—

modeling  as an AR(1) process (that is, t+1 = αt + vt).

The results presented in Table 1 indicate that the coefficients of the cubic functional form—

capturing the increasing but slowing response of the primary balance to lagged debt—are

statistically significant. In fact, based on the estimated coefficients, the marginal response of

primary balance to lagged debt starts to decline at debt levels around 90-100 percent of GDP,

becoming negative as the debt ratio approaches about 150 percent of GDP. This is in contrast to

the findings of Bohn for the United States, which show that fiscal effort increases with the debt


                                                                                                    22
level, but supports the results of Mendoza and Ostry (2008) who find that sustainability is less

assured in advanced economies when public debt is high than when it is moderate. The estimated

response of primary balance at moderate debt levels (in the range of 0.02–0.06 percentage

points) is also consistent with the results of the latter, but the empirical approach adopted here is

preferable because instead of an ad hoc classification of countries into high and low debt groups,

the cubic specification allows more flexibility, and helps to pin down the debt range where

economies risk moving into the insolvency territory.

The estimated coefficients of other determinants included in the fiscal reaction function are also

plausible and broadly in line with previous studies. For example, the primary balance responds

positively to the output gap. Temporary increases in government outlays as captured by the

government expenditure gap variable, affect the primary balance negatively. More open

economies in terms of international trade activity demonstrate better fiscal performance, as do

countries with stronger institutional quality (as proxied by the political stability variable), and

fuel exporters when oil prices rise.14 The nonlinearity of the fiscal reaction function and the

response of the primary balance to other structural and economic determinants are robust to a

variety of different estimation methods discussed in Appendix II.

Our empirical analysis, while including fixed effects for individual countries to capture

differences in average primary balances, is based on the panel estimates of the primary balance

reaction function to lagged debt. As with any panel estimation, this raises questions about slope

homogeneity. But the issue is more complex here because the cubic “fiscal fatigue” behavior is

postulated to hold over the entire range of debt (from 0 to about 180 percent of GDP), whereas


14
     Norway is the only country classified as an oil exporter in the sample.




                                                                                                      23
individual countries’ debt ratios may be observed over only a portion of that range. Our analysis

for countries that, in the sample, we do not observe at high debt ratios must therefore rest on the

assumption that these countries—if their debt were to increase—would behave similarly (in

terms of fiscal fatigue) as countries that we do observe at high debt ratios.

While this is—and can only be—a conjecture, three observations suggest that it is a reasonable

conjecture. First, our sample consists only of advanced economies, which share similar

characteristics, and is therefore relatively homogeneous. Second, the contrary assumption—that

some countries would never exhibit fiscal fatigue, and would always increase the primary

balance in line with rising debt—seems implausible, if only because the primary surplus cannot

exceed GDP. Third, slope homogeneity across countries cannot be rejected (in almost every

case) over the debt ranges (low-to moderate; moderate-to-high) in which they are observed.

Specifically, when observed at low-to-moderate debt ranges, countries (including those that

eventually have high debt) react similarly with a positive, linear coefficient to lagged debt (see

Appendix II for detailed results).15 Likewise, when observed at moderate-to-high debt ranges,

countries (including those that, in the sample, have some low debt observations) exhibit similar

fiscal fatigue as captured by the cubic specification. In other words, countries in the sample

behave similarly at common debt ratios at which they are observed—providing some confidence

that they would behave similarly at debt ratios at which (some) are not observed.16




15
   Of course, countries do differ in their average primary balances, as captured by the country fixed effects and other
structural determinants of the primary balance.
16
  This observation is in line with the strong evidence of homogeneity (for 42 out of 56 industrial and developing
countries) of the fiscal response coefficient reported in Mendoza and Ostry (2008).




                                                                                                                    24
       Table 1. Estimation Results for the Fiscal Reaction Function1

Sample                                     1970-2007                      1985-2007
Specification                            (1)            (2)         (3)            (4)


Lagged debt                          -0.2080***     -0.2249***    -0.0805       -0.0864
                                       (0.059)       (0.061)      (0.076)        (0.070)
Lagged debt_square                    0.0032***     0.0034***     0.0016*       0.0017*
                                       (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.001)        (0.001)
Lagged debt_cubic                    -0.00001***   -0.00001***   -0.00001*     -0.00001**
                                      (3.0e-06)     (3.0e-06)    (3.0e-06)      (3.0e-06)
Output gap                            0.4974***     0.4910***    0.4849***      0.4408***
                                       (0.047)       (0.046)      (0.053)        (0.053)
Government expenditure gap           -0.1847***     -0.1837***   -0.1831***    -0.1826***
                                       (0.047)       (0.045)      (0.052)        (0.047)
Trade openness                                       0.0908*                    0.1461***
                                                     (0.050)                     (0.054)
Inflation                                             3.4005                    4.6201**
                                                     (2.519)                     (2.008)
Oil pricea                                          8.7747***                   9.5288***
                                                     (3.216)                     (3.244)
Age dependency                                                                  -0.0717
                                                                                 (0.101)
Future age dependency                                                           -0.0154
                                                                                 (0.067)
Nonfuel commodity price    a
                                                                                 3.0049
                                                                                 (8.362)
Political stability                                                             0.0678**
                                                                                 (0.030)
IMF arrangement                                                                 -1.1421
                                                                                 (0.999)
Fiscal rules                                                                     0.3000
                                                                                 (0.347)
Observations                             642           642          496           491
Number of countries                      23             23          23             23
R-squared                               0.282          0.316       0.304         0.405
AR (1) coefficient                      0.791          0.760       0.819         0.749
Source: Authors' estimates.
1
 Dependent variable is general government primary balance to GDP (in percent); in all
specifications, country-specific fixed effects included, and error term assumed to follow
an AR (1) process; robust standard errors reported in parentheses; ***, **, and * denote
a
    Applies to oil and nonoil commodities exporters only.




                                                                                            25
                                               B. Fiscal Space

To perform our calculations of fiscal space, we also need estimates of the relevant interest rates

on public debt. We consider two approaches to obtain these estimates. The first, which we label

“market approach,” is to use current (or projected) market interest rates on government debt,

based on the assumption that the market rate reflects the perceived probability of default. Table 2

reports the interest rate-growth rate differentials obtained using two variants of this approach.

The first variant is the historical average (over the past ten years) of the implied nominal interest

rate on government debt (interest payments divided by end-period debt) relative to the growth

rate of nominal GDP. The second variant replaces historical averages with International

Monetary Fund’s projections of long-term government bond yields and for GDP growth obtained

from IMF (2010). With minor exceptions, projected interest rate-growth differentials are

considerably less favorable than historical ones, reflecting the expectation of both higher interest

rates and lower real GDP growth rates (Table 2).17

The use of (historical or projected) market interest rates may overestimate the true debt limit

implied by the model because it ignores the fact that the interest rate will rise sharply as debt

approaches its limit and default risk increases. An alternative approach, therefore, is to calculate

interest rates endogenously, which provide us with a framework to estimate the rising risk of

default as debt approaches its limit. We label this the “model approach.” Its main drawback is

that it requires various assumptions about the risk-free interest rate, the distribution (and support)

of the shocks to the primary balance, and the recovery rate in the event of default. We assume a

triangular distribution for the shocks to primary balance, calibrated for each country based on the
17
  This may in turn reflect the worse public debt outlook—on average, public debt increased from 60 percent of
GDP on the eve of the crisis (end-2007) to almost 75 percent of GDP by end-2009, and, more strikingly, is projected
to continue rising over the next five years.




                                                                                                                26
residuals obtained from the primary balance reaction function in the estimation sample, and

assume a recovery rate of 90 percent in the event of default.18

                  Table 2. Public Debt and Interest Rate-Growth Rate Differential (in percent)

                                                                       Debt/GDP                                 Interest Rate-Grow th Rate Differential
                 Country
                                                 2007                    2009             2015 1/                    Historical 2/             Projected 1/
         Australia                                  9.4                  15.5                 20.9                         0.1                            1.2
         Austria                                  59.5                   67.3                 77.3                         1.4                            0.8
         Belgium                                  82.8                   97.3                 99.9                         1.2                            2.1
         Canada                                   65.0                   82.5                 71.2                         1.7                            0.4
         Denmark                                  34.1                   47.3                 49.8                         3.2                            0.1
         Finland                                  35.2                   44.0                 76.1                         0.0                            1.4
         France                                   63.8                   77.4                 94.8                         0.8                            0.5
         Germany                                  65.0                   72.5                 81.5                         2.6                            1.5
         Greece                                   95.6                  114.7               158.6                         -1.5                            2.2
         Iceland                                  29.3                  105.1                 86.6                        -1.4                            4.1
         Ireland                                  24.9                   64.5                 94.0                        -5.8                            3.2
         Israel                                   78.1                   77.8                 69.9                         0.1                            0.2
         Italy                                  103.4                   115.8               124.7                          1.4                            1.7
         Japan                                  187.7                   217.7               250.0                          2.0                            1.0
         Korea                                    29.6                   32.6                 26.2                        -0.7                            -2.3
         Netherlands                              45.5                   59.7                 77.4                         0.5                            0.6
         New Zealand                              17.4                   26.1                 36.1                         1.1                            2.5
         Norw ay                                  58.6                   53.6                 53.6                        -3.4                            -0.7
         Portugal                                 63.6                   77.1                 98.4                        -0.6                            2.2
         Spain                                    36.1                   55.2                 94.4                        -2.4                            2.6
         Sw eden                                  40.5                   40.9                 37.6                        -0.5                            -0.7
         United Kingdom                           44.1                   68.2                 90.6                         0.4                            1.3
         United States                            62.1                   83.2               109.7                          0.3                            1.6

         Median                                   58.6                   68.2                 81.5                         0.3                            1.3
         Mean                                     57.9                   73.7                 86.1                         0.0                            1.2

     So urce: IM F's WEO database.
     1/ IM F (2010) P ro jectio ns. Interest rate-gro wth rate differential is based o n the lo ng-term go vernment bo nd yield (average fo r 2010-14).
     2/ A verage o f 1998-2007 based o n the implied interest rate o n public debt.




18
  Benjamin and Wright (2008) estimate the recovery rate for upper-middle income countries to be about 60-100
percent; hence, for advanced economies we assume an average recovery rate of 90 percent. We construct the finite
support of the shock (ߝҧ) by using the country-specific average of the worst five negative residuals. The risk-free
interest rate is assumed to be common to all countries in the sample, and is taken as the average over 2003-07 of the
effective real interest rate on government debt. It is growth adjusted by using the five-year country-specific average
of the IMF projected real GDP growth rate.




                                                                                                                                                                 27
Point estimates

Table 3 reports the debt limits, ݀ҧ, as well as the long-run debt ratio to which each country’s

public debt conditionally converges, d*, calculated using the country’s predicted primary balance

obtained from the results for the recent period (1985–2007) reported in Table 1 (column 4), and

historical, market and model-generated interest rates.19 While there is, of course, significant

variation across countries (reflecting the country specific fixed effects and interest-growth rate

gaps), d* ranges between 0 to about 100 percent of GDP—with a median of 50 percent of GDP—

using historical interest rates, and the estimated ݀ҧ ranges between 150 to 250 percent of GDP

with a median of 190 percent. Since the projected interest rate-growth rate differentials are

generally less favorable than the historical experience, the corresponding median d* is 57 percent

of GDP and the median ݀ҧ is 185 percent of GDP.

The estimated d * and d obtained from the model-implied interest rate—reported in the last two

columns of Table 3—are similar to the estimates based on market interest rates—though in most

cases somewhat lower (consistent with the intuition that, especially for countries with lower debt

levels, the market-based interest rate will likely overestimate the available fiscal space). In a few

cases (Greece, Iceland, Italy, Japan, Portugal) and depending on the interest rate used, no

estimate of d* (or of d ) is reported. This is because, given these countries’ estimated primary

balance reaction function and assumed interest rate-growth rate differential, public debt would

not be expected to converge to a finite steady state debt ratio (it follows that there is no

maximum debt level below which convergence occurs, so it is not meaningful to calculate d



19
  For the calculation of ݀ҧ and d*, output and government expenditure gaps are assumed to be closed. We also
compute fiscal space estimates based on the 1970–2007 sample, and find the results to be very similar.




                                                                                                               28
either).20 For Italy and Japan, d*does not exist even using the historical interest rate-growth rate

differential, implying that their debt ratios had not been on a convergent path even prior to the

crisis (and indeed, especially for Japan, the public debt ratio has been rising steadily over much

of the sample period).21 For Iceland, there is a finite long-run debt ratio using either the historical

or the model-generated interest rate, but not using projected market interest rates. For Greece and

Portugal, d*exists only using the historical interest rate-growth rate differential—not at market or

model-implied interest rates.

It is worth noting however that these fiscal space estimates are based on the projected values of

the set of structural variables included in f(d). Any change in these values would shift the

predicted fiscal reaction function, and hence affect the debt limit and the corresponding fiscal

space estimates. This is a particularly useful feature of our approach since it allows us to quantify

the impact of any structural changes on fiscal sustainability. Thus, for example, using the

estimates reported in column (4) of Table 1, and assuming that the institutional capacity (that is,

the political stability variable) in all countries is at the sample maximum, we find that the

available fiscal space increases—albeit to different degrees—in almost all economies.22 Among

the countries with no available fiscal space, the most notable increase is for Iceland, which is

projected to have positive fiscal space with an improvement in its institutional capacity.23




20
     In terms of Figure 3, the fiscal reaction function lies below the interest rate schedule, implying no intersection.
21
     This holds even if net debt rather than gross debt is used in the analysis for Japan.
22
  The highest score for the political stability index in the sample is for Finland. The results for this exercise are
available upon request.
23
     For Greece, Italy, Japan and Portugal, ݀ҧ increases but remains lower than the projected debt level for 2015.




                                                                                                                           29
     Table 3. Long-run d * and d Under Alternative Interest Rate-Growth Rate Assumptions1

                                            (In percent of GDP), 1985-2007

                                                      Market Interest Rate                         Model-implied Interest Rate2
                            Debt
        Country                                  d*                          d
                         (end-2015)
                                                                                                     d*                     d
                                        Historical    Projected    Historical    Projected

    Australia                20.9              0.0         0.0         203.9        193.2              0.0                202.7
    Austria                  77.3            63.9         54.3         179.7        187.3             55.1                170.7
    Belgium                  99.9            60.3         76.3         182.0        168.4             53.7                172.0
    Canada                   71.2           110.8         82.6         152.3        181.1             75.2                173.1
    Denmark                  49.8              0.0         0.0         175.7        208.7              0.0                195.9
    Finland                  76.1              0.0         0.0         200.4        184.5              0.0                167.0
    France                   94.8            94.8         89.8         170.9        176.1             92.7                159.7
    Germany                  81.5            94.5         71.0         154.1        175.8             63.6                170.0
    Greece                  158.6            80.5           …          196.5           …                  …                     …
    Iceland                  86.6              0.0          …          213.5           …               0.0                157.3
    Ireland                  94.0              0.0        90.7         245.7        149.7             42.9                157.6
    Israel                   69.9            79.7         82.1         184.8        182.4             65.0                183.9
    Italy                   124.7               …           …                …         …                  …                     …
    Japan                   250.0               …           …                …         …                  …                     …
    Korea                    26.2              0.0         0.0         217.2        229.2              0.0                220.3
    Netherlands              77.4            50.2         50.7         190.5        190.1             58.0                168.7
    New Zealand              36.1              0.0         0.0         201.0        186.4              0.0                197.6
    Norw ay                  53.6              0.0         0.0         263.2        249.2              0.0                233.5
    Portugal                 98.4            77.1           …          191.6           …                  …                     …
    Spain                    94.4              0.0        94.8         218.3        153.9             70.2                168.4
    Sw eden                  37.6              0.0         0.0         203.5        204.9              0.0                167.8
    United Kingdom           90.6            79.6         94.9         182.0        166.5             75.5                166.0
    United States           109.7            78.7        101.2         183.3        160.5             77.6                173.1

    Median                   81.5            50.2         62.6         191.6        183.4             53.7                170.7
    Mean                     86.1            41.4         49.3         195.7        186.0             38.4                179.2

Source: IMF's WEO database and authors' calculations.
1
  d is the debt limit, above w hich debt grow s w ithout bound given the country's historical primary balance behavior; d* is the long-
run average debt ratio to w hich the economy converges conditional on not exceeding d ; … indicates that given the fiscal
reaction function and the interest rate-grow th differential, the public debt dynamics are not on a sustainable path to converge to
a finite stable steady state debt ratio; 0 indicates that convergence is achieved at a negative d *, implying a positive asset
position. All results are based on the estimated fiscal reaction function reported in Table 1 (column 4).
2
  The estimates of d are obtained assuming a recovery rate of 90 percent in the event of default.




                                                                                                                                    30
Likelihood of fiscal space

As mentioned above, our definition of fiscal space is simply the difference between the debt ratio

projected for 2015 and the debt limit, d . But this difference gives the point estimate, which is a

complicated function of the underlying parameter estimates of the fiscal reaction function, and

even modest uncertainty in the estimates of the primary balance could potentially translate into

significant differences in debt limits.24 To take account of this uncertainty, the model is simulated

allowing stochastic variation in the estimated coefficients of the primary balance reaction

function.25 Table 4 reports the estimates of fiscal space (i.e., the difference between 2015

projected debt levels and the debt limit) in terms of the probability that a country has a given

amount (0, 50, or 100 percent of GDP) of remaining fiscal space, with cells shaded dark or light

grey if the probability is less than 50 percent, or between 50 and 85 percent, respectively.

Consistent with the discussion above, the probability that Greece, Iceland, Italy, Japan, and

Portugal have additional fiscal space is low—though in a few cases, depending on the interest

rate used, as high as 50 percent. Next are Ireland and Spain, where the probability that these

countries have at least some additional fiscal space is around 70 percent (rising to more than 80

percent for Spain using the model-implied rather than the current interest rate). For the United

States and the United Kingdom, the probability of any remaining fiscal space is around 70–80

percent. For the other countries, the estimated probability of at least some additional fiscal space

is greater than 85 percent. Intuitively, the estimates of fiscal space depend on the debt level


24
  To put this in perspective, if the primary balance that a country can run is 1 percent of GDP larger than estimated,
then with an interest rate-growth rate differential of 1 percent per year, ݀ҧ increases by 100 percent of GDP.
25
  In the simulations, random shocks are drawn from the multivariate normal distribution (with mean zero) and the
estimated variance-covariance matrix of the coefficients of the fiscal reaction function. In Table 4, the reported
probabilities under the projected market (model implied) interest rate are based on 10,000 (1,000) iterations.




                                                                                                                   31
projected for 2015 and the debt limit, which depends on the country’s historical track record of

primary balances. Thus even a country with relatively high debt currently may enjoy additional

fiscal space (and thus scope for dealing with unexpected shocks) if, in the past, it has acted

fiscally responsibly, adjusting the primary balance once the shock has passed.

In assessing these results, several points should be borne in mind. First, the reported estimates of

fiscal space are against projected debt levels in 2015, and do not take account of possible

contingent liabilities. Contingent liabilities, such as unfunded pension obligations and potential

bank bailouts, by increasing actual debt can worsen our fiscal space estimates substantially.

Moreover, the debt limit—on which the fiscal space estimates are predicated—is by no means a

“desirable” or “optimal” level of debt. For a variety of reasons, including possible rollover risk,

governments will generally want to ensure they do not exhaust their fiscal space and that their

debt remains well below its calculated limit. Second, as discussed in the theoretical section, a key

feature of the model is that a revision in market estimates of the support of the possible shock to

the primary balance—even if the shock does not occur—can trigger a rise in the market interest

rate, potentially undermining debt sustainability. Third, though not evident in the reported

estimates of fiscal space, simulations to calculate the fiscal space under the model endogenous

interest rate suggest that the increase from the risk-less to the risky interest tends to happen quite

abruptly as debt reaches its limit. Thus, a country may be able to borrow at low (“risk-free”)

interest rates even as its public debt increases, and then suddenly find itself facing much steeper

interest rates or even shut out of the capital markets. The last two properties resonate with the

experience of some Southern European countries in the recent crisis, and underscore the

importance of maintaining sufficient fiscal space.




                                                                                                    32
            Table 4. Estimated Probability of Given Fiscal Space: 1985-2007

                                               (In percent)

                       Projected Market Interest Rate                    Model-im plied Interest Rate
                        FS > 0         FS > 50        FS >100          FS > 0        FS > 50       FS >100

Australia                   99.8            99.5          99.5             99.8          99.8           99.8
Austria                     97.9            97.8          75.1             81.4          81.4           38.1

Belgium                     95.9            89.7            2.9            95.5          92.0            5.2
Canada                      92.2            92.1          70.3             80.9          80.9           57.1
Denmark                    100.0           100.0         100.0           100.0          100.0         100.0

Finland                     96.2            96.0          69.3             72.8          72.8           37.1
France                      88.7            86.6          12.0             65.5          63.1            4.3

Germany                     93.0            92.3          35.3             82.6          82.3           25.8
Greece                        6.3            0.1            0.1             0.3           0.0            0.0
Iceland                     49.1            44.0            5.8            57.9          57.3           20.4
Ireland                     66.0            55.9            1.7            60.9          58.8            4.3

Israel                      97.1            97.1          80.7             95.1          95.1           81.4
Italy                       17.3             1.7            0.2             0.1           0.1            0.1
Japan                         0.1            0.1            0.1             0.0           0.0            0.0
Korea                      100.0           100.0         100.0           100.0          100.0         100.0

Netherlands                 99.3            99.2          83.1             81.0          80.8           35.1
New Zealand                 93.3            93.0          92.1             94.5          94.5           94.5

Norw ay                    100.0           100.0         100.0             99.9          99.9           99.9
Portugal                    34.4            27.1            0.4            27.6          23.8            0.5
Spain                       69.9            61.0            1.6            82.6          79.8            6.3
Sw eden                     99.9            99.9          99.9             71.3          71.3           70.6
United Kingdom              78.1            75.9            8.9            69.3          68.9           12.1
United States               71.8            52.2            1.2            82.9          71.2            2.8

Median                      93.0            92.1          35.3             81.0          79.8           25.8
Mean                        75.9            72.2          45.2             69.7          68.4           38.9
Source: Authors' calculations.
Black and grey cells indicate probability less than 50 percent, and betw een 50 and 85 percent, respectively.




                                                                                                                33
                                         IV. CONCLUSION

This paper contributes to the existing literature on fiscal sustainability by proposing a new

framework that conceptualizes the notion of fiscal space—defined as the difference between

current debt level and a (country-specific) debt limit, where the latter is the debt level beyond

which fiscal solvency fails. Our concept of the debt limit, which takes explicit account of fiscal

fatigue in a stochastic setting, is intuitively appealing and has several sensible properties. In

particular, an improvement in a country’s structural characteristics or economic growth rate

raises its debt limit, while the occurrence (or recognition of the possibility) of a negative shock

could push an otherwise sustainable debt level to the unsustainable territory.

We apply our framework empirically to a sample of 23 advanced economies over 1970–2007,

and find robust empirical support for the fiscal fatigue characteristic. Specifically, we find that

the marginal response of primary balance to lagged debt is nonlinear, remaining positive at

moderate debt levels but starting to decline when debt reaches around 90-100 percent of GDP.

Combining these estimates with those of exogenous and endogenous (model-implied) interest

rates, we find that the estimated debt limits and corresponding fiscal space vary considerably

across countries. For example, the debt limit obtained for countries in the sample ranges between

150 to 250 percent of GDP, while the fiscal space estimates indicate limited or no available fiscal

space for Greece, Iceland, Italy, Japan and Portugal, and ample space for Australia, Korea and

the Nordic countries.

The probability estimates of positive fiscal space present a somewhat similar picture with several

countries including Australia, Korea, and the Nordics projected to have the highest probability of

positive fiscal space, and a number of Southern European countries, and Japan and Iceland the

lowest. In addition, the United Kingdom and the United States also appear to be constrained in


                                                                                                      34
their degree of fiscal maneuver. These estimates however do not take into account

liquidity/rollover risks or the possible realization of contingent liabilities. Further, while our

model is essentially a one-period model that incorporates an endogenous interest rate, exploring

the implications of longer-term debt and/or stochastic endogenous growth are possible avenues

for future research. From a policy perspective, however, our probability estimates can be used to

flag cases where fiscal consolidation may be urgently needed in order to ensure that debt remains

on a sustainable path and that shocks, including data revisions, do not derail sustainability.




                                                                                                     35
REFERENCES

Abiad, Abdul, and J. D. Ostry. 2005. “Primary Surpluses and Sustainable Debt Levels in
Emerging Market Countries.” International Monetary Fund Policy Discussion Papers No. 05/6.

Aguiar, Mark, and G. Gopinath. 2006 “Defaultable Debt, Interest Rates and the Current
Account.” Journal of International Economics, 69 (1): 64-83.

Arellano, Cristina. 2008. “Default Risk and Income Fluctuations in Emerging Economies.”
American Economic Review, 98(3): 690-712.

Benjamin, D., and M. Wright. 2009. “Recovery Before Redemption? A Theory of Delays in
Sovereign Debt Renegotiations.” Center for Applied Macroeconomic Analysis Working Paper
15/2009.

Blanchard, Olivier Jean. 1984. “Current and Anticipated Deficits, Interest Rates, and Economic
Activity.” European Economic Review, 25(1): 7-27.

_____ 1985. “Debt, Deficits, and Finite Horizons.” Journal of Political Economy, 93(2): 223-
247.

Bohn, Henning. 1998. “The Behavior of US Public Debt and Deficits.” Quarterly Journal
Economics, 113(3): 949–963.

——— 2007.“Are Stationarity and Cointegration Restrictions Really Necessary for the
   Intertemporal Budget Constraint?” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(7):1837-1847.

——— 2008. “The Sustainability of Fiscal Policy in the United States.” In Sustainability of
Public Debt, ed. R. Neck and Jan-Egbert Sturm, 15–49. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Blundell, R.W. and S.R. Bond. 1998. “Initial Conditions and Moment Restrictions in Dynamic
Panel Data Models,” Journal of Econometrics, 87(1): 115-143.

Celasun, O., and J. S. Kang. 2006. “On the Properties of Various Estimators for Fiscal Reaction
Functions.” International Monetary Fund Working Paper No. 06/182.




                                                                                               36
Cottarelli, C., L. Forni, J. Gottschalk, and P. Mauro. 2010. “Default in Today's Advanced
Economies: Unnecessary, Undesirable, and Unlikely.” International Monetary Fund Staff
Position Note SPN/10/12.

Eaton, J., and M. Gersovitz. 1981. “Debt with Potential Repudiation: Theoretical and Empirical
Analysis.” Review of Economic Studies, 48(2): 289-309.

Eaton, J., and R. Fernandez. 1995. “Sovereign Debt.” National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper 5131.

Flood, R., and Nancy P. Marion. 2006. “Getting Shut Out of the International Capital Markets: It
Doesn't Take Much.” International Monetary Fund Working Paper No. 06/144.

Galí, J., and Roberto Perotti. 2003. “Fiscal Policy and Monetary Integration in Europe.”
Economic Policy, 18(37): 533-572.

IMF. 2010. World Economic Outlook: April 2010. Washington DC: International Monetary
Fund.

Kremers, J. J. M. 1989. “US Federal Indebtedness and the Conduct of Fiscal Policy.” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 23(2): 219–238.

Mendoza, E. G., and J. D. Ostry. 2008. “International Evidence on Fiscal Solvency: Is Fiscal
Policy “Responsible”?” Journal of Monetary Economics, 55(6): 1081-1093.

Roubini, N., and J. Sachs. 1988. “Political and Economic Determinants of Budget Deficits in the
Industrial Democracies.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 2682.




                                                                                               37
                        APPENDIX I. DETERMINATION OF THE DEBT LIMIT

This appendix derives the debt limit formally, and provides mathematical proofs for key results

used in the derivation and in the discussion on the properties of the debt limit.

Boundary condition for the debt limit

For notational convenience, we denote z ( p )  z ( p; d , d ). Since p * is an interior solution to

p  z ( p) , the following boundary condition must hold for p * :

(A.1)                              pL  p *  pU

where pL  z (0) and pU  arg min z 1 (1) . Substituting from (8) yields,

                                                            F (d )
(A.2)           pL  G ( F (d )) and         pU 
                                                      W (d )    F (d )

where

                        F (d )  (r *  g )d    f (d )
                        W (d )  (1   )(1  r*)d

The assumption on the recovery value (see footnote 7) imposes the following restiction on the

value of W (d ) :

(A.3)                   W (d )  (1   )(1  r*)d  ( d / d m )  .

In addition, (A.1) implies that p * exists only if pU  pL  0 , which in turn requires the

following inequality conditions:

                                                              1  G ( F ( d )) 
(A.4)     F ( d )       and     (d / d m )   W (d )                      [  F ( d )].
                                                              G ( F ( d )) 

The first condition in (A.4) can be further reduced to yield,

(A.5)                           d1  d  d 2



                                                                                                       38
where d1 and d2 are as defined in Section 2.2, and d m  d1  d 2 (see Proof 1).


Determination of the debt limit

Stochastic case

According to the equilibrium conditions for the debt limit shown in (12), d and p * are

determined by solving the following two equations simultaneously:

                         (i)      p  z ( p)
(A.6)
                         (ii)     z ( p ) / p  1

The first equation is for the existence of an interior solution at d  d while the second equation

ensures that the interior solution is the maximum interior solution obtained at the tangency point

between z ( p) and p  p (see Proof 4).

Deterministic case

Substituting from (8), the equilibrium conditions for the debt limit discussed in Section 2.3 can

be written as follows:

(A.7)           (i) H (0; d , d )  0 for d  d     and (ii) H (1; d , d )  0 for d  d.

Since (ii) holds trivially, d is essentially determined by (i). It can be easily shown that

H (0; d , d )  F ( d ) where F (d ) is as defined in (A.2). Given this result, d is obtained as the

largest root of F (d ) as shown in (13). It is possible that H (0; d , d )  0 for some d  d due to

the nonlinearity of f (d ) . But the market will charge the risk-free interest rate because it is

assured that debt is sustainable up to and including d .




                                                                                                           39
Key characteristics of the debt limit

Proof 1: d m  d1  d  d 2 .


By property (3), F ( d m )   and F ( d )  0,  d  d m . We show for the proof that

F ( d m )  F ( d1 )  F ( d )  F ( d 2 ) . By definition, F ( d1 )   , F ( d )  0, and F ( d 2 )   . This

completes the proof.


Proof 2: d̂  d1 .


Substituting p = 0 into (8) yields the following inequality:

                            B(d )  F (d )    (d  d )  0

where d  d . Note that B (dˆ )  0 by definition, and that by property (3), B ( d )  0 for all

d  d m . Since d  d1 and F ( d1 )    0 , it follows that B (d1 )  0 . This completes the proof.


Proof 3: p * / d  0 and p * / d  0 if p* exists.

Assuming that p* exists, we first show that

                   z / d  G ( H )  [1  (1   )(1  r *) p / (1  p )  F ( d )]  0,
                   z / d   G ( H )  0,
                   z / p  G ( H )  W ( d ) / (1  p ) 2  0

where the first inequality follows from the boundary condition (A.5) and Proof 1. Total

differentiating (8) and rearranging terms yields,

          p * / d  (z / d ) / [1  (z / p )] and p * / d  (z / d ) / [1  (z / p )] .

For the proof, we show that z / p  1 at p = p*. Since z / d  0 and z (0; dˆ , d )  0 by

definition, it readily follows that z (0; d , d )  0 for d  (dˆ , d ] . This result, together with




                                                                                                                      40
z / p  0 , ensures that z / p  1 at p = p* (the lowest interior solution), and z / p  1 at the

upper interior solution in case of two interior solutions. This completes the proof.

Proof 4: Tangency condition for the debt limit ( z ( p) / p  1 ).


The equilibrium condition states that p* must exist for d  d and must not exist for d  d . This

condition can be satisfied only if the fixed point solution jumps from p* to p = 1 at the very

moment when debt exceeds the debt limit or, equivalently, only if p * / d   at d  d . It

follows from Proof 3 that  p */ d   iff z / p  1 . This completes the proof.


Proof 5: d  d .


For the proof, we show that the boundary condition for W (d ) in (A.4) is violated if d  d .

Suppose that d  d . It follows from Proof 1 that F ( d )  0 , which implies that G ( F ( d ))  1 / 2 .

Given these results, it is straightforward to show

                           1  G ( F (d )) 
                                              [  F (d )]    (d / d )   .
                                                                         m
                          
                             G ( F ( d ))  

This completes the proof.


Proof 6: 0  (d  dˆ )   .


The expression B(dˆ )  0 shown in Proof 2 can be rewritten as

                                   (d  dˆ )  F (dˆ )   .

It suffices for the proof to show that    F ( dˆ )  0 . Proof 1 and 5 immediately imply that

  F ( d1 )  F ( dˆ )  F ( d )  0 . This completes the proof.


Proof 7: Equilibrium properties of the debt limit.



                                                                                                        41
For the proof, we show that

                                                               0                    if p*  0.5
        d / r*  0, d / g  0, d /   0, and d /   
                                                               0                   otherwise

where in the last inequalities,   0 refers to a mean-preserving spread (i.e., a symmetric

widening of the support). Total differentiating p  z ( p) while exploiting the tangency condition

for the debt limit yields,

                         d / x   ( z / x ) / ( z / d )

where x  {r*, g ,  ,  } . It is straightforward to show

                    z / r*  0,  z / g  0,  z /   0, and  z / d  0 .

To complete the proof, we show that

                                    0     if p*  0.5
                         z /   
                                    0     otherwise .

Note that (A.1)-(A.2) imply that p * can exceed 0.5 only if pU  0.5 or, equivalently, if

W (d )    F (d )  2 . As discussed in Section 2.4 (footnote 12), this condition would only

hold if the recovery value is sufficiently large. Conversely, for any given recovery value (strictly

less than unity), this condition is necessarily violated if  converges to zero (i.e., lim pU  0 ).
                                                                                            0



Since z ( p*)  G ( H ( p*; d , d ))  p * in equilibrium, it is readily verified that H ( p*; d , d )  0

if p*  1 / 2 and H ( p*; d , d )  0 otherwise. Then, the assumed properties of G( ) ensure that

G ( H )  G ( H ) if H  0 , and G ( H )  G ( H ) otherwise, where G is a mean-preserving spread of

G. This completes the proof.




                                                                                                         42
     APPENDIX II. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS OF THE ESTIMATED FISCAL REACTION FUNCTION

This appendix examines the robustness of the estimated nonlinear fiscal reaction function.26

Estimation methods

The nonlinearity of the fiscal reaction function and the response of the primary balance to other

structural and economic determinants are generally robust to different estimation methods. Table

A2 present the results of the cubic model obtained through pooled ordinary least squares method

(col.1); country fixed effects estimation without assuming an AR(1) error structure (col. 2);

country fixed effects estimation with AR(1) disturbances and controlling for time effects (col.

3); and correcting for both serial correlation and the possibility of cross sectional dependence in

the error term (col. 4). In each case, the negative cubic term is statistically significant at the 1

percent level; fiscal behavior is estimated to be countercyclical; and the primary balance is

estimated to react negatively to temporary increases in government outlays.27

Slope Homogeneity

The estimation results for the fiscal reaction function supporting the fiscal fatigue hypothesis are

based on a panel dataset, which while allowing for differences in the average primary balance

across countries, assumes homogeneity of fiscal response to lagged debt for all countries. A

panel data approach is especially useful here because, for most countries in the sample, we do

not observe the full range of debt ratios over which the varying primary balance response is


26
  The results presented here pertain to the 1970–2007 sample. Results obtained from the 1985–2007 sample are
broadly similar and are available upon request.
27
  In addition, we estimate an alternate dynamic specification of the fiscal reaction function—which includes lagged
primary balance as a regressor—to take account of any persistence in the primary balance behavior due to sluggish
tax and expenditure adjustment. The obtained results, using Blundell and Bond’s (1998) system Generalized Method
of Moments (GMM) estimator, also support the existence of a nonlinear fiscal response to lagged debt.




                                                                                                                43
postulated to occur. This also means, however, that conventional tests for slope homogeneity

cannot be applied.28 Instead, we proceed by testing whether countries, when observed over a

common debt range (low-to moderate; moderate-to-high), behave similarly in terms of their

reaction to rising debt. To the extent that they do, this gives some confidence that they will

behave similarly at debt ratios at which some of them are not observed in the sample.

Specifically, we first restrict the sample to low-to-moderate debt observations (30 to 100 percent

of GDP) and test whether the response of primary balance to lagged debt is similar across

countries over this range.29 The results presented in Table A3 indicate that the linear model gives

the best fit, and that the primary balance exhibits an increasing response to lagged debt over the

considered debt range (column 1). Estimating country-specific slope parameters for the linear

debt term, we find that for all countries, the hypothesis of a positive linear slope cannot be

rejected (columns 2-24). Since countries in our sample (including those that eventually have high

debt) behave in a similar way at lower-to-moderate debt ratios, one could reasonably argue that

they may exhibit a similar response at higher debt levels.

Next, we also test if the high debt countries—defined as those for which the maximum observed

(lagged) debt to GDP ratio is ever greater than 100 percent of GDP—behave similarly, and

exhibit fiscal fatigue. If the hypothesis of a nonlinear response of primary balance to lagged debt

cannot be rejected for these countries, one could argue that a similar pattern may also apply to

28
  Testing explicitly for slope homogeneity in our full panel dataset is difficult precisely because the overlap of debt
ratios observed across countries over different debt ranges is limited. For example, for Australia and Korea the
observed debt range is about 10 to 30 percent of GDP—well below the debt ratio at which the panel estimates
suggest that fiscal fatigue is likely to set in.
29
   Specifically, we estimate an equation of the form: ‫ܾ݌‬௜௧ ൌ ܾܽ݀݁‫ݐ‬௜௧ ൅ ܽ௜ ܾ݀݁‫ݐ‬௜௧ ‫ݕ݉݉ݑ݀ כ‬௜ ൅ ߤ௜ ൅ ܿ‫ݎܽݒ݈݋ݎݐ݊݋‬௜௧ ൅
߳௜௧ , where i=1,2,…,23, dummyi is a dummy variable for country i, µi are country fixed effects, a and ai are the
(average) panel and country specific slope coefficients to be estimated, respectively, and Єit is an AR(1) error term.
We estimate the equation one by one for each country, and test the null hypothesis of similarity between the country
and panel parameter estimates (i.e., âi=0).




                                                                                                                     44
other advanced economies. In our sample, moderate-to-high debt ratios are observed for seven

countries (Belgium, Canada, Greece, Ireland, Israel, Italy, and Japan). Across these countries,

there exists some overlap of observations over different debt ranges making it possible to test the

applicability of the fiscal fatigue hypothesis to these countries individually.30

The results presented in Table A4 (column 1) support the existence of a cubic model for high

debt countries. When country-specific debt terms are included in the model (columns 2-8), the

null hypothesis of slope homogeneity cannot be rejected for Belgium, Canada and Ireland. For

Greece, Israel, and Italy, the joint significance test of parameter estimates indicates a statistically

different fiscal response, but one that is consistent with the fiscal fatigue hypothesis. The only

country in the sample for which the fiscal fatigue hypothesis does not hold is Japan, for which

the response of primary balance to lagged debt is negative and deteriorating over most of the

debt range but exhibits a rising trend at the top end of the range.31




30
  Specifically, we estimate an equation of the form: ‫ܾ݌‬௜௧ ൌ ܽଵ ܾ݀݁‫ݐ‬௜௧ ൅ ܽଶ ܾ݀݁‫ݐ‬௜௧ଶ ൅ ܽଷ ܾ݀݁‫ݐ‬௜௧ଷ ൅ ܽଵ௜ ܾ݀݁‫ݐ‬௜௧ ‫כ‬
݀‫ݕ݉݉ݑ‬௜ ൅ ܽଶ௜ ܾ݀݁‫ݐ‬௜௧ଶ ‫ݕ݉݉ݑ݀ כ‬௜ ൅ ܽଷ௜ ܾ݀݁‫ݐ‬௜௧ଷ ‫ݕ݉݉ݑ݀ כ‬௜ ൅ߤ௜ ൅ ܿ‫ݎܽݒ݈݋ݎݐ݊݋‬௜௧ ൅ ߳௜௧ , where i=1,2,…,7, dummyi is a
dummy variable for country i, µi are country fixed effects, aki are the potentially heterogeneous slope coefficients to
be estimated, and Єit is an AR(1) error term. We estimate the equation for each country one by one, and test the joint
significance of â1i,, â2i, and â3i in each case.
31
  Excluding Japan from this sample does not have any significant effect on the results—the cubic specification
holds for the data, and we find that other high debt countries conform to the cubic behavior.




                                                                                                                    45
                                Table A1. Variable Definitions and Data Sources
Variable                        Description                                      Source


Dependent variable
 Primary balance to GDP ratio   In percent                                       IMF's World Economic Outlook (WEO) and OECD
                                                                                 databases.
Explanatory variables
 Lagged debt to GDP ratio       In percent                                       WEO database.

 Output gap                     Difference between actual and potential          Staff calculations based on WEO database.
                                (calculated using the Hodrick-Prescott filter)
                                real GDP.

 Government expenditure gap     Difference between actual and potential          Staff calculations based on WEO database.
                                (calculated using the Hodrick-Prescott filter)
                                real government consumption spending.

 Trade openness                 Sum of exports and imports to GDP (in            Staff calculations based on WEO database.
                                percent)

 Inflation                      Three year lagged moving average of CPI          Staff calculations based on WEO database.
                                inflation.
 Oil price                      Log of (trend) oil price applied to oil          Staff calculations based on WEO database.
                                exporters only.
 Nonfuel commodity price        Log of (trend) nonfuel commodity price index     Staff calculations based on WEO database.
                                applied to nonfuel commodity exporters only.

 Age dependency ratio           Ratio of the dependent to working age (15-       UN's database. Available online at:
                                64 years) population.                            http://data.un.org/Data.aspx?q=dependency+ratio+
                                                                                 (per+cent)&d=PopDiv&f=variableID%3a42
 Future age dependency ratio    Projected age dependency ratio 20 years          UN's database. Available online at:
                                ahead.                                           http://data.un.org/Data.aspx?q=dependency+ratio+
                                                                                 (per+cent)&d=PopDiv&f=variableID%3a42
 Political stability index      Smaller (larger) values indicating higher        International Country Risk Guide (ICRG) dataset.
                                (lower) political risk.

 IMF arrangement                Binary variable equal to one if a country has    IMF's History of Lending Arrangements database.
                                an IMF support program in a given year, and      Available online at
                                zero otherwise.                                  http://www.imf.org/external/np/fin/tad/extarr1.aspx.

 Fiscal rules                   Binary variable equal to one if a country has    IMF's Fiscal Rules database, 1985-2009.
                                any type (expenditure, revenue, balanced
                                budget, and debt) of fiscal rule in a given
                                year, and zero otherwise.




                                                                                                                                        46
Table A2. Alternative Estimation Methods of the Fiscal Reaction Function
Method                       OLS            FEa             FEb           AR(1) c         PCSEd
Specification                (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)


Lagged debt               -0.168***       -0.202**         -0.133        -0.147***      -0.144***
                           (0.031)         (0.075)        (0.091)         (0.056)        (0.041)
Lagged debt_square         0.002***      0.00316***      0.00227*       0.00228***      0.00229***
                           (0.000)         (0.001)        (0.001)         (0.001)        (0.001)
Lagged debt_cubic        -0.00001***     -0.00001***    -0.00001***     -0.00001***    -0.00001***
                          (2.0e-06)       (3.0e-06)      (4.0e-06)       (3.0e-06)      (2.0e-06)
Output gap                 0.547***       0.553***        0.476***       0.427***        0.428***
                           (0.052)         (0.085)        (0.088)         (0.054)        (0.044)
Govt. expenditure gap     -0.319***       -0.293***      -0.275***       -0.188***      -0.188***
                           (0.064)         (0.088)        (0.079)         (0.043)        (0.034)
Trade openness             0.064***        0.125*          0.114         0.00937         0.0313
                           (0.010)         (0.062)        (0.093)         (0.069)        (0.048)
Inflation                  -1.376          -0.835          3.003         5.995***        5.600***
                           (3.531)         (5.133)        (3.665)         (2.109)        (1.759)
Oil price                  1.236***       10.560***      10.890***       9.329***        9.611***
                           (0.213)         (0.242)        (0.866)         (2.906)        (3.503)


Observations                 642            642             642            642             642
R-squared                   0.337          0.348           0.466           0.418          0.432
Number of countries          23              23             23              23              23
Country fixed effects        No             Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes
Time effects                 No              No             Yes            Yes             Yes
AR rho                                                                       0.762
Source: Staff estimates.
1
  Dependent variable is general government primary balance to GDP (in percent). Estimation pertains
to the sample 1970-2007. Robust standard errors reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote
significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.
a
  Fixed effects estimation w ithout assuming an AR(1) error structure.
b
  Fixed effects estimation w ith year effects included w ithout assuming an AR(1) error structure.
c
  Fixed effects estimation w ith year effects included assuming an AR(1) error structure.
d
  Panel corrected standard errors assuming an AR(1) structure.




                                                                                                      47
                                             Table A3. Estimation results for the fiscal reaction function for low debt observations
                           1       2        3        4         5         6         7         8         9        10        11        12        13        14        15        16        17        18        19        20        21        22        23        24

debt                     0.032** 0.033** 0.029** 0.034** 0.029*       0.031** 0.032** 0.032** 0.029** 0.029*            0.035** 0.035** 0.032** 0.033** 0.031** 0.024*              0.033** 0.031*      0.031** 0.032** 0.032** 0.035** 0.032** 0.032**
                         (0.015) (0.015) (0.015) (0.015) (0.015)      (0.015) (0.015) (0.015) (0.015) (0.015)           (0.015) (0.015) (0.015) (0.015) (0.015) (0.014)             (0.015) (0.016)     (0.015) (0.015) (0.015) (0.014) (0.015) (0.015)
debt × dUSA                       -0.042
                                 (0.046)
debt × dUK                                0.152*
                                         (0.079)
debt × dAustria                                   -0.076
                                                 (0.062)
debt × dBelgium                                           0.180
                                                         (0.145)
debt × dDenmark                                                        0.002
                                                                      (0.047)
debt × dFrance                                                                   -0.024
                                                                                (0.038)
debt × dGermany                                                                            -0.014
                                                                                          (0.048)
debt × dItaly                                                                                        0.057
                                                                                                    (0.063)
debt × dNetherlands                                                                                            0.061
                                                                                                              (0.051)
debt × dNorway                                                                                                           -0.083
                                                                                                                        (0.073)
debt × dSweden                                                                                                                     -0.038
                                                                                                                                  (0.047)
debt × dCanada                                                                                                                               0.001
                                                                                                                                            (0.044)
debt × dJapan                                                                                                                                          -0.021
                                                                                                                                                      (0.051)
debt × dFinland                                                                                                                                                  0.009
                                                                                                                                                                (0.073)
debt × dGreece                                                                                                                                                            0.122**
                                                                                                                                                                          (0.058)
debt × dIceland                                                                                                                                                                      -0.102
                                                                                                                                                                                    (0.078)
debt × dIreland                                                                                                                                                                                0.006
                                                                                                                                                                                              (0.034)
debt × dPortugal                                                                                                                                                                                         0.052
                                                                                                                                                                                                        (0.138)
debt × dSpain                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (0.037)
                     1
debt × dAustralia                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.756**
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (0.369)
debt × dNew Zealand                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -0.061
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (0.111)
debt × dIsrael                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -0.048
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (0.047)
                 1
debt × dKorea                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.029
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (0.100)
Observations              473     473      473      473       473       473       473      473       473       473       473       473       473       473       473       473       473       473       473       473       473       473       473         473
R-squared                0.393   0.393    0.397    0.397     0.394     0.393     0.393    0.393     0.395     0.394     0.394     0.393     0.393     0.393     0.393     0.405     0.396     0.393     0.393     0.393     0.393     0.392     0.393       0.393
AR rho                   0.696   0.696    0.692    0.692     0.705     0.696     0.696    0.695     0.694     0.697     0.698     0.699     0.696     0.696     0.696     0.688     0.695     0.696     0.696     0.696     0.696     0.700     0.697       0.696
Notes: Dependent variable is primary balance to GDP (in percent). Sample restricted to (lagged) debt observations betw een 30 and 100 (inclusive) percent of GDP. The estimated equation is: pb it=a*debtit+ai *debtit*di +μi +controlvar it+ϵit, w here
i=1,2,…,23, debt is lagged debt ratio, µi are country fixed effects, di are country dummies, a is the average parameter estimate for the panel, a i is the slope coefficients for individual countries, and ϵ is an AR(1) error term. Control variables include
country-specific fixed effects, output gap, government expenditure gap, tradeopenness, (log of) inflation, and oil prices. Robust standard errors in parentheses. ***,**,* indicate significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.
1/ The number of observations for Australia and Korea in the restricted sample is only 3 and 1, respectively, as most of the lagged debt observations for these countries are below 30 percent of GDP.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          48
        Table A4. Estimation results for the fiscal reaction function for high debt countries
                                         (1)         (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)          (7)          (8)

debt                                     -0.152    -0.102      -0.133    -0.144     -0.272    -0.120    -0.207*      -0.176
                                        (0.117)   (0.120)     (0.119)   (0.123)    (0.264)   (0.117)    (0.106)     (0.122)
debt_square                             0.003**     0.002      0.003*   0.003**      0.005    0.002*    0.003**     0.003**
                                        (0.001)   (0.001)     (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.003)   (0.001)    (0.001)     (0.001)
debt_cubic                            -0.00001** -0.00001* -0.00001** -0.00001** -0.00001* -0.00001** -0.00001*** -0.00001**
                                        (0.000)   (0.000)     (0.000)   (0.000)    (0.000)   (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
debt × dBelgium                                     0.599
                                                  (1.699)
debt_square × dBelgium                             -0.002
                                                  (0.017)
debt_cubic × dBelgium                               0.000
                                                  (0.000)
debt × dItaly                                                -2.674**
                                                              (1.037)
debt_square × dItaly                                          0.031**
                                                              (0.012)
debt_cubic × dItaly                                         -0.0001**
                                                              (0.000)
debt × dCanada                                                            1.138
                                                                        (1.415)
debt_square × dCanada                                                    -0.018
                                                                        (0.019)
debt_cubic × dCanada                                                    0.0001
                                                                        (0.000)
debt × dJapan                                                                        0.338
                                                                                   (0.276)
debt_square × dJapan                                                               -0.006*
                                                                                   (0.003)
debt_cubic × dJapan                                                               0.00002*
                                                                                   (0.000)
debt × dGreece                                                                                -4.266
                                                                                             (3.163)
debt_square × dGreece                                                                          0.055
                                                                                             (0.041)
debt_cubic × dGreece                                                                         -0.0002
                                                                                             (0.000)
debt × dIreland                                                                                          0.923*
                                                                                                        (0.558)
debt_square × dIreland                                                                                  -0.013*
                                                                                                        (0.008)
debt_cubic × dIreland                                                                                   0.0001*
                                                                                                        (0.000)
debt × dIsrael                                                                                                       -2.606
                                                                                                                    (2.040)
debt_square × dIsrael                                                                                                 0.021
                                                                                                                    (0.018)
debt_cubic × dIsrael                                                                                                -0.0001
                                                                                                                    (0.000)
Observations                             199         199          199           199          199          199           199          199
R-squared                               0.300       0.325        0.315         0.305        0.345        0.324         0.315        0.316
AR rho                                  0.892       0.895        0.873         0.894        0.863        0.887         0.896        0.896
Joint significance test (p-value) 1                 0.180        0.051         0.562        0.000        0.000         0.353        0.072
Notes: Dependent variable is primary balance to GDP (in percent). Sample restricted to countries w here maximum observed
(lagged) debt is over 100 percent of GDP. The estimated equation is: pb it=a1*debtit+a2*debtit2+a3*debtit3+a1i *debtit*di +
a2i *debtit2*di +a3i *debtit3*di +μi +controlvar it+ϵit, w here i=1,2,…,23, debt is lagged debt ratio, µi are country fixed effects, di are
country dummies, ak (k=1, 2, 3) are the average parameters for the linear, quadratic and cubic terms for the panel, aki are the
country-specific parameters for the linear, quadratic and cubic terms, and ϵ is an AR(1) error term. Control variables include
country-specific fixed effects, output gap, government expenditure gap, tradeopenness, (log of) inflation, and oil prices. Robust
standard errors in parentheses. ***,**,* indicate significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.
1/Joint significance test of country-specific parameter estimates (a ki ).




                                                                                                                                              49
