                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                   THE ELASTICITY OF TRADE:
                                   ESTIMATES AND EVIDENCE

                                            Ina Simonovska
                                           Michael E. Waugh

                                         Working Paper 16796
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16796


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2011




We are grateful to the World Bank for providing us with the price data from the 2003-2005 ICP round.
We thank George Alessandria, Alexander Aue, Dave Donaldson, Robert Feenstra, Timothy Kehoe,
Matthias Lux, B. Ravikumar, seminar participants at CUHK, Tsinghua, UC San Diego, Syracuse,
ETH/KOF, Princeton, Uppsala, Oslo, San Francisco Fed, UC Berkeley, NYU and participants at the
CESifo Area Conference on Global Economy 2011, NBER ITI Program Meeting Winter 2010, 2010
International TradeWorkshop at the Philadelphia Fed, Conference on Microeconomic Sources of Real
Exchange Rate Behavior at Vanderbilt, Midwest International Trade Meeting Fall 2010, SED 2010,
WEAI 2010, Conference on Trade Costs and International Trade Integration: Past, Present and Future
in Venice, International Comparisons Conference at Oxford, North American Winter Meeting of the
Econometric Society 2010, AEA 2010 for their feedback. Ina Simonovska thanks Princeton University
for their hospitality and financial support through the Peter B. Kenen fellowship. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Ina Simonovska and Michael E. Waugh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Elasticity of Trade: Estimates and Evidence
Ina Simonovska and Michael E. Waugh
NBER Working Paper No. 16796
February 2011, Revised July 2013
JEL No. F10,F11,F14,F17

                                              ABSTRACT

Quantitative results from a large class of structural gravity models of international trade depend critically
on the elasticity of trade with respect to trade frictions. We develop a new simulated method of moments
estimator to estimate this elasticity from disaggregate price and trade-flow data and we use it within
Eaton and Kortum's (2002) Ricardian model. We apply our estimator to disaggregate price and trade-flow
data for 123 countries in the year 2004. Our method yields a trade elasticity of roughly four, nearly
fifty percent lower than Eaton and Kortum's (2002) approach. This difference doubles the welfare
gains from international trade.


Ina Simonovska
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
inasimonovska@ucdavis.edu

Michael E. Waugh
New York University
Kaufman Management Center
44 West Fourth St. 7-160
New York, NY 10012-1126
mwaugh@stern.nyu.edu
1. Introduction
Quantitative results from a large class of structural gravity models of international trade de-
pend critically on the elasticity of trade with respect to trade frictions.1 To illustrate how im-
portant this parameter is, consider two examples: First, for any pair of countries, the estimate
of the tariff equivalent of a border effect is inversely proportional to the assumed elasticity of
trade with respect to trade frictions. Thus, observed reductions in tariffs across countries can
explain almost all or none of the growth in world trade, depending on this elasticity. Second,
the trade elasticity is one of only two statistics needed to measure the welfare cost of autarky
in a large and important class of structural gravity models of international trade. Therefore,
this elasticity is key to understanding the size of the frictions to trade, the response of trade to
changes in tariffs, and the welfare gains or losses from trade.

Estimating this parameter is difficult because quantitative trade models can rationalize small
trade flows with either large trade frictions and small elasticities, or small trade frictions and
large elasticities. Thus, one needs satisfactory measures of trade frictions independent of trade
flows to estimate this elasticity. Using their Ricardian model of trade, Eaton and Kortum (2002)
(henceforth EK) provide an innovative and simple solution to this problem by arguing that,
with product-level price data, one could use the maximum price difference across goods be-
tween countries as a proxy for bilateral trade frictions. The maximum price difference between
two countries is meaningful because it is bounded by the trade friction between the two coun-
tries via simple no-arbitrage arguments.

We develop a new simulated method of moments estimator for the elasticity of trade incor-
porating EK’s intuition. Our argument for a new estimator is that EK’s method understates
the true trade friction and results in estimates of the trade elasticity that are biased upward by
economically significant magnitudes. Thus, we propose a new methodology, which is subject
to the same data requirements as EK’s approach, and we use it within EK’s Ricardian model in
order to correct the bias and arrive at a new estimate for the elasticity of trade.

We apply our estimator to disaggregate price and trade-flow data for the year 2004, which
span 123 countries that account for 98 percent of world GDP. Our benchmark estimate for the
elasticity of trade is 4.14, rather than approximately eight, as EK’s estimation strategy suggests.
This difference doubles the measured welfare gains from trade.

Since the elasticity of trade plays a key role in quantifying the welfare gains from trade, it is
important to understand why our estimates of the parameter differ substantially from EK’s.
We show that the reason behind the difference is that their estimator is biased in finite samples
   1
     The class of models includes Armington, Krugman (1980), Eaton and Kortum (2002), and Melitz (2003) as
articulated in Chaney (2008), which all generate log-linear relationships between bilateral trade flows and trade
frictions.


                                                       1
of price data. The bias arises because the model’s equilibrium no-arbitrage conditions imply
that the maximum operator over a finite sample of prices underestimates the trade cost with
positive probability and overestimates the trade cost with zero probability. Consequently, the
maximum price difference lies strictly below the true trade cost, in expectation. This implies
that EK’s estimator delivers an elasticity of trade that lies strictly above the true parameter, in
expectation. As the sample size grows to infinity, EK’s estimator can uncover the true elasticity
of trade, which necessarily implies that the bias in the estimates of the parameter is eliminated.

Quantitatively, the bias is substantial. To illustrate its severity, we discretize EK’s model, simu-
late trade flows and product-level prices under an assumed elasticity of trade, and apply their
estimating approach on artificial data. Assuming a trade elasticity of 8.28—EK’s preferred esti-
mate for 19 OECD countries in 1990—EK’s procedure yields an elasticity estimate of 12.5, which
is nearly 50-percent higher than originally postulated. Moreover, in practice, the true parameter
can be recovered when 50,000 goods are sampled across the 19 economies, which constitutes an
extreme data requirement to produce unbiased estimates of the elasticity of trade.

Based on these arguments, we propose an estimator that is applicable when the sample size of
prices is small. Our approach builds on our insight that one can use observed bilateral trade
flows to recover all sufficient parameters to simulate EK’s model and to obtain trade flows
and prices as functions of the parameter of interest. This insight then suggests a simulated
method of moments estimator that minimizes the distance between the moments obtained by
applying EK’s approach on real and artificial data. We explore the properties of this estimator
numerically using simulated data and we show that it can uncover the true elasticity of trade.

Applying our estimator to alternative data sets and conducting several robustness exercises
allows us to establish a range for the elasticity of trade between 2.79 to 4.46. In contrast, EK’s
approach would have found a range of 4.17 to 9.6. Thus, our method finds elasticities that are
roughly half the size of EK’s approach. Because the inverse of this elasticity linearly controls
changes in real income necessary to compensate a representative consumer for going to autarky,
our estimates double the measured welfare gains from trade relative to previous findings.

The contribution of this paper is threefold. First, we provide a precise point estimate of the
trade elasticity in the context of EK’s Ricardian model that doubles the welfare gains from trade
predicted by EK’s estimation. Since EK’s model is a canonical model of international trade and
it is widely used in quantitative trade studies, providing a precise point estimate of the trade
elasticity in the context of this model is important. Moreover, our findings suggest a range for
the trade elasticity of 2.79 to 4.46, which is both lower and narrower relative to EK’s estimates of
3.6 to 12.8. In particular, our critique also applies to EK’s estimate of 12.8, which was obtained
using an alternative approach. After correcting for biases in EK’s alternative approach, we
obtain an estimate of 4.4, which is nearly the same as our benchmark finding. Thus, we provide


                                                 2
a lower and narrower range of 2.79 to 4.46, relative to EK’s wide range of estimates.

Second, we develop a methodology that is applicable to a wide class of trade models. The
method and the moments that we use to estimate the trade elasticity within EK’s Ricardian
framework can be derived for other structural gravity models of trade. In Simonovska and
Waugh (2012), we show how the new estimation strategy applies to models with product dif-
ferentiation such as Anderson (1979) and Krugman (1980), variable mark-ups such as Bernard,
Eaton, Jensen, and Kortum (2003), and models that build on the monopolistic-competition
structure of Melitz (2003) as articulated in Chaney (2008). Thus, while we focus on the particu-
lars of EK’s Ricardian model and our method’s relationship with EK’s approach, our method-
ology contributes to the estimation of trade elasticities above and beyond a particular model.

Third, the estimates that we obtain using the newly-developed methodology contribute to a
large and important literature that aims to measure the trade elasticity. Anderson and van
Wincoop (2004) survey the literature that estimates the trade elasticity using various approaches
and they establish a range between five and ten. One set of estimates that Anderson and van
Wincoop (2004) report is obtained using Feenstra’s (1994) method. However, in heterogeneous
frameworks with constant-elasticity-of-substitution (CES) preferences, such as EK’s Ricardian
model, Feenstra’s (1994) method recovers the preference parameter that controls the elasticity
of substitution across goods. This parameter plays no role in determining aggregate trade flows
and welfare gains from trade in EK’s Ricardian model with micro-level heterogeneity.

Another set of estimates that Anderson and van Wincoop (2004) document relies on time-series
and cross-industry variation in tariffs and trade flows during trade liberalization episodes as in
Head and Ries (2001) and Romalis (2007), or time-series and cross-country variation in tariffs
and trade flows for developed economies during the post-war period as in Baier and Bergstrand
(2001). Recently, Caliendo and Parro (2011) build on these approaches and estimate sectoral
trade elasticities from cross-sectional variations in trade flows and tariffs. The methods that
rely on variations in tariffs and trade flows in order to identify the trade elasticity are applicable
to a variety of structural gravity models, including EK’s Ricardian model. Hence, the estimates
obtained using these methods are comparable to our estimates of the trade elasticity.

Admittedly, there are two outstanding issues in our analysis. First, there is a difference between
the low values of the elasticity that our approach yields and the high values typically obtained
using tariff data. In particular, Head and Ries (2001), Romalis (2007), and Baier and Bergstrand
(2001) find values in the range of five to ten, while our benchmark estimates center around four.
The corollary is that the low values of the elasticity we find imply large deviations between
observed trade frictions (tariffs, transportation costs, etc.) and those inferred from trade flows.

However, there are two pieces of evidence in support of the values that we find. First, Parro
(2013) uses the tariff based approach of Caliendo and Parro (2011) to estimate an aggregate


                                                  3
trade elasticity for capital goods and non-capital, traded goods. He finds estimates of 4.6 and
5.2 which are only modestly larger than ours. Second, our results compare favorably with al-
ternative estimates of the shape parameter of the productivity distribution, which governs the
trade elasticity in models with micro-level heterogeneity, that are not obtained from gravity-
based estimators. For example, estimates of the shape parameter from firm-level sales data, as
in Bernard, Eaton, Jensen, and Kortum (2003) and Eaton, Kortum, and Kramarz (2011), are in
the range of 3.6 to 4.8—exactly in the range of values that we find. Identification of the param-
eter in these papers comes from firm-level data, which suggest that there is a lot of variation in
firm productivity. The data in our paper are telling a similar story: price variation (once prop-
erly corrected) suggests that there is a lot of variation in productivity implying a relatively low
trade elasticity.

Second, there are concerns about the quality of the price data that we use in our analysis and
we address them to the best of our ability within the scope of the paper. As in EK, we use
cross-country micro-level price data from the International Comparison Program (ICP). Obvi-
ous concerns with these data are the degree of product comparability (especially across rich
and poor countries), aggregation, general measurement error, the role of distribution mark-
ups, etc. To make headway, we incorporate these issues into our estimation to determine the
direction and quantitative effects that they could have on our estimates. Finally, we provide an
additional set of estimates using cross-country price data from the Economist Intelligence Unit
(EIU), which suggest a trade elasticity that is even lower than our baseline results.


2. Model
We outline the environment of the multi-country Ricardian model of trade introduced by EK.
We consider a world with N countries, where each country has a tradable final-goods sector.
There is a continuum of tradable goods indexed by j ∈ [0, 1].

Within each country i, there is a measure of consumers Li . Each consumer has one unit of
time supplied inelastically in the domestic labor market and enjoys the consumption of a CES
bundle of final tradable goods with elasticity of substitution ρ > 1:
                                                                                 ρ
                                             Z       1            ρ−1
                                                                               ρ−1
                                      Ui =                xi (j)    ρ    dj           .
                                                  0


To produce quantity xi (j) in country i, a firm employs labor using a linear production func-
tion with productivity zi (j).2 Country i’s productivity is, in turn, the realization of a random
variable (drawn independently for each j) from its country-specific Fréchet probability distri-
   2
    We abstract from including intermediate inputs as in EK’s original formulation of the model. This is of no
consequence: Including intermediate inputs as in EK would have no quantitative impact on our results.



                                                              4
bution:

                                       Fi (zi ) = exp(−Ti zi−θ ).                                  (1)

The country-specific parameter Ti > 0 governs the location of the distribution; higher values
of it imply that a high productivity draw for any good j is more likely. The parameter θ > 1
is common across countries and, if higher, it generates less variability in productivity across
goods.

Having drawn a particular productivity level, a perfectly competitive firm from country i in-
curs a marginal cost to produce good j of wi /zi (j), where wi is the wage rate in the economy.
Shipping the good to a destination n further requires a per-unit iceberg trade cost of τni > 1 for
n 6= i, with τii = 1. We assume that cross-border arbitrage forces effective geographic barriers
to obey the triangle inequality: For any three countries i, k, n, τni ≤ τnk τki .

Below, we describe equilibrium prices, trade flows, and welfare.

Perfect competition forces the price of good j from country i to destination n to be equal to the
marginal cost of production and delivery:

                                                         τni wi
                                           pni (j) =            .
                                                         zi (j)

So, consumers in destination n would pay pni (j), should they decide to buy good j from i.

Consumers purchase good j from the low-cost supplier; thus, the actual price consumers in n
pay for good j is the minimum price across all sources k:
                                                                        
                                      pn (j) = min               pnk (j) .                         (2)
                                                 k=1,...,N


The pricing rule and the productivity distribution allow us to obtain the following CES exact
price index for each destination n:
                                                             " N                     #
                                −1
                                                              X
                       Pn =   γΦn θ     where        Φn =               Tk (τnk wk )−θ .           (3)
                                                                  k=1

                                            1
                                θ+1−ρ
                                        1−ρ
In the above equation, γ = Γ      θ
                                                  is the Gamma function, and parameters are restricted
such that θ > ρ − 1.

To calculate trade flows between countries, let Xn be country n’s expenditure on final goods, of
which Xni is spent on goods from country i. Since there is a continuum of goods, computing the
fraction of income spent on imports from i, Xni /Xn , can be shown to be equivalent to finding
the probability that country i is the low-cost supplier to country n given the joint distribution

                                                        5
of efficiency levels, prices, and trade costs for any good j. The expression for the share of
expenditures that n spends on goods from i or, as we will call it, the trade share is:

                                         Xni     Ti (τni wi )−θ
                                             = PN                     .                            (4)
                                         Xn     k=1  Tk (τnk w k ) −θ


Expressions (3) and (4) allow us to relate trade shares to trade costs and the price indices of each
trading partner via the following equation:
                                                                                  −θ
                                      Xni /Xn   Φi −θ                 Pi τni
                                              =   τ =                                    ,         (5)
                                      Xii /Xi   Φn ni                  Pn

        Xii
where   Xi
              is country i’s expenditure share on goods from country i, or its home trade share.

In this model, it is easy to show that the welfare gains from trade are essentially captured
by changes in the CES price index that a representative consumer faces. Because of the tight
link between prices and trade shares, this model generates the following relationship between
changes in price indices and changes in home trade shares, as well as, the elasticity parameter:
                                                                         1θ
                                        Pn′                   ′
                                                                 /Xn′
                                                         
                                                             Xnn
                                            −1=1−                              ,                   (6)
                                        Pn                   Xnn /Xn

where the left-hand side can be interpreted as the percentage compensation a representative
consumer in country n requires to move between two trading equilibria.

Expression (5) is not particular to EK’s model. Several popular models of international trade
relate trade shares, prices and trade costs in the same exact manner. These models include
Anderson (1979) and Krugman (1980). More importantly for the context of this paper, the het-
erogeneous Ricardian framework of Bernard, Eaton, Jensen, and Kortum (2003) and the model
of firm heterogeneity by Melitz (2003), when parametrized as in Chaney (2008), also generate
this relationship. Arkolakis, Costinot, and Rodriguez-Clare (2011) show how equation (6) arises
in all of these models.

2.1. The Elasticity of Trade

The key parameter determining trade flows (equation (5)) and welfare (equation (6)) is θ. To
see the parameter’s importance for trade flows, take logs of equation (5) yielding:
                                            
                                   Xni /Xn
                         log                     = −θ [log (τni ) − log(Pi ) + log(Pn )] .         (7)
                                   Xii /Xi

As this expression makes clear, θ controls how a change in the bilateral trade costs, τni , will
change bilateral trade between two countries. This elasticity is important because if one wants


                                                           6
to understand how a bilateral trade agreement will impact aggregate trade or to simply under-
stand the magnitude of the trade friction between two countries, then a stand on this elasticity
is necessary. This is what we mean by the elasticity of trade.

To see the parameter’s importance for welfare, it is easy to demonstrate that (6) implies that θ
represents the inverse of the elasticity of welfare with respect to domestic expenditure shares:
                                                                     
                                                    1           Xnn
                                        log(Pn ) = − log                                                      (8)
                                                    θ           Xn

Hence, decreasing the domestic expenditure share by one percent generates a (1/θ)/100-percent
increase in consumer welfare. Thus, in order to measure the impact of trade policy on welfare,
it is sufficient to obtain data on realized domestic expenditures and an estimate of the elasticity
of trade.

Given θ’s impact on trade flows and welfare, this elasticity is absolutely critical in any quanti-
tative study of international trade.


3. Estimating θ: EK’s Approach
Equation (5) suggests that one could easily estimate θ if one had data on trade shares, aggregate
prices, and trade costs. The key issue is that trade costs are not observed. In this section, we
discuss how EK approximate trade costs and estimate θ. Then, we characterize the statistical
properties of EK’s estimator. The key result is Proposition 1, which states that their estimator
is biased and overestimates the elasticity of trade with a finite sample of prices. The second
result is Proposition 2, which states that EK’s estimator is a consistent and an asymptotically
unbiased estimator of the elasticity of trade.

3.1. Approximating Trade Costs

The main problem with estimating θ is that one must disentangle θ from trade costs, which are
not observed. EK propose approximating trade costs using disaggregate price information across
countries. In particular, the maximum price difference across goods between two countries
bounds the bilateral trade cost, which solves the indeterminacy issue.

To illustrate this argument, suppose that we observe the price of good ℓ across locations, but
we do not know its country of origin.3 We know that the price of good ℓ in country n relative to
   3
    This is the most common case, though Donaldson (2009) exploits a case where he knows the place of origin
for one particular good, salt. He argues convincingly that in India, salt was produced in only a few locations and
exported everywhere; thus, the relative price of salt across locations identifies the trade friction.




                                                        7
country i must satisfy the following inequality:

                                                  pn (ℓ)
                                                         ≤ τni .                                             (9)
                                                  pi (ℓ)

That is, the relative price of good ℓ must be less than or equal to the trade friction. This inequal-
ity must hold because if it does not, then pn (ℓ) > τni pi (ℓ) and an agent could import ℓ at a
lower price. Thus, the inequality in (9) places a lower bound on the trade friction.

Improvements on this bound are possible if we observe a sample of L goods across locations.
This follows by noting that the maximum relative price must satisfy the same inequality:
                                                               
                                                       pn (ℓ)
                                            max                     ≤ τni .                                 (10)
                                            ℓ∈L        pi (ℓ)

This suggests a way to exploit disaggregate price information across countries and to arrive at
an estimate of τni by taking the maximum of relative prices over goods. Thus, EK approximate
τni , in logs, by

                             log τ̂ni (L) = max {log (pn (ℓ)) − log (pi (ℓ))} ,                             (11)
                                             ℓ∈L


where the “hat” denotes the approximated value of τni and (L) indexes its dependence on the
sample size of prices.

3.2. Estimating the Elasticity

Given the approximation of trade costs, EK derive an econometric model that corresponds
to (7). For a sample of L goods, they estimate a parameter, β, using a method of moments
estimator, which takes the ratio of the average of the left-hand side of (7) to the average of the
term in the square bracket of the right-hand side of (7), where the averages are computed across
all country pairs.4 Mathematically, their estimator is:
                                                                                    
                                                  P P                      Xni /Xn
                                                       n       i log       Xii /Xi
                              β̂ = − P P                                                ,                 (12)
                                        n    i     log τ̂ni (L) + log P̂i − log P̂n

                              where     log τ̂ni (L) = max {log pn (ℓ) − log pi (ℓ)} ,
                                                                ℓ∈L


                                                           L
                                                   1X
                              and     log P̂i =          log(pi (ℓ)).
                                                   L ℓ=1
   4
     They also propose two other estimators. One uses the approximation in (11) and the gravity equation in (22).
We show in Appendix C that our arguments are applicable to this approach as well. The other approach does not
use disaggregate price data and we discuss it later.

                                                               8
The value of β is EK’s preferred estimate of the elasticity θ.5 Throughout, we will denote by
β̂ the estimator defined in equation (12) to distinguish it from the value θ. As discussed, the
second line of expression (12) approximates the trade cost. The third line approximates the
aggregate price indices. The top line represents a rule that combines these statistics, together
with observed trade flows, in an attempt to estimate the elasticity of trade.

3.3. Properties of EK’s Estimator

Assumption regarding the key source of randomness. Before describing the properties of the
estimator β̂, we state the assumptions that we maintain throughout the theoretical analysis re-
garding the sources of error in equation (12). Following EK, we assume that trade barriers and
price indices are approximated from price data using the last two equations in (12). These two
objects are potentially measured with error because of the approximation. Hence, approxima-
tion error is the key source of error that we examine in the theoretical analysis. In the model,
prices are realizations of random variables, thus we treat the micro-level prices as being ran-
domly sampled from the equilibrium distribution of prices. This allows us to theoretically
characterize the properties of the approximation error and in turn to derive the properties of
the estimator β̂ in expression (12).

In practice, there may be other sources of error. First, trade shares also appear in equation (12).
Throughout the theoretical analysis, we assume that bilateral trade shares are observable statis-
tics that are not measured with error. Therefore, we treat them as constants. We recognize that
in practice this may not be the case, so we relax this assumption in the quantitative analysis.
Second, prices may be measured with error in the data. Consequently, in the quantitative anal-
ysis in Section 7.4, we consider a number of sources of price variation outside of the model.
We find that different sources of price variation affect the estimates of the trade elasticity in
different directions. Crucially, however, approximation error in trade barriers remains to be the
key source of bias in the estimates. Therefore, we turn to the theoretical characterization of the
approximation error next.

Given our assumption that the prices are randomly sampled from the equilibrium distribution,
we define the following objects.

Definition 1 Define the following objects:

   1. Let ǫni = θ[log pn − log pi ] be the log price difference of a good between country n and country i,
      multiplied by θ.

   2. Let the vector S = {log(T1 w1−θ ), . . . , log(TN wN
                                                         −θ
                                                            )}.
   5
    To alleviate measurement error, EK use the second-order statistic over price differences rather than the first-
order statistic. Our estimation approach is robust to either specification.

                                                        9
   3. Let the vector τ˜i = {θ log(τi1 ), . . . , θ log(τiN )} and let τ̃ be a matrix with typical row, τ˜i .

   4. Let g(pi ; S, τ˜i ) be the pdf of prices of individual goods in country i, pi ∈ (0, ∞).

   5. Let fmax (ǫni ; L, S, τ̃i , τ˜n ) be the pdf of max(ǫni ), given prices of a sample L ≥ 1 of goods.
                                                                                                        
   6. Let X denote the normalized trade share matrix, with typical (n, i) element, log XXniii /X    /Xi
                                                                                                       n
                                                                                                           .

The first item is simply the scaled log price difference. As we show in Appendix 2.1, this hap-
pens to be convenient to work with, as the second line in (12) can be restated in terms of scaled
log price differences across locations. The second item is a vector in which each element is a
function of a country’s technology parameter and wage rate. The third item is a matrix of log
bilateral trade costs, scaled by θ, with a typical vector row containing the trade costs that coun-
try i’s trading partners incur to sell there. The fourth item specifies the probability distribution
of prices in each country. The fifth item specifies the probability distribution over the maximum
scaled log price difference and its dependence on the sample size of prices of L goods. We de-
rive this distribution in Appendix 2.1. Finally, the sixth item summarizes trade data, which we
view as observable statistics.

3.4. β̂ is a Biased Estimator of θ

Given these definitions, we establish two intermediate results and then state Proposition 1,
which characterizes the expectation of β̂, shows that the estimator is biased and discusses the
reason why the bias arises. The proof of Proposition 1 can be found in Appendix 2.1.

The first intermediate result is the following:

Lemma 1 Consider an economy of N countries with a sample of L goods’ prices observed. The expected
value of the maximal difference of logged prices for a pair of countries is strictly less than the true trade
cost,
                                                     θ log(τni )
                                           1
                                                Z
                  Ψni (L; S, τ˜i , τ˜n ) ≡                         ǫni fmax (ǫni ; L, S, τ̃i , τ˜n )dǫni < log(τni ).              (13)
                                           θ        −θ log(τin )


The difference in the expected values of logged prices for a pair of countries equals the difference in the
price parameters, Φ, of the two countries,
                             ∞                                            ∞
                                                                                                             1
                         Z                                          Z
 Ωni (S, τ˜n , τ̃i ) ≡           log(pn )g(pn ; S, τ˜n )dpn −                 log(pi )g(pi ; S, τ˜i )dpi =     (log Φi − log Φn ) , (14)
                         0                                            0                                      θ

with Φn defined in equation (3).

The key result in Lemma 1 is the strict inequality in (13). It says that Ψni , the expected maximal
log price difference, is less than the true log trade cost. Two forces drive this result. First, with

                                                                        10
a finite sample L of prices, there is positive probability that the maximal log price difference
will be less than the true log trade cost. In other words, there is always a chance that the
weak inequality in (11) does not bind. Second, there is zero probability that the maximal log
price difference can be larger than the true log trade cost. This comes from optimality and the
definition of equilibrium. These two forces imply that the expected maximal log price difference
lies strictly below the true log trade cost.

The second result in Lemma 1 is that the difference in the expected log prices in expression (14)
equals the difference in the aggregate price parameters defined in equation (3). This result is
important because it implies that any source of bias in the estimator β̂ does not arise because of
systematic errors in approximating the price parameter Φ.

The next intermediate step computes the expected value of 1/β̂. This step is convenient because
the inverse of β̂ is linear in the random variables that Lemma 1 characterizes.

Lemma 2 Consider an economy of N countries with a sample of L goods’ prices observed. The expected
value of 1/β̂ equals:
                                                                     
                                P P
                      1      1       (θΨni (L) − (log Φi − log Φn ))    1
                 E         =     − n i P P                            < ,                    (15)
                      β̂     θ               log Xni /Xn                θ
                                              n    i        Xii /Xi


with
                                                          
                          P P (θΨ (L) − (log Φ − log Φ )) 
                                  ni            i      n
                      1 > − n i P P                        > 0.                              (16)
                                           Xni /Xn
                                    log  n   i
                                                           
                                                       Xii /Xi



This results says that the expected value of the inverse of β̂ equals the inverse of the elasticity
multiplied by the bracketed term of (16). The bracketed term is the expected maximal log price
difference minus the difference in expected log prices, both scaled by theta, and divided by
trade data. This term is strictly less than one because Ψni does not equal the log trade cost, as
established in Lemma 1. If Ψni did equal the log trade cost, then the bracketed term would equal
one, and the expected value of the inverse of β̂ would be equal to the inverse of θ. This can be
seen by examining the relation between Φ’s and aggregate prices P ’s in (3), and by substituting
expression (7) into (16).

Inverting (15) and then applying Jensen’s inequality establishes the main result: EK’s estimator
is biased above the true value of θ.

Proposition 1 Consider an economy of N countries with a sample of L goods’ prices observed. The



                                                  11
expected value of β̂ is
                                                                  
                                      P P            Xni /Xn
                                     n    i log   Xii /Xi
                                                                     
                   E β̂ ≥ θ × − P P                                    > θ.                   (17)
                                n i (θΨni (L) − (log Φi − log Φn )) 




The proposition establishes that the estimator β̂ provides estimates that exceed the true value
of the elasticity θ. The weak inequality in (17) comes from applying Jensen’s inequality to the
strictly convex function of β̂, 1/β̂. The strict inequality follows from Lemma 1, which argued
that the expected maximal logged price difference is strictly less than the true trade cost. Thus,
the bracketed term in expression (17) is always greater than one and the elasticity of trade is
always overestimated.

3.5. Consistency and Asymptotic Bias

While the estimator β̂ is biased in a finite sample, the asymptotic properties of EK’s estimator
are worth understanding. Proposition 2 summarizes the result. The proof to Proposition 2 can
be found in Appendix 2.2.

Proposition 2 Consider an economy of N countries. The maximal log price difference is a consistent
estimator of the trade cost,

                               plim max (log pn (ℓ) − log pi (ℓ)) = log τni .                 (18)
                               L→∞ ℓ=1,...,L


The estimator β̂ is a consistent estimator of θ,

                                            plim β̂ (L; S, τ̃ , X) = θ,                       (19)
                                            L→∞


and the asymptotic bias of β̂ is zero,
                                              h                 i
                                         lim E β̂ (L; S, τ̃ , X) − θ = 0.                     (20)
                                     L→∞


There are three elements to Proposition 2, each building on the previous one. The first statement
says that the probability limit of the maximal log price difference equals the true log trade
cost between two countries. Intuitively, this says that as the sample size becomes large, the
probability that the weak inequality in (10) does not bind becomes vanishingly small.

The second statement says that the estimator β̂ converges in probability to the elasticity of
trade—i.e., β̂ is a consistent estimator of θ. The reasons are the following. Because the maximal
log price difference converges in probability to the true log trade cost, and the difference in

                                                        12
averages of log prices converges in probability to the difference in log price parameters, 1/β̂
converges in probability to 1/θ. Since 1/β̂ is a continuous function of β̂ (with β̂ > 0), β̂ must
converge in probability to θ because of the preservation of convergence for continuous functions
(see Hayashi (2000)).

The third statement says that, in the limit, the bias is eliminated. This follows immediately
from the argument that β̂ is a consistent estimator of θ (see Hayashi (2000)).

The results in Proposition 2 are important for two reasons. First, they suggest that with enough
data, EK’s estimator provides informative estimates of the elasticity of trade. However, as we
will show in the next section, Monte Carlo exercises suggest that the data requirements are
extreme. Second, because EK’s estimator has desirable asymptotic properties, it underlies the
simulation-based estimator that we develop in Section 5.


4. How Large is the Bias? How Much Data is Needed?
Proposition 1 shows that EK’s estimator is biased in a finite sample. Many estimators have this
property, which raises the question: How large is the bias? Furthermore, even if the magnitude
of the bias is large, perhaps moderate increases in the sample size are sufficient to eliminate the
bias (in practical terms). The natural question is: How much data is needed to achieve that?

To answer these questions, we perform Monte Carlo experiments in which we simulate trade
flows and samples of micro-level prices under a known θ. Then, we apply EK’s estimator (and
other estimators) to the artificial data. To simulate trade flows that mimic the data, we use
the simulation procedure that is described in Steps 1-3 in Section 5.2 below. We estimate all
the parameters necessary to simulate the model (except for θ) using the trade data from EK.
We set the true value of θ equal to 8.28, which is EK’s estimate when employing the approach
described above. We then randomly sample prices from the simulated data and we apply EK’s
estimation to the simulated trade flows and prices. The sample size of prices is set to L = 50,
which is the number of prices EK had access to in their data set.

Table 1 summarizes our findings. The columns of Table 1 present the mean and median es-
timates of β over 1000 simulations. The rows present two different estimation approaches:
method of moments and least squares with suppressed constant. Also reported are the true
average trade cost and the estimated average trade cost using maximal log price differences.

The first row in Table 1 shows that the estimates using EK’s approach are larger than the true θ
of 8.28, which is consistent with Proposition 1. The key source of bias in Proposition 1 was that
the estimates of the trade costs were biased downward, as Lemma 1 argued. The final row in
Table 1 illustrates that the estimated trade costs are below the true trade costs, where the latter
correspond to an economy characterized by a true elasticity of trade among 19 OECD countries


                                                13
                               Table 1: Monte Carlo Results, True θ = 8.28

              Approach                   Mean Estimate of θ (S.E.)          Median Estimate of θ

              EK’s Estimator                      12.5 (0.06)                          12.5

              Least Squares                       12.1 (0.06)                          12.1

              True Mean τ = 1.83         Estimated Mean τ = 1.50
            Note: S.E. is the standard error of the mean. In each simulation there are 19 countries
            and 500,000 goods. Only 50 realized prices are randomly sampled and used to estimate θ.
            10000 simulations performed.



of 8.28.

The second row in Table 1 reports results using a least squares estimator with the constant
suppressed rather than the method of moments estimator.6 Similar to the method of moments
estimates, the least squares estimates are substantially larger than the true value of θ. This is
important because it suggests that the key problem with EK’s approach is not the method of
moment estimator per se, but, instead, the poor approximation of the trade costs.

The final point to note is that the magnitude of the bias is substantial. The underlying θ was set
equal to 8.28, and the estimates in the simulation are between 12.1 and 12.5. Equation (8) can
be used to formulate the welfare cost of the bias. It suggests that the welfare gains from trade
will be underestimated by 50 percent as a result of the bias.

While Table 1 reflects the results from a particular calibration of the model to trade flow data,
one would like to know how these results depend on the particulars of the economy like trade
costs. Inspection of (15) and the integral in (13) shows that the bias will depend on trade flows
and the level of trade costs in the economy. For example, as all trade costs approach one, the
bias will disappear holding fixed the sample size of prices. The reason is that as trade costs
approach one, all goods become traded and hence the maximal price difference—even in a
small sample—will likely reflect the true trade friction.

Figure 1 shows how the bias behaves when trade costs are increasing away from one and the
economy approaches autarky. To generate this figure, we keep the true θ equal to 8.28 and we
uniformly scale the trade costs from the baseline simulation up or down. We then apply EK’s
estimation approach to the simulated data (now indexed by the level of trade costs) with the
   6
     We have found that including a constant in least squares results in slope coefficients that either underestimate
or overestimate the elasticity depending on the level of trade costs in the simulation. Hence, including a constant
term does not resolve the bias.



                                                         14
                          17


                          16


                          15
       EK Estimate of θ




                          14


                          13

                                                                Benchmark Simulation
                          12


                          11


                          10
                           1.25      1.5           2              2.5                3      3.5          4
                                                       Average Trade Costs in the Economy



                                  Figure 1: EK’s Estimator and the Level of Trade Costs, True θ = 8.28

sample size of prices set equal to 50. The x-axis reports the average trade cost across all the
countries and the y-axis reports the associated estimate of θ.

Figure 1 shows that, as trade costs increase, EK’s estimate of θ increases and hence the bias
increases. For example, when the average trade cost equals about three, EK’s estimate of θ is
16—almost two times larger than the true θ of 8.28. In contrast, in the baseline simulation when
average trade costs are about 1.8, EK’s estimate is only fifty percent larger at 12.5. The intuition
for this outcome is straightforward. As trade costs increase, more goods are likely to become
non-traded and hence it is more likely that many of the prices in the sample are not informative
about trade costs.

How much data is needed to eliminate the bias? Table 2 provides a quantitative answer. It
performs the same Monte Carlo experiments described above, as the sample size of micro-level
prices varies.

Table 2 shows that, as the sample size becomes larger, the estimate of θ becomes less biased and
begins to approach the true value of θ. The final column shows how the reduction in the bias
coincides with the estimates of the trade costs becoming less biased. This is consistent with the
arguments of Proposition 2, which describes the asymptotic properties of this estimator.

We should note that the rate of convergence is extremely slow. The exercise allows us to con-
clude that the data requirements to minimize the bias in estimates of the elasticity of trade (in
practice) are extreme. This motivates our alternative estimation strategy in the next section.


                                                                      15
              Table 2: Increasing the Sample of Prices Reduces the Bias, True θ = 8.28

              Sample Size of Prices          Mean θ (S.E.)         Median θ              Mean τ

              50                              12.51 (0.06)            12.51                1.50

              500                               9.42 (0.02)            9.42                1.69

              5,000                             8.47 (0.01)            8.47                1.80

              50,000                            8.30 (0.01)            8.30                1.83
            Note: S.E. is the standard error of the mean. In each simulation, there are 19 countries and
            500,000 goods. The results reported use least squares with the constant suppressed. 10000
            simulations performed. True Mean τ = 1.83.




5. A New Approach To Estimating θ
In this section, we develop a new approach to estimating θ and we discuss its performance on
simulated data.

5.1. The Idea

Our idea is to exploit the structure of the model as follows. First, in Section 5.2, we show how
to recover all the parameters that are needed to simulate the model up to the unknown scalar θ
from trade data only. These parameters are the vector S and the scaled trade costs in matrix τ̃ .
Given these values, we can simulate moments from the model as functions of θ.

Second, Lemma 1 and Lemma 2 actually suggest which moments are informative. Inspection
of the integral (13) and the density fmax in (b.28) leads to the observation that the expected
maximal log price difference monotonically varies with θ and linearly with 1/θ. This follows
because of the previous point—the vector S and scaled log trade costs τ̃ are pinned down by
trade data, and these values completely determine all parameters in the integral (13), except
the value 1/θ lying outside the integral. Similarly, the integral (14) is completely determined by
these values and scaled in the same way by 1/θ as (13) is.

These observations have the following implication. While the maximum log price difference is
biased below the true trade cost, if θ is large, then the value of the maximum log price differ-
ence will be small. Similarly, if θ is small, then the value of the maximum log price difference
will be large. A large or small maximum log price difference will result in a small or large esti-
mate of β. This suggests that the estimator β̂ will vary monotonically with the true value of θ.
Furthermore, this suggests that β is an informative moment with regard to θ.7
  7
      Lemma 1 established that the expected value of 1/β̂ is proportional to 1/θ. Hence, modulo effects from Jensen’s


                                                          16
                14                                                        β(θ)
                                   Moment Seen in Data
                13

                12

                11

                10

                 9
        β (θ)




                 8

                 7
                                                                         Estimate of θ
                 6

                 5

                 4

                 3
                  3   4       5           6      7          8        9        10         11   12   13   14
                                                                θ

                                  Figure 2: Schematic of Estimation Approach

Figure 2 quantitatively illustrates this intuition by plotting β(θ) from simulations as we varied
θ. It is clear that β is a biased estimator because these values do not lie on the 45o line. However,
β varies near linearly with θ. These observations suggest an estimation procedure that matches
the data moment β to the moment β(θ) implied by the simulated model under a known θ.8
Because of the monotonicity implied by our arguments, the known θ must be the unique value
that satisfies the moment condition specified.

5.2. Simulation Approach

In this subsection, we show how to recover all parameters of interest up to the unknown scalar
θ from trade data only, and then we describe our simulation approach. This provides the foun-
dation for the simulated method of moments estimator that we propose.

Step 1.—We estimate the parameters for the country-specific productivity distributions and
trade costs (scaled by θ) from bilateral trade-flow data. We follow closely the methodologies
proposed by EK and Waugh (2010b). First, we derive the theoretical gravity equation from
expression (4) by dividing the bilateral trade share by the importing country’s home trade share,
                                                       
                                              Xni /Xn
                                    log                     = Si − Sn − θ log τni ,                             (21)
                                              Xnn /Xn
inequality, this suggests that β̂ is roughly proportional to θ. Figure 2 confirms this.
   8
     Another reason for using the moment β is that β̂ is a consistent estimator of θ, as argued in Proposition 2.




                                                                17
where Si is defined as log Ti wi−θ and is the same value in the parameter vector S in Definition
                                 

1. Note that (21) is a different equation than expression (5), which is derived by dividing the
bilateral trade share by the exporting country’s home trade share, and is used to estimate θ.

The goal is to estimate the objects Si for all i = 1, ..., N and θ log τni for all country pairs n and i
such that n 6= i. To do so we first derive an empirical gravity equation that corresponds to the
theoretical expression in (21). It is given by
                                                  
                                         Xni /Xn
                               log                     = Ŝi − Ŝn − θ̂ log τ̂ni + νni .                           (22)
                                         Xnn /Xn

Ŝi ’s are recovered as the coefficients on country-specific dummy variables given the restrictions
on how trade costs can covary across countries. Trade costs take the following functional form

                                            log τ̂ni = dk + bni + exi .                                            (23)

Here, trade costs are a logarithmic function of distance, where dk with k = 1, 2, ..., 6 is the effect
of distance between country i and n lying in the k-th distance interval.9 bni is the effect of a
shared border in which bni = 1 if country i and n share a border and zero otherwise.

The term exi is an exporter fixed effect which allows the trade-cost level to vary depending
upon the exporter. Waugh (2010b) shows that including this term helps EK-type models match
both cross-country variation in aggregate prices and trade flows. In Section 7.2, we show that
using importer fixed effects (as in EK) or aggregate price data to exactly identify trade costs
does not change our estimates by economically meaningful amounts. Finally, our results are
robust to incorporating bilateral colonial, language, and legal origin ties as well as countries’
geographical attributes.

We assume that νni reflects other factors and it is orthogonal to the regressors and normally
distributed with mean zero and standard deviation σν . This error term simply captures the fact
that the observed trade flows are not entirely explained by the gravity equation of trade in prac-
tice.10 We use least squares to estimate equations (22) and (23). Finally, we explored estimating
equations (22) and (23) with the Poisson pseudo-maximum-likelihood estimator advocated by
Silva and Tenreyro (2006) and we found that our results for our estimate of θ are robust to this
approach.

Step 2.—The parameter estimates obtained from the first-stage gravity regression are sufficient
   9
      Intervals are in miles: [0, 375); [375, 750); [750, 1500); [1500, 3000); [3000, 6000); and [6000, maximum]. An
alternative to specifying a trade-cost function is to recover scaled trade costs as a residual using equation (5), trade
data, and measures of aggregate prices as in Waugh (2010a). Section 7.2 shows that our results are robust to using
this alternative approach.
   10
      We explored a specification in which we included the error term in expression (23) instead of (22) and we
interpreted it as measurement error in trade barriers. The results were nearly identical to our benchmark estimates.


                                                              18
to simulate trade flows and micro-level prices up to a constant, θ̂.

The relationship is obvious in the estimation of trade barriers since log τ̂ni is scaled by θ̂ in (22).
To see that we can simulate micro-level prices as a function of θ̂ only, notice that for any good
j, the model implies that pni (j) = τni wi /zi (j). Thus, rather than simulating productivities, it is
sufficient to simulate the inverse of marginal costs of production ui (j) = zi (j)/wi . In Appendix
2.3, we show that ui is distributed according to:
                                           
                    Mi (ui ) = exp −S̃i u−θ
                                         i    , with S̃i = exp(Si ) = Ti wi−θ .                   (24)

Thus, having obtained the coefficients Ŝi from the first-stage gravity regression, we can simulate
the inverse of marginal costs and prices.

To simulate the model, we assume that there are a large number (150,000) of potentially tradable
goods. In Section 7.1, we discuss how we made this choice and the motivation behind it. For
each country, the inverse marginal costs are drawn from the country-specific distribution (24)
and assigned to each good. Then, for each importing country and each good, the low-cost
supplier across countries is found, realized prices are recorded, and aggregate bilateral trade
shares are computed.

Step 3.—From the realized prices, a subset of goods common to all countries is defined and
the subsample of prices is recorded – i.e., we are acting as if we were collecting prices for the
international organization that collects the data. We added disturbances to the predicted trade
shares with the disturbances drawn from a mean zero normal distribution with the standard
deviation set equal to the standard deviation of the residuals from Step 1.

These steps then provide us with an artificial data set of micro-level prices and trade shares that
mimic their analogs in the data. Given this artificial data set, we can then compute moments—
as functions of θ—and compare them to the moments in the data.

5.3. Estimation

We perform two estimations: an overidentified procedure with two moments and an exactly
identified procedure with one moment. Below, we describe the moments we try to match and
the details of our estimation procedure.

Moments. Let β̂k be EK’s method of moment estimator defined in (12) using the kth-order
statistic over micro-level price differences. Then, the moments we are interested in are:
                                                                     
                                         P P                Xni /Xn
                                           n    i log       Xii /Xi
                      βk = − P P                                            , k = 1, 2          (25)
                                               k
                                n    i   log τ̂ni (L) + log P̂i − log P̂n



                                                        19
        k
where τ̂ni (L) is computed as the kth-order statistic over L micro-level price differences between
countries n and i. In the exactly identified estimation, we use β1 as the only moment.

We denote the simulated moments by β1 (θ, us ) and β2 (θ, us ), which come from the analogous
formula as in (25) and are estimated from artificial data generated by following Steps 1-3 above.
Note that these moments are a function of θ and depend upon a vector of random variables us
associated with a particular simulation s. There are three components to this vector. First, there
are the random productivity draws for production technologies for each good and each country.
The second component is the set of goods sampled from all countries. The third component
mimics the residuals νni from equation (22), which are described in Section 5.2.

Stacking our data moments and averaged simulation moments gives us the following zero
function:
                                               1
                                                    PS                 
                                         β1 −   S    s=1 β1 (θ, us )
                             y(θ) =                                   .                     (26)
                                                1
                                                    PS
                                         β2 −   S    s=1 β2 (θ, us )



Estimation Procedure. We base our estimation procedure on the moment condition:

                                         E [y(θo )] = 0,

where θo is the true value of θ. Thus, our simulated method of moments estimator is:

                                 θ̂ = arg min [y(θ)′ W y(θ)] ,                                (27)
                                            θ


where W is a 2 × 2 weighting matrix that we discuss below.

The idea behind this moment condition is that, though β1 and β2 will be biased away from θ,
the moments β1 (θ, us ) and β2 (θ, us ) will be biased by the same amount when evaluated at θo ,
in expectation. Viewed in this language, our moment condition is closely related to the estima-
tion of bias functions discussed in MacKinnon and Smith (1998) and to indirect inference, as
discussed in Smith (2008). The key issue in MacKinnon and Smith (1998) is how the bias func-
tion behaves. As we argued in Section 5.1, the bias is monotonic in the parameter of interest.
Furthermore, Figure 2 shows that the bias is basically linear, so it is well behaved.

For the weighting matrix, we use the optimal weighting matrix suggested by Gouriéroux and
Monfort (1996) for simulated method of moments estimators. Because the weighting matrix
depends on our estimate of θ, we use a standard iterative procedure outlined in the next steps.

Step 4.—We start with the identity matrix as an initial guess for the weighting matrix W0 and
solve for θ̂0 . Then, given this value we simulate the model to generate a new estimate of the


                                                    20
                           Table 3: Estimation Results With Artificial Data

         Estimation Approach                   True θ = 8.28                       True θ = 4.00
         Overidentified                 Mean Estimate of θ (S.E.)          Mean Estimate of θ (S.E.)
         SMM                                      8.27 (0.03)                       4.00 (0.02)
         Moment, β1                             12.52 (0.06)                        6.04 (0.03)
         Moment, β2                             15.20 (0.06)                        7.34 (0.03)
         Exactly Identified
         SMM                                      8.28 (0.04)                       4.00 (0.02)
         Moment, β1                             12.52 (0.06)                        6.04 (0.03)
       Note: S.E. is the standard error of the mean. In each simulation there are 19 countries, 150,000
       goods and 100 simulations performed. The sequence of artificial data is the same for both the
       overidentified case and exactly identified case.



weighting matrix following the approach described in Gouriéroux and Monfort (1996). With
the new estimate of the weighting matrix we solve for a new θ̂1 . We perform this iterative
procedure twice. We found that iterating until some convergence criteria gave effectively the
same results but with substantial increases in computing time.

Step 5.—We compute standard errors using a parametric bootstrap technique. Given our es-
timate of θ, estimates of trade costs and Ss, and the error variance σν , we have a completely
specified data generating process. We then proceed to simulate micro-level data, add error
terms to the trade data, collect a sample of prices, and compute new estimates β1b and β2b . Next,
we estimate the model using moments β1b and β2b and obtain θb . We repeat this procedure 100
times and construct standard errors accordingly.

5.4. Performance on Simulated Data

In this section, we evaluate the performance of our estimation approach using simulated data
when we know the true value of θ.

Table 3 presents the results from the following exercise. We generate two sets of artificial data
on trade flows and disaggregate prices with true values of θ that are equal to 8.28 and 4.00,
respectively, and then we apply our estimation routine.11 We repeat this procedure 100 times.
Table 3 reports average estimates. The sequence of artificial data is the same for both the overi-
dentified case and the exactly identified case to facilitate comparisons across estimators.
   11
      To generate the artificial data set, we employ the same simulation procedure described in Steps 1-3 in Section
5.2 using the trade data from EK.



                                                        21
The first row presents the average value of our simulated method of moments estimate, which
is 8.27 with a standard error of 0.03. For all practical purposes, the estimation routine recovers
the true value of θ that generated the data. To emphasize our estimator’s performance, the next
two rows of Table 3 present the approach of EK (which also corresponds to the moments used).
Though not surprising given the discussion above, this approach generates estimates of θ that
are significantly (in both their statistical and economic meaning) higher than the true value of
θ of 8.28.

The final two rows present the exactly identified case when we use only one moment to es-
timate θ. In this case, we use β1 . Similar to the overidentified case, the average value of our
simulated method of moments estimate is 8.28 with a standard error of 0.04. Again, this is the
same as the true value of θ.

The second column reports the results when the true value of θ is set equal to 4.00. The esti-
mates using our estimator are 4.00 in both the overidentified and the exactly identified case,
respectively. Similar to the previous results, these values are equivalent to the true value of θ.
Furthermore, the alternative approaches that correspond to the moments that we used in our
estimation are biased away from the true value of θ.

We also compare our estimation approach to an alternative statistical approach to bias reduc-
tion. Robson and Whitlock (1964) propose a way to reduce the bias when estimating the trun-
cation point of a distribution. This problem is analogous to estimating the trade cost from
price differences. This can be seen by inspecting the integral in (13) of Lemma 1. Robson and
Whitlock’s (1964) approach would suggest (in our notation) an estimator of the trade cost of
   1      2
2τ̂ni − τ̂ni , or two times the first-order statistic minus the second-order statistic. This makes in-
tuitive sense because it increases the first-order statistic by the difference between the first- and
second-order statistic. They show that this estimator is as efficient as the first-order statistic but
with less bias.12

We apply their approach to approximate the trade friction and then use it as an input into the
simple method of moments estimator. Table 4 compares the results from this estimation pro-
cedure to the results obtained using our SMM estimator. The second row reports the results
when using Robson and Whitlock’s (1964) approach to reduce the bias. This approach reduces
the bias relative to using the first-order statistic (EK’s approach) reported in the third row. It is
not, however, a complete solution, as the estimates are still meaningfully higher than both the
true value of θ and the estimates from our estimation approach. Moreover, we should empha-
size Robson and Whitlock’s (1964) approach only appeal is its computational simplicity. The
fact that the approach does not depend on the explicit distributional assumptions is not a ben-
  12
    Robson and Whitlock (1964) provide more-general refinements using inner-order statistics, but methods using
inner-order statistics will have very low efficiency. Cooke (1979) provides an alternative bias reduction technique
but only considers cases in which the sample size (L in our notation) is large.


                                                        22
            Table 4: Comparison to Alternative Statistical Approaches to Bias Reduction

                                                True θ = 8.28                   True θ = 4.00
       Estimation Approach               Mean Estimate of θ (S.E.)        Mean Estimate of θ (S.E.)
       SMM                                        8.28 (0.04)                     4.00 (0.02)
       Robson and Whitlock (1964)               10.63 (0.06)                      5.14 (0.03)
       Moment, β1                               12.52 (0.05)                      6.03 (0.03)
   Note: In each simulation there are 19 countries, 150,000 goods and 100 simulations performed. The se-
   quence of artificial data is the same for all cases.



efit because without these assumptions the model does not yield a gravity equation. Without
gravity, it is not clear what structural parameter is being estimated, which calls into question
the entire enterprise.

Overall, we view these results as evidence supporting our estimation approach and empirical
estimates of θ presented in Section 6 below.


6. Empirical Results
In this section, we apply our estimation strategy described in Section 5 to several data sets. The
key finding of this section is that our approach yields an estimate around four, in contrast to
Eaton and Kortum’s (2002) estimation strategy, which results in an estimate around eight.

6.1. New ICP Data

Our sample contains 123 countries. We use trade flows and production data for the year 2004
to construct trade shares. The trade and production data and the construction of trade shares
are standard in the literature, so we relegate the details to Appendix 1.1. Instead, in this section,
we focus on the price data. To compute aggregate price indices and proxies for trade costs we
use basic-heading-level price data from the 2003-2005 round of the International Comparison
Program (ICP). Bradford (2003) and Bradford and Lawrence (2004) use earlier rounds of the ICP
price data to measure the degree of fragmentation, or the level of trade barriers, among OECD
countries. The authors, as well as Deaton and Heston (2010), provide an excellent description
of the data-collection process.

The ICP collects price data on goods with identical characteristics across retail locations in
the participating countries during the 2003-2005 period.13 The basic-heading level represents
a narrowly-defined group of goods for which expenditure data are available. The data set
  13
       The ICP Methodological Handbook is available at http://go.worldbank.org/6VPHKOKHG0



                                                    23
contains a total of 129 basic headings. Appendix 1.2 provides details on the procedure that
the ICP uses to construct the price of a basic heading. We reduce the sample to 62 tradable
categories based on their correspondence with the trade data that we employ. Table 20 lists the
62 basic headings used in the analysis.

We choose to work with this dataset for three reasons. First, the database provides extensive
coverage, as it includes as many as 123 developing and developed countries that account for
98 percent of world GDP. Second, the sampled goods span all categories of GDP and therefore
reflect a number of industries. Third, and most important, because this is the latest round of
the ICP, the measurement issues are less severe than in previous rounds.

We recognize that sources of price variation that are outside of the EK model are present in our
micro-level price dataset. We consider a number of these sources in later sections as part of our
robustness analysis. In the remainder of this section, however, we describe the nature of the
ICP price dataset and we provide useful references for the reader, since this database has not
been used extensively by the international trade literature in the past.

Considerable care is taken to ensure that the price data are properly collected and recorded.
Roberts (2012) details the extensive preparation and post-collection validation checks that are
performed on the ICP price data at both the national and the international level with the explicit
purpose of eliminating error in the pricing of products. The ICP addresses two types of errors:
product error, which refers to the failure to survey comparable products, and price error, which
refers to the failure to record the price of a product correctly.

To minimize product error, the products that appear on the survey are defined very precisely.
Deaton and Heston (2010) provide the following three examples of products (within basic head-
ings) whose prices are sampled across countries: (a) Nescafé classic: product presentation, tin
or glass jar, 100 grams: type, 100 percent Robusta: variety, instant coffee, caffeine, not decaf-
feinated: brand, Nestlé-Nescafé classic; (b) Boubou (item within womens clothing): product
specification, no package, 1 unit: fibre type, cotton 100 percent: production, small scale: type,
boubou: sleeve length, sleeveless: fabric design, brocade: details/features, embroidery; (c) light
bulb: product presentation, carton, 1 piece: type, regular: power 40 watts: brand name, indicate
brand.

If a product is unavailable, price collectors are instructed to collect the price of a substitute
product and record its characteristics. It is sometimes possible to adjust the price for qual-
ity differences between the product priced and the product specified. Alternatively, if other
countries report prices for the same substitute product, price comparisons can be made for the
substitute product as well as for the product originally specified. If neither of these options is
available, the price is discarded.

To minimize price error, the ICP validates the data via statistical methods aimed to iden-

                                                 24
tify potential outlying prices. Prices are then reconfirmed through additional data collection
and/or adjustments if the initial price cannot be verified. Outliers that are large in the statisti-
cal sense are discarded. Thus, while measurement error is always a concern, the methods and
approaches of the ICP are intended to minimize this error subject to feasibility.

Finally, the ICP does not randomly sample prices from the entire set of produced goods in the
world economy. Instead, it provides a common list of “representative” goods whose prices are
to be randomly sampled in each country over a certain period of time. A good is representative
of a country if it comprises a significant share of a typical consumer’s bundle there. Thus,
the ICP samples the prices of a common basket of goods that appear across countries, where
the goods have been pre-selected due to their highly informative content for the purpose of
international comparisons.

It is important to account for this feature of the ICP data in the estimation procedure that relies
on the EK model. We argue that EK’s model gives a natural common basket of goods to be
priced across countries. In the model, agents in all countries consume all goods that lie within a
fixed interval, [0, 1]. Thus, we consider this common list in the simulated model and randomly
sample the prices of its goods across countries, in order to approximate trade barriers, much
like it is done in the ICP data.

6.2. Baseline Results—ICP 2004 Data

Table 5 presents the results.14 The first row simply reports the moments that our estimation
procedure targets. As discussed, these values correspond with EK’s estimate of θ.


                              Table 5: Estimation Results With 2004 ICP Data

                                                       Estimate of θ (S.E.)          β1          β2

                      Data Moments                                —                 7.75         9.64

                      Exactly Identified Case               4.14 (0.09)             7.75         —

                      Overidentified Case                   4.10 (0.08)             7.67         9.65



The second row reports the results for exactly identified estimation, where the underlying mo-
ment used is β1 . In this case, our estimate of θ is 4.14, roughly half of EK’s estimate of θ.

The third row reports the results for the overidentified estimation. The estimate of θ is 4.10—
almost the same as in our exactly identified estimation and, again, roughly half of EK’s estimate.
  14
       The results from the Step 1 gravity regressions are presented in Table 16 and Table 19.


                                                           25
The second and third columns report the resulting moments from the estimation routine, which
are close to the data moments targeted.

It should be noted that our estimates of the trade elasticity imply that trade costs are very large.
Using the estimate that EK would arrive at from the ICP database—7.75—the median trade cost
across all countries is 3.3 with an inter-quartile range between 2.4 and 4.6. Using our estimate
of 4.14, the implied trade costs are substantially larger. The median trade cost is now 9.2 with
an inter-quartile range between 5.1 and 17.2. The overall size of these costs hides the relatively
low frictions between rich countries (recall that there are 123 countries in the ICP dataset, many
of which are very poor). For example, the median trade cost between only OECD countries
is only 3.2. This estimate is consistent with our estimates of trade frictions using the EK data,
which focuses only on rich/developed countries.

6.3. Estimates Using EK’s Data

In this section, we apply our estimation strategy to the same data used in EK as another check of
our estimation procedure. Their data set consists of bilateral trade data for 19 OECD countries
in 1990 and 50 prices of manufactured goods for all countries.15 The prices come from a study
conducted by the OECD. It is these same data that were included in a round of the ICP in the
early 1990’s. Similar to our data, the price data are at the basic-heading level and are for goods
with identical characteristics across retail locations in the participating countries.

                               Table 6: Estimation Results With EK’s Data

                                                    Estimate of θ (S.E.)        β1       β2

                     Data Moments                             —                5.93     8.28

                     Exactly Identified Case             3.93 (0.17)           5.93      —

                     Overidentified Case                 4.27 (0.16)           6.45     7.84



Table 6 presents the results.16 The first row simply reports the moments that our estimation
procedure targets. The entry in the third column corresponds with β2 , which is EK’s baseline
estimate of θ.

The second row reports the results for exactly identified estimation, where the underlying mo-
ment used is β1 . In this instance, our estimate of θ is 3.93, which is, again, roughly half of EK’s
estimate of θ. The standard error of our estimate is fairly tight.
  15
       The data are available here: http://home.uchicago.edu/kortum/papers/tgt/tgtprogs.htm.
  16
       The results from the Step 1 gravity regressions are presented in Table 17 and Table 19.

                                                       26
The third row reports the results for the overidentified estimation. Here, our estimate of θ is
4.27. Again, this is substantially below EK’s estimate. Unlike our results in Table 5 with newer
data, the overidentified case is giving a slightly different value than the exactly identified case
gives. This contrasts with the Monte Carlo evidence, which suggests that the estimation pro-
cedure should not deliver very different estimates. Furthermore, comparing the data moments
in the top row versus the implied moments in the second and third columns of the third row
suggests that the estimation routine is facing challenges fitting the observed moments. We view
this as pointing towards a problem with measurement error in the old data, as EK suggested.

Once again, there is a substantial difference between the implied trade barriers from EK’s and
our estimation. Using EK’s original estimate of 8.28, the median trade cost is 1.9 with an inter-
quartile range between 1.5 and 2.1. Using our estimate of 3.93, the median trade cost is 3.7 with
an inter-quartile range between 2.4 and 4.7. This estimate is about 100 percentage points larger
than Anderson and van Wincoop’s (2004) estimate that the total trade barrier is equivalent to a
170 percent ad-valorem tax equivalent, or a trade cost of 2.7.

6.4. Relation to Existing Literature

The elasticity of trade has been a focus of many studies. Below we discuss our method and
results in relation to alternatives in the literature. We focus our discussion first on alternative
procedures that use price variation to approximate trade frictions and then on gravity-based
estimators that use alternative proxies of trade frictions to estimate the trade elasticity.

EK provide a second estimate of the trade elasticity that amounts to 12.8.17 Our critique and
proposed solution apply to the estimator employed in this exercise as well. The critique applies
because the alternative estimation approach is based on the same measures of trade frictions
discussed above, which always underestimate the true trade friction. In Appendix C, we per-
form a Monte Carlo study where we find that EK’s alternative methodology yields estimates
that are nearly 100 percent higher than the true elasticity. Then, we employ a simulated method
of moments estimator that minimizes the distance between the moments from EK’s alternative
approach on real and artificial data. We find that the estimate of θ is 4.39, which is essentially
the same as our estimate in Table 6.

Donaldson (2009) estimates θ as well, and his approach is illuminating relative to the issues we
have raised. His strategy for approximating trade costs is to study differences in the price of salt
across locations in India. In principle, his approach is subject to our critique as well—i.e., how
could price differences in one good be informative about trade frictions? However, he argues
convincingly that in India, salt was produced in only a few locations and exported everywhere.
Thus, by examining salt, Donaldson (2009) finds a “binding good”. Using this approach, he
  17
   Waugh (2010b) estimates the trade elasticity as well using EK’s benchmark approach and hence our critique
and solution applies to his approach as well.

                                                    27
finds estimates in the range of 3.8-5.2, which is consistent with our range of estimates of θ.

Anderson and van Wincoop (2004) survey the literature on trade-elasticity estimates obtained
from gravity-based methods (which include EK’s approach) and they find that the estimates
range between five and ten. Excluding EK’s results, the evidence cited in Anderson and van
Wincoop (2004) comes from two alternative estimation approaches. The first uses second mo-
ments of changes in prices and expenditure shares, as in Feenstra (1994). The second uses the
gravity equation with direct measures of trade barriers (i.e. tariffs), as in Head and Ries (2001),
Baier and Bergstrand (2001), and Romalis (2007). We discuss each of these approaches in turn.

In Appendix D, we explore Feenstra’s (1994) method in the context of EK’s Ricardian model
with micro-level heterogeneity. We find that Feenstra’s (1994) method, as well as papers that
build on it such as Broda and Weinstein (2006), Imbs and Mejean (2010), and Feenstra, Obstfeld,
and Russ (2010), does not recover the elasticity of trade in EK’s Ricardian model with micro-
level heterogeneity. In particular, we apply Feenstra’s (1994) method to data generated from
EK’s model and we show that the method recovers the utility parameter ρ that controls the
elasticity of substitution across goods; not the trade elasticity θ. This utility parameter plays
no role in determining aggregate trade flows and welfare gains from trade in EK’s Ricardian
model with micro-level heterogeneity.18 Hence, elasticity estimates obtained using Feenstra’s
(1994) approach should not be used in quantitative analysis of Ricardian and monopolistic-
competition models with micro-level heterogeneity.19

The second set of estimates in Anderson and van Wincoop (2004) are obtained using direct
measures of trade barriers in the gravity equation of trade. This methodology typically yields
estimates in the range of five to ten and above. The estimates that Anderson and van Win-
coop (2004) report are obtained using time-series and cross-industry variation in tariffs and
trade flows during bilateral trade liberalization episodes as in Head and Ries (2001) and Ro-
malis (2007), or time-series variation in tariffs in the cross-section of countries as in Baier and
Bergstrand (2001). Recently, Caliendo and Parro (2011) build on these approaches and estimate
sectoral trade elasticities from cross-sectional variations in trade flows and tariffs.

The tariff-based estimation approach is appealing because of its simplicity and the appearance
of being model-free. However, in order to apply it to EK’s Ricardian model with micro-level
heterogeneity, the model must be able to generate a gravity equation. Given the model’s utility
specification, the assumption that productivity is drawn from a Fréchet distribution is crucial
to obtain this result, as Arkolakis, Costinot, and Rodriguez-Clare (2011) argue. Hence, both our
  18
     The parameter governs the elasticity of trade and welfare in models that do not feature micro-level hetero-
geneity such as the Anderson (1979) and Krugman (1980) models (see Arkolakis, Costinot, and Rodriguez-Clare
(2011)). In Simonovska and Waugh (2012), we show that our method can also recover this key parameter in the
two frameworks that do not feature micro-level heterogeneity.
  19
     Feenstra (2010) makes a similar argument in the context of the Melitz (2003) model when parameterized as in
Chaney (2008).


                                                      28
methodology and the approach that uses tariffs share the same parametric restrictions in order
to be applied to EK’s Ricardian model.

Admittedly, there is a substantial difference between the values of the elasticity that are typi-
cally obtained using the tariff-based versus our approach. In particular, Head and Ries (2001),
Romalis (2007), and Baier and Bergstrand (2001) find values in the range of five to ten, while
our benchmark estimates center around four. The corollary is that low values of the elasticity
imply large deviations between observed trade frictions (tariffs, transportation costs, etc.) and
those inferred from trade flows.

There are two pieces of evidence in support of the values that we find. First, Parro (2013) uses
the approach of Caliendo and Parro (2011) to estimate an aggregate trade elasticity for capital
goods and non-capital, traded goods. He finds estimates of 4.6 and 5.2 with a standard error of
0.27 and 0.29. These point estimates are only modestly larger than ours. Thus, there are tariff
based estimates of the elasticity that are consistent with our findings.

Second, our results compare favorably with alternative estimates of the shape parameter of the
productivity distribution, θ, that are not obtained from gravity-based estimators. For example,
estimates of the shape parameter from firm-level sales data, as in Bernard, Eaton, Jensen, and
Kortum (2003) and Eaton, Kortum, and Kramarz (2011), are in the range of 3.6 to 4.8—exactly
in the range of values that we find. Burstein and Vogel (2009) estimate θ matching moments
regarding the skill intensity of trade and find a value of five. The identifying source of variation
in Bernard, Eaton, Jensen, and Kortum (2003) and Eaton, Kortum, and Kramarz (2011) comes
from firm-level data, which suggest that there is a lot of variation in firm productivity. The data
in our paper are telling a similar story: price variation (once properly corrected) suggests that
there is a lot of variation in productivity implying a relatively low trade elasticity.

Finally, we want to point out that, like methods that use tariffs and the gravity equation, our
methodological approach is not specific to EK’s model. The methodology and the moments that
we use to estimate the trade elasticity within EK’s Ricardian framework can be derived from
other structural gravity models of trade that feature product differentiation. In Simonovska
and Waugh (2012), we demonstrate the applicability of our estimator to the Anderson (1979)
and Krugman (1980) models, the Ricardian framework with variable mark-ups of Bernard,
Eaton, Jensen, and Kortum (2003), and the monopolistic-competition model of Melitz (2003)
as articulated in Chaney (2008).

Our main finding is that different models—estimated to fit the same moments in the data—
imply different trade elasticities. The key insight behind the result is that the different margins
of adjustment in new trade models, e.g., an extensive margin or variable markups, alter the
mapping from the price data to the estimate of the trade elasticity. For example, in Bernard,
Eaton, Jensen, and Kortum (2003), mark-ups are negatively correlated with marginal costs im-


                                                 29
plying that the same degree in cost variation results in smaller variation of prices relative to
EK. Hence, the maximal price difference lies further below the trade friction relative to the EK
model and an even lower trade elasticity is needed to rationalize the same amount of trade ob-
served in the data. Thus, the presence of variable markups yields a lower estimate of the trade
elasticity and, hence, larger welfare gains from trade.


7. Robustness
In this section, we conduct a variety of exercises to verify the robustness of our benchmark
estimates of the trade elasticity. First, we discuss some computational issues regarding the
number of goods in the simulation. Second, we explore the sensitivity of our results to different
assumptions regarding the functional form that trade costs take. Third, we apply estimation ap-
proaches that are based on different moment conditions than the ones employed above. Fourth,
we allow for additional sources of variation in the price data that are not captured by the EK
model. In particular, we discuss issues that relate to distribution costs, mark-ups, good-specific
trade costs, product quality, and aggregation, and the possible biases that they may introduce
in our estimation.

7.1. The Number of Goods

The estimation routine requires us to take a stand on the number of goods in the economy. We
argue that the appropriate way to view this issue is to ask: how many goods are needed to nu-
merically approximate the infinite number of goods in the model? Thus, the number of goods
chosen should be judged on the accuracy of the approximation relative to the computational
cost. The choice of the number of goods should not be judged on the basis of how many goods
actually exist in the “real world” because this value is impossible to know or discipline.

To understand our argument, recall that our estimation routine is based on a moment condition
that compares a biased estimate from the data with a biased estimate using artificial data. In
Section 3.4, we argued that the bias depends largely on the expected value of the max over a
finite sample of price differences—i.e., the integral of the left-hand side of equation (13). Thus,
when we compute the biased estimate using artificial data, we are effectively computing this
integral via simulation.20 This suggests that the number of goods should be chosen in a way
that delivers an accurate approximation of the integral. Furthermore, a way to judge if the
number of goods selected delivers an appropriate approximation is to increase the number of
goods until the estimate of θ does not change too much.

Table 7 reports the results of this analysis. It shows how our estimate of θ varies as the number
  20
   An alternative estimation strategy would be to use different numerical methods to compute the integrals (13)
and then to adjust the EK estimator given this value.



                                                      30
                            Table 7: Results with Different # of Goods

       Number of Goods                                   1,000 5,000 25,000 100,000 150,000∗

       EK’s Data, Exactly Identified Case, θ̂            4.57   4.13    3.99      3.93       3.93

       Fraction of Wrong Zeros                           0.29   0.10    0.03     0.005      0.003

       Fraction of Correct Zeros                          —     —        —         —          —

       2004 ICP Data, Exactly Identified Case, θ̂        6.54   5.43    4.67      4.22       4.14

       Fraction of Wrong Zeros                           0.63   0.46    0.31      0.21       0.18

       Fraction of Correct Zeros                         0.93   0.85    0.72      0.55       0.50



of goods in the economy changes, using the EK data and the 2004 ICP data. For the EK data,
notice that our estimates vary little above 5,000 goods. Moreover, the estimates are effectively
the same after the number of goods is above 100,000, suggesting that this is a reasonable starting
point.

The results obtained using the 2004 ICP data, which feature 123 countries, vary more depend-
ing upon the number of goods used. While the change from 4.22 to 4.12 when going from
100,000 to 150,000 goods is numerically large, computational costs force our hand to settle on
150,000 as the number of goods in the economy.21

Table 7 also reports a side effect of using a low number of goods—zero trade flows between
countries predicted by the model in places where we observe positive trade flows in the data.
The reason for zero trade flows is that the probability of no trade occurring between any two
country pairs is increasing with a more “sparse” approximation of the continuum of goods.
This result is consistent with Armenter and Koren (2010) and their emphasis on the sparsity of
trade data in accounting for zeros in trade flows.

Table 7 reports the fraction of zeros that the model produces in instances where there are pos-
itive trade flows observed in the data. With only 5,000 goods, using the 2004 ICP data set, in
almost half of the instances where trade flows are observed in the data, the model generates a
zero. While not as severe, ten percent of positive trade flows are assigned zeros with the EK
data. Results of this nature suggest increasing the number of goods to minimize the number of
wrong zeros, though at the cost of getting some observed zeros incorrect.

  21
    The reason is that 150,000 goods is near the maximum number of goods feasible while still being able to
execute the simulation routine in parallel on a multi-core machine.




                                                    31
7.2. Trade Cost Functional Form

This section explores how the results depend upon our assumptions about the particular func-
tional form that trade costs take. Overall, we find that our main results are robust to alternative
trade-cost representations.

In Step 2. of our estimation we specified a particular functional form (equation (23)) for the
trade costs. To explore the sensitivity of our results to this assumption we consider two alter-
native approaches.

First, we rely on the functional form for trade costs that was employed by EK

                                     log τ̂ni = dk + bni + mn .                                (28)

The functional form mimics the one used throughout the paper except for the presence of an
importer fixed effect rather than the exporter fixed effect (mn vs. exi ). This term allows the
trade-cost level to vary depending upon the importer rather than the exporter as in the main
results of the paper. As discussed in Waugh (2010b), the model-implied trade flows using this
functional form will not differ from the baseline specification; the differences lie in the way
in which the trade costs co-vary with country pairs and the Ŝ’s estimated from the gravity
regression.

Second, we re-estimate the trade elasticity without imposing any functional form on the trade
costs. In particular, we back out the scaled trade costs as a residual from Equation (7)
                                                              
                                         1           Xni /Xn
                              log τ̂ni = − log                     − log P̂i + log P̂n ,       (29)
                                          θ̂         Xii /Xi
                                                      L
                                                 1X
                              where log P̂i =          log(pi (ℓ)).
                                                 L ℓ=1

So given value of θ̂, trade flow data, and proxies for aggregate price indices, we recover trade
costs as a residual from (29). What remains is to recover the implied Ŝ parameters (necessary
to simulate marginal costs) that are consistent with these trade costs. To do so, note that there
is a log-linear relationship between the Ŝ’s, a country’s price index, and its home trade share,

                         Ŝi = log Ti wi−θ = −θ̂ log P̂i + log (Xii /Xi ) ,
                                         
                                                                                               (30)

which allows us to recover the Ŝ parameters. We should note that these Ŝ parameters are
recovered in a way so that the model will exactly (up to any simulation error) replicate the
observed trade flows and aggregate price indices.



                                                      32
             Table 8: Alternative Trade Cost Functional Forms: Estimation Results

           Data Set         Functional Form                             Estimate of θ (S.E.)

                            Baseline                                        3.93 (0.17)

           EK Data          EK Functional Form                              3.93 (0.17)

                            No Functional Form/Residual                     3.96 (0.18)

                            Baseline                                        4.14 (0.09)

           ICP Data         EK Functional Form                              4.14 (0.09)

                            No Functional Form/Residual                     4.46 (0.12)
        Note: Exactly identified case used across all specifications.



Table 8 presents the results. The top panel reports the results using the EK data under the
baseline specification, the EK functional form, and the residual-based specification. Across all
cases, the estimate of θ is effectively the same as in the baseline case, i.e. around 4. The ICP
results tell a similar story. The bottom panel reports the results using the ICP data set under the
three different trade-cost specifications. Similar to the results with the EK data set, the estimate
using the EK functional form is virtually indistinguishable from the one obtained using the
Waugh (2010b) functional form; the residual based specification is only slightly larger (4.46 vs.
4.14) than the baseline.

7.3. Alternative Moment Conditions

In this section, we explore an alternative moment condition to estimate θ. The alternative mo-
ment condition that we explore uses more information about price dispersion between coun-
tries to estimate θ. The idea is to compute the average variance in prices between two countries
rather than to study the maximal price difference only. In other words, we are using more infor-
mation about the entire price distribution than just the max. Note that it is not a priori obvious
how our baseline estimate of θ should relate to the estimate that is based upon the alternative
moment condition. Hence, this robustness exercise is a strong cross-check on our results.

To operationalize this idea, we define the moment

                                  1  XX
                         ψ=               varni (log pn (ℓ) − log pi (ℓ)) .
                               N2 − N n i

In particular, for a country pair, we compute the variance of log price differences and then we


                                                       33
average across all country pairs (not including own pairs) to arrive at ψ. Given the moment ψ
constructed from the data, we then form the following zero function
                                               "      S
                                                                  #
                                                   1 X
                                     y A (θ) = ψ −       ψ(θ, us ) ,                            (31)
                                                   S s=1

with the alternative moment condition

                                              E y A (θo ) = 0.
                                                        




                    Table 9: Alternative Moment Conditions: Estimation Results

         Data Set         Estimation Approach             Estimate of θ (S.E.)   Data Moments

                          Baseline                             3.93 (0.17)           5.93

         EK Data          Alternative                          4.40 (0.16)           0.10

                          Baseline                             4.14 (0.09)           7.75

         ICP Data         Alternative                          3.59 (0.06)           0.19
       Note: Exactly identified case used across all specifications.



Table 9 presents the results. The first panel reports the results using the EK data set for the
baseline and alternative moment conditions. The second panel reports the results using the
ICP data set. The results using the average variance in bilateral price differences are in the
same ballpark as the baseline estimates. As discussed above, we should not expect them to be
the same given that the alternative approach incorporates significantly more information about
price dispersion than does the baseline. However, it is reassuring that the different features of
the data are telling a similar story.

Finally, we explored an alternative estimation based on the moment 1/β1 , instead of β1 . The
idea behind this moment condition is to bring the estimation closer to our theoretical results in
Section 3 which centered around 1/β1 . In the exactly identified estimation, we found that the
baseline estimates and the estimates based on the inverse of the moment β1 are effectively the
same regardless of the data set used. The details and results from this exercise are available
upon request.




                                                        34
                           Table 10: Results with Measurement Error

         Measurement Error, σ                              0     0.01    0.05    0.10    0.20

         EK’s Data, Exactly Identified Case, θ̂          3.93    3.94    4.27    4.38    6.44

         2004 ICP Data, Exactly Identified Case, θ̂      4.14    4.15    4.20    4.39    5.59
        Note: Estimates of θ are under the assumption that observed prices pi (j) in logs equal
        log(pi (j)) = log(p̂i (j)) + ǫ with ǫ ∼ N (0, σ) where p̂i (j) is the true price.



7.4. Additional Sources of Price Variation

The price data that we employ in our benchmark analysis constitute the 2003-2005 round of
the ICP. Although the goal of the ICP is to minimize measurement error and to collect prices
of comparable products across countries, the reported prices likely reflect additional sources
of variation that are not captured by the EK model. In this section, we discuss issues that
relate to measurement error, distribution costs, mark-ups, good-specific trade costs, product
quality, and aggregation, and the possible biases that they may introduce in our estimation. We
conclude that these sources of price variation potentially affect our estimation in various and
different directions. Thus, in order to address them, one would need to take a stand on the
mechanism that potentially generates them and incorporate it in the estimation procedure. The
advantage of our simulation-based estimator that relies on a model is that it can accommodate
these extensions. Below, we preview how various mechanisms may affect the results and we
offer further avenues of research on this topic.

Random Measurement Error. In our estimation, non-systematic measurement error in the
price data (mean-zero measurement error) may artificially generate larger maximal price differ-
ences than implied by the underlying model. This would result in estimates of θ that are biased
downwards. To address this issue, we introduce additive log-normal measurement error to the
artificial prices in our simulation routine and we re-estimate θ as described in Section 5. This
exercise allows us to quantify the sensitivity of our results to assumptions about the extent of
measurement error in the data.

Table 10 presents the results from this exercise. Each column presents the estimates of θ for
different magnitudes of measurement error, σ, where σ is the standard deviation of the error.
The leftmost column with σ = 0 reproduces our benchmark exactly-identified results. Table
10 shows that our estimates increase with the extent of measurement error, which is consistent
with the intuition described above. However, only when measurement error is large do our es-
timates change in economically meaningful amounts. For example, with σ = 0.20 our estimate


                                                   35
                Table 11: Max Price Differences and Distance: Data and Model

        Elasticity w.r.t. Distance            Data           Model (σ = 0)         Model (σ = 0.20)

        EK Data                          0.12 (0.015)         0.08 (0.024)            0.03 (0.015)

        2004 ICP Data                    0.10 (0.004)         0.07 (0.014)            0.05 (0.010)
                                                                    n       o
                                                                        (ℓ)
      Note: The dependent variable is the logarithm of τ̂ = maxℓ∈L ppni (ℓ)   and this is regressed on the
      logarithm of distance, a shared border indicator, and country fixed effects. Standard errors are in
      parenthesis.



of θ is 6.44 in EK’s data and 5.59 in the 2004 ICP data. This amount of measurement error is
large as it implies that 30 percent of all prices are mismeasured by 20 percent or more.

While measurement error can meaningfully affect our results, we argue that substantial mea-
surement error (i.e. σ = 0.20) is implausible for two reasons. First, as discussed in Section 6,
the ICP performs extensive validation checks of the price data (at least in the 2003-2005 round)
at both the national and international level with the explicit purpose of eliminating error in
the pricing of products. Second, if maximal price differences reflected measurement error, then
they should be relatively uncorrelated with distance, other gravity variables, and trade shares.
However, we do not observe this in the data.

The first row of Table 11 reports the results from the regression of log maximal price differences
on log distance and other controls. The first column of Table 11 shows that maximal price
differences are positively correlated with distance with an elasticity of 0.12 and 0.10 in the EK
and in the 2004 ICP data. Both coefficients are statically different from zero and the magnitudes
of the elasticity are similar to the findings in Donaldson (2009). The second and third columns
of Table 11 report the results of the same regressions using artificial data generated from the
estimated model (both to EK data and 2004 ICP data) with and without measurement error.
Table 11 shows that the model with large measurement error predicts elasticities that are 30 to
60 percent lower relative to the model with no measurement error. Relative to the data, the
model with measurement error yields elasticities that are 50 to 75 percent lower. These results
suggest that substantial measurement error is inconsistent with observed correlations between
maximal price differences and distance.

Good-Specific Trade Costs. Our estimation abstracts from good-specific trade costs by follow-
ing the approach of EK and focusing on the estimation of an aggregate θ. The potential cost of
this abstraction is that good-specific trade costs may bias the estimate of θ in various ways.



                                                      36
Mode choice (i.e. air, land, sea) to transport goods is a natural mechanism which will lead trade
costs to differ across goods. As Hummels (2007) documents, different goods are shipped by
different means across borders. Some goods are transported expensively by air, while others are
transported cheaply by sea. Oftentimes, the characteristics of the good motivate the differences
in shipping modes.

Lux (2012) studies the endogenous choice of shipping mode in an extended EK framework with
good- and mode-specific trade costs. The key feature of his model is that the good-specific com-
ponent of trade costs depends upon the shipping mode. In the model, consumers who source
a good choose both the low-cost supplier (as in EK) and the low-cost mode of shipment. An
implication of Lux’s (2012) model is that the no-arbitrage condition in (10) should be modified
with relative prices bounded by the lowest trade cost across different modes. This implies that
our estimate of θ (which abstracts from good-specific trade costs) is an upper bound. Lux (2012),
however, argues that the variation in his estimates of the mode-specific component is small and
thus our estimate of θ is unlikely to be biased by economically meaningful amounts.

It is important to note, however, that the presence of good-specific trade costs does not alter
our critique of EK’s estimator and their estimates of θ. Moreover, our method is applicable to
an industry- or a narrowly-defined product-level where presumably good-specific trade costs
are less of a concern. One could use a multi-sector EK model (along the lines of Levchenko
and Zhang (2011) or Caliendo and Parro (2011)), estimate θ’s at the industry level, and then
compute an aggregate θ parameter. In fact, recently, Giri, Yi, and Yilmazkuday (2013) rely on
OECD cross-country micro data on prices for 1400 goods, each of which is mapped into one of
21 manufacturing sectors, as well as bilateral trade flows for each of these sectors to estimate
sectoral trade elasticities using the method that we develop in this paper.

Distribution Costs and Markups. The price data used in our estimation were collected at the
retail level. These prices may reflect local distribution costs, sales taxes, and mark-ups. As long
as the frictions are multiples over marginal costs of production and they are country- but not
good-specific, they will not affect our estimates of the elasticity parameter. Mathematically, one
can see this by noting that any multiplicative country-specific effect cancels out in the denom-
inator of equation (12). This is an important reason for using β as a moment in our estimation
routine rather than some other moment.

What if these effects are not multiplicative? For example, Burstein, Neves, and Rebelo (2003)
present a model where distribution margins over tradable goods are additive. To understand
the effects of additive distribution margins, we carry out the experiment described in Section
4: we simulate trade flows and samples of micro-level prices under a known θ and then we
introduce additive distribution costs and study the bias that may arise.

The Monte Carlo exercise shows that the bias in β relative to θ is larger than in the cases when


                                                37
additive distribution costs are not present. The reason is that additive distribution costs increase
low prices proportionally more than high prices, so the maximum price difference is smaller
than it would be otherwise. Because of the strong monotonicity between β and θ, this suggests
that incorporating additive distribution costs to the estimation would make our estimates of θ
even lower.

Mark-ups that are not only country-, but also firm/retailer-specific is an important issue that
is beyond the scope of this paper. However, in Simonovska and Waugh (2012), we apply the
estimator developed in this paper to Bernard, Eaton, Jensen, and Kortum’s (2003) Ricardian
framework which features variable markups. The exercise yields lower estimates of the trade
elasticity relative to the EK model. The crucial observation is that because mark-ups are neg-
atively correlated with marginal costs in Bernard, Eaton, Jensen, and Kortum (2003), the same
degree in cost variation results in smaller variation of prices relative to EK. Hence, the maximal
price difference lies further below the trade friction relative to the EK model and an even lower
trade elasticity is needed to rationalize the same amount of trade observed in the data.

Variable mark-ups may also arise in monopolistic-competition frameworks with micro-level
heterogeneity and non-homothetic consumer preferences as in Simonovska (2010). In this
model, the relative price of identical goods across countries reflects trade barriers and mini-
mum productivity thresholds necessary to serve each destination, where the latter summarize
the effects that destination-specific characteristics have on the level of competition in each mar-
ket. Two important points need to be made with respect to this model. First, although maxi-
mal price differences are not necessarily bounded above by trade barriers in this model, order
statistics from the relative price distribution remain to be informative about trade barriers. Sec-
ond, since preferences are non-homothetic, the trade elasticity and the domestic expenditure
share are no longer sufficient statistics to quantify the welfare gains from trade (see Arkolakis,
Costinot, Donaldson, and Rodriguez-Clare (2012)). Consequently, we leave it for future re-
search to extend the methodology developed in the present paper to trade models that feature
non-homothetic preferences.

Varying Product Quality. Our estimation relies on cross-country variation in prices of goods
in order to identify trade costs and ultimately trade elasticities. One may be concerned that
relative prices of goods across countries reflect not only trade costs, but also varying product
quality. For example, Baldwin and Harrigan (2011), Johnson (2012), and Manova and Zhang
(2012) use free-on-board unit value data to argue that richer countries import goods of higher
quality from a given source. It is important to note that these studies employ unit values from
highly disaggregated trade data as proxies for prices of individual goods.

In contrast, we use the basic-heading-level price data from the 2003-2005 round of the ICP in
our study. As described in Section 6, the ICP collects prices of precisely-defined products with


                                                38
identical characteristics across retail locations in the participating countries. With the method-
ologies and practices employed by the ICP in mind, it is reasonable to argue that varying prod-
uct quality is not a first-order concern in our data. Moreover, varying product quality should
be even less of a concern among countries of similar levels of development. To illustrate this
point, we repeat the overidentified estimation using price and trade-flow data for the thirty
largest countries in terms of absorption in our dataset. The resulting estimate of the trade elas-
ticity is 4.21, which compares favorably to the benchmark estimates obtained using data on all
123 countries.

Aggregation. The basic-heading price data employed in our analysis are disaggregated; but,
they are not at the individual-good level. For example, a price observation titled “rice” contains
the average price across different types of rice sampled, such as basmati rice, wild rice, whole-
grain rice, etc. Suppose that basmati rice is the binding good for a pair of countries. In the ICP
data, we compute the difference between the average price of rice between the two countries,
which is smaller than the price difference of basmati rice, if the remaining types of rice are
more equally priced across the two countries. In this case, trade barriers are underestimated
and, consequently, the elasticity of trade is biased upwards.

To quantify the bias in our estimates that is associated with aggregation, we conduct a robust-
ness exercise using the Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU) data. The EIU surveys the prices
of individual goods across various cities in two types of retail stores: mid-priced, or branded
stores, and supermarkets, or chain stores. The dataset contains the nominal prices of goods and
services, reported in local currency, as well as nominal exchange rates relative to the US dol-
lar, which are recorded at the time of the survey. Crucini, Telmer, and Zachariadis (2003) and
Crucini and Yilmazkuday (2009) use the same data to study the determinants of the deviations
from the law of one price across cities and countries.

The database spans a subset of 71 countries from our original data set, but provides prices for
110 individual tradable goods. Table 21 lists the 110 goods used in the analysis. While in the
majority of the countries, price surveys are conducted in a single major city, in 17 of the 71
countries multiple cities are surveyed.22 For these countries, we use the price data from the city
which provided the maximum coverage of goods. In most instances, the location that satisfied
this requirement was the largest city in the country. We use prices collected in mid-priced
stores in the year 2004 and we combine them with the observations on trade and output from
the benchmark analysis.23

Table 12 presents estimates of the elasticity parameter using EIU’s good-level price data set.
The results from the Step 1 gravity regressions are presented in Table 18 and Table 19. The
  22
     These countries are Australia, Canada, China, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, New Zealand, Russian
Federation, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Spain, Switzerland, United Kingdom, USA, and Vietnam.
  23
     The results are robust to using supermarket price data for the same year.


                                                     39
                         Table 12: Estimation Results With EIU Data

                                            Estimate of θ (S.E.)      β1      β2

                Data Moments                         —               4.39    5.23

                Exactly Identified Case         2.82 (0.06)          4.39     —

                Overidentified Case             2.79 (0.05)          4.39    5.24



estimates of the elasticity of trade that we obtain from the good-level price data for the subset
of 71 countries range between 2.79 and 2.82. As a point of comparison, using the same 71
countries but the ICP price data yields estimates of 3.98 and 4.05, respectively. This finding
suggests that the benchmark estimates are potentially biased upwards due to aggregation.

To quantify the bias, we aggregate the individual goods in the EIU dataset to the basic-heading
level at which the ICP data are reported. To do so, we first assigned each good in the EIU
dataset to one of the 62 basic headings employed in the ICP data. The procedure yields 41
non-zero good categories, with the mode category having 12 products. We then aggregated
prices by taking the geometric average across the price of each good within each category. The
elasticity estimates increase modestly to 3.04-3.08. This result suggests that aggregation bias is
not a first-order concern in the benchmark analysis which relies on the ICP data.

While aggregation is a (small) shortcoming of the ICP data, key benefits of the database are that
it offers a wide coverage of both goods and countries, it is readily comparable to the price data
employed by EK, and it is least prone to measurement error as discussed in Roberts (2012).
Hence, it is reasonable to favor our benchmark estimates of the trade elasticity, which center
around four.


8. Conclusion
In this paper we develop a new methodology to estimate the elasticity of trade that builds
on EK’s Ricardian model of international trade with micro-level heterogeneity. We apply our
estimator to novel disaggregate price and trade-flow data for the year 2004, which span 123
countries that account for 98 percent of world GDP. Across numerous exercises, we obtain es-
timates of the trade elasticity that range between 2.79 to 4.46. These values are both lower
and fall within a narrower range relative to the existing literature. Our findings imply that the
measured welfare gains from international trade are twice as high as previously documented.




                                               40
References
A LVAREZ , F., AND R. J. L UCAS (2007): “General Equilibrium Analysis of the Eaton-Kortum
  Model of International Trade,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(6), 1726–1768.

A NDERSON , J.,    AND     E.   VAN   W INCOOP (2004): “Trade Costs,” Journal of Economic Literature,
  42(3), 691–751.

A NDERSON , J. E. (1979): “A Theoretical Foundation for the Gravity Equation,” American Eco-
  nomic Review, 69(1), 106–16.

A RKOLAKIS , C., A. C OSTINOT, D. D ONALDSON , AND A. R ODRIGUEZ -C LARE (2012): “The
  Elusive Pro-Competitive Effects of Trade,” MIT, mimeo.

A RKOLAKIS , C., A. C OSTINOT,         AND   A. R ODRIGUEZ -C LARE (2011): “New Trade Models, Same
  Old Gains?,” American Economic Review (forthcoming).

A RMENTER , R.,      AND   M. K OREN (2010): “A Balls-and-Bins Model of Trade,” CEPR Discussion
  Papers 7783, C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers.

B AIER , S., AND J. B ERGSTRAND (2001): “The Growth of World Trade: Tariffs, Transport Costs,
  and Income Similarity,” Journal of International Economics, 53(1), 1–27.

B ALDWIN , R., AND J. H ARRIGAN (2011): “Zeros, Quality, and Space: Trade Theory and Trade
  Evidence,” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 3(2), 60–88.

B ERNARD , A., J. E ATON , J. B. J ENSEN ,       AND   S. K ORTUM (2003): “Plants and Productivity in
  International Trade,” American Economic Review, 93(4), 1268–1290.

B RADFORD , S. (2003): “Paying the Price: Final Goods Protection in OECD Countries,” The
  Review of Economics and Statistics, 85(1), 24–37.

B RADFORD , S., AND R. Z. L AWRENCE (2004): Has Globalization Gone Far Enough: The Costs
   of Fragmented Markets, no. 349 in Peterson Institute Press: All Books. Peterson Institute for
   International Economics.

B RODA , C.,   AND   D. W EINSTEIN (2006): “Globalization and the Gains from Variety,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 121(2).

B URSTEIN , A., J. N EVES , AND S. R EBELO (2003): “Distribution costs and real exchange rate
  dynamics during exchange-rate-based stabilizations,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 50(6),
  1189–1214.

B URSTEIN , A.,   AND   J. V OGEL (2009): “Globalization, Technology, and the Skill Premium,” Dis-
  cussion paper.

                                                       41
C ALIENDO , L.,      AND   F. PARRO (2011): “Estimates of the Trade and Welfare Effects of NAFTA,”
  mimeo.

C HANEY, T. (2008): “Distorted Gravity: The Intensive and Extensive Margins of International
  Trade,” American Economic Review, 98(4), 1707–1721.

C OOKE , P. (1979): “Statistical inference for bounds of random variables,” Biometrika, 66(2), 367.

C OSTINOT, A., D. D ONALDSON , AND I. K OMUNJER (2011): “What Goods Do Countries Trade?
  A Quantitative Exploration of Ricardo’s Ideas,” Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.

C RUCINI , M. J., C. T ELMER , AND M. Z ACHARIADIS (2003): “Price dispersion: The role of dis-
  tance, borders and location,” GSIA Working Papers 2004-E25, Carnegie Mellon University,
  Tepper School of Business.

C RUCINI , M. J.,    AND   H. Y ILMAZKUDAY (2009): “A Model of International Cities: Implications
  for Real Exchange Rates,” Working Paper 14834, National Bureau of Economic Research.

D AVIDSON , R., AND J. M AC K INNON (2004): Econometric Theory and Methods. New York: Oxford
  University Press.

D EATON , A., AND A. H ESTON (2010): “Understanding PPPs and PPP-Based National Ac-
  counts,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2(4), 1–35.

D ONALDSON , D. (2009): “Railroads of the Raj: Estimating the Economic Impact of Transporta-
  tion Infrastructure,” unpublished paper, MIT.

E ATON , J.,   AND   S. K ORTUM (2002): “Technology, Geography, and Trade,” Econometrica, 70(5),
  1741–1779.

E ATON , J., S. K ORTUM ,       AND   F. K RAMARZ (2011): “An Anatomy of International Trade: Evi-
  dence from French Firms,” Econometrica (forthcoming).

F EENSTRA , R. (1994): “New product varieties and the measurement of international prices,”
   The American Economic Review, 84(1), 157–177.

         (2010): Product Variety and the Gains from International Trade. MIT Press.

F EENSTRA , R. C., M. O BSTFELD ,        AND   K. N. R USS (2010): “In Search of the Armington Elastic-
  ity,” University of California - Davis, unpublished mimeo.

G IRI , R., K.-M. Y I ,   AND   H. Y ILMAZKUDAY (2013): “Sectoral Heterogeneity and the Gains from
   Trade,” mimeo.



                                                      42
G OURI ÉROUX , C., AND A. M ONFORT (1996): Simulation-based econometric methods, CORE lec-
  tures. Oxford University Press.

H AYASHI , F. (2000): Econometrics. Princeton.

H EAD , K.,   AND    J. R IES (2001): “Increasing Returns versus National Product Differentiation as
  an Explanation for the Pattern of U.S.-Canada Trade,” American Economic Review, 91(4), 858–
  876.

H UMMELS , D. (2007): “Transportation Costs and International Trade in the Second Era of Glob-
  alization,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(3).

I MBS , J.,   AND   I. M EJEAN (2010): “Trade Elasticities,” Paris School of Economics, unpublished
  mimeo.

J OHNSON , R. C. (2012): “Trade and prices with heterogeneous firms,” Journal of International
  Economics, 86(1), 43 – 56.

K RUGMAN , P. (1980): “Scale Economies, Product Differentiation, and the Pattern of Trade,”
  American Economic Review, 70(5), 950–959.

L EVCHENKO , A. A., AND J. Z HANG (2011): “The Evolution of Comparative Advantage: Mea-
   surement and Welfare Implications,” Working Paper 16806, National Bureau of Economic
  Research, Inc.

L UX , M. (2012): “Defying Gravity: The Substitutability of Transportation in International
  Trade,” unpublished manuscript.

M AC K INNON , J. G., AND A. A. S MITH (1998): “Approximate bias correction in econometrics,”
 Journal of Econometrics, 85(2), 205–230.

M ANOVA , K., AND Z. Z HANG (2012): “Export Prices Across Firms and Destinations,” The Quar-
 terly Journal of Economics, 127(1), 379–436.

M ELITZ , M. J. (2003): “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
  Industry Productivity,” Econometrica, 71(6), 1695–1725.

M UENDLER , M.-A. (2009): “Converter from SITC to ISIC,” University of California - San Diego,
  unpublished mimeo.

PARRO , F. (2013): “Capital-Skill Complementarity and the Skill Premium in a Quantitative
  Model of Trade,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 5(2), 72–117.




                                                   43
R OBERTS , D. (2012): “Validation of ICP Regional Prices and Basic Heading PPPs,” chap. 9,
  Measuring the Real Size of the World Economy The Framework, Methodology, and Results
  of the International Comparison Program (ICP).

R OBSON , D.,   AND   J. W HITLOCK (1964): “Estimation of a truncation point,” Biometrika, 51(1-2),
  33.

R OMALIS , J. (2007): “NAFTA’s and CUSFTA’s Impact on International Trade,” Review of Eco-
  nomics and Statistics, 89(3), 416–35.

S ILVA , J. M. C. S., AND S. T ENREYRO (2006): “The Log of Gravity,” The Review of Economics and
   Statistics, 88(4), 641–658.

S IMONOVSKA , I. (2010): “Income Differences and Prices of Tradables,” Working Paper 16233,
   National Bureau of Economic Research.

S IMONOVSKA , I., AND M. WAUGH (2012): “Different Trade Models, Different Trade Elastici-
   ties,” New York University and University of California - Davis, mimeo.

S MITH , A. (2008): “Indirect inference,” The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 2nd Edition
  (forthcoming).

WAUGH , M. (2010a): “Bilateral Trade, Relative Prices, and Trade Costs,” unpublished paper,
  NYU.

WAUGH , M. E. (2010b): “International Trade and Income Differences,” American Economic Re-
 view, 100(5), 2093–2124.



A. Data Appendix

1.1. Trade Shares

To construct trade shares, we used bilateral trade flows and production data as follows:

                      Xni                    Importsni
                          =                                              ,
                      Xn    Gross Mfg. Productionn − Exportsn + Importsn
                              N
                    Xnn      X    Xni
                        = 1−          .
                    Xn       k6=n
                                  X n


Putting the numerator and denominator together is simply computing an expenditure share by
dividing the value of goods country n imported from country i by the total value of goods in


                                                 44
country n. The home trade share XXnnn
                                      is simply constructed as the residual from one minus the
sum of all bilateral expenditure shares.

To construct XXnin , the numerator is the aggregate value of manufactured goods that country n
imports from country i. Bilateral trade-flow data are from UN Comtrade for the year 2004. We
obtain all bilateral trade flows for our sample of 123 countries at the four-digit SITC level. We
then used concordance tables between four-digit SITC and three-digit ISIC codes provided by
the UN and further modified by Muendler (2009).24 We restrict our analysis to manufacturing
bilateral trade flows only—namely, those that correspond with manufacturing as defined in
ISIC Rev.#2.

The denominator is gross manufacturing production minus manufactured exports (for only
the sample) plus manufactured imports (for only the sample). Gross manufacturing produc-
tion data are the most serious data constraint we faced. We obtain manufacturing production
data for 2004 from UNIDO for a large sub-sample of countries. We then imputed gross man-
ufacturing production for countries for which data are unavailable as follows: We first obtain
2004 data on manufacturing (MVA) and agriculture (AVA) value added, as well as population
size (L) and GDP for all countries in the sample. We then impute the gross output (GO) to
manufacturing value added ratio for the missing countries using coefficients resulting from the
following regression:
                            
                      MV A
            log                  = β0 + βGDP CGDP + βL CL + βM V A CM V A + βAV A CAV A + ǫ,
                      GO

where βx is a 1x3 vector of coefficients corresponding to Cx , an Nx3 matrix which contains
[log(x), (log(x))2 , (log(x))3 ] for the sub-sample of N countries for which gross output data are
available.

1.2. Prices

The ICP price data we employ in our estimation procedure is reported at the basic-heading
level. A basic heading represents a narrowly-defined group of goods for which expenditure
data are available. For example, basic heading “1101111 Rice” is made up of prices of different
types of rice, and the resulting value is an aggregate over these different types of rice. This
implies that a typical price observation of ”Rice” contains different types of rice, as well as
different packaging options that affect the unit price of rice within and across countries.

According to the ICP Handbook, the price of the basic heading ”Rice” is constructed using a
  24
    The trade data often report bilateral trade flows from two sources. For example, the exports of country A
to country B can appear in the UN Comtrade data as exports reported by country A or as imports reported by
country B. In this case, we take the report of bilateral trade flows between countries A and B that yields a higher
total volume of trade across the sum of all SITC four-digit categories.


                                                        45
transitive Jevons index of prices of different varieties of rice. To illustrate this point, suppose
that the world economy consists of three countries, A, B, C and ten types of rice, 1-10. Further
suppose that consumers in country A have access to all 10 types of rice; those in country B only
have access to types 1-5 of rice; and those in country C have access to types 4-6 of rice. Although
all types of rice are not found in all three countries, it is sufficient that each pair of countries
shares at least one type of rice.

The ICP obtains unit prices for all available types of rice in all three countries and records a price
of 0 if the type of rice is not available in a particular country. The relative price of rice between
countries A and B, based on goods available in these two countries, pA,B  AB , is a geometric average
of the relative prices of rice of types 1-5

                                                  " 5      #1
                                                   Y pA (j) 5
                                      pA,B
                                       AB =                         .
                                                   j=1
                                                         pB (j)

Similarly, one can compute the relative price of rice between countries A and C (B and C) based
on varieties available in both A and C (B and C). The price of the basic heading ”Rice” reported
by the ICP is:
                                              "                   # 13
                                                        A,C
                                                   A,B pAC
                                    pAB   = pA,B p
                                             AB AB B,C                   ,
                                                       pBC

which is a geometric average that features not only relative prices of rice between countries
A and B, but also cross-prices between A and B linked via country C. This procedure ensures
that prices of basic headings are transitive across countries and minimizes the impact of missing
prices across countries.

Thus, a basic-heading price is a geometric average of prices of varieties that is directly compa-
rable across countries.


B. Proofs
Below, we describe the steps to proving Lemmata 1 and 2. The key part in Lemma 1 is deriving
the distribution of the maximal log price difference. We then prove Propositions 1 and 2.

2.1. Proof of Lemma 1, Lemma 2, and Proposition 1

First, we derive the distribution of the maximal log price difference. The key insight is to work
with direct comparisons of goods’ prices (i.e., do not impose equilibrium and work from the
equilibrium price distribution) and to compute the distribution of log price differences and then
the distribution of the maximal log price difference.

                                                     46
Having obtained the distribution of the maximum log price difference, we show that the ex-
pected value of the maximum log price difference is biased in a finite sample and the estimator
β̂ is biased.

2.1.A. Preliminaries

In deriving the distribution of maximum log price differences, we will work with a relabeling
of the production functions and exponential distributions following an argument in Alvarez
and Lucas (2007). They relate the pdfs of the exponential and Frèchet distributions. The claim
                                         −1
is that if zi ∼ exp(Ti ), then yi ≡ zi θ ∼ exp(−Ti yi−θ ). To see this, notice that since yi = h(zi )
is a decreasing function, it must be that f (zi )dzi = −g(yi )dyi , where f, g are the pdf’s of zi , yi ,
respectively. The result will allow us to characterize moments of the log price difference by
invoking properties of the exponential distribution.

2.1.B. Proof of Lemma 1

The proof of Lemma 1 follows.
     −1                 −1
Let zk θ ∼ exp(−Tk (zk θ )−θ ) be the productivity associated with good z, drawn from the Frèchet
pdf in country k. By the argument above, the underlying distribution of zk is exponential. The
                                                                                               1
price for good z produced in country k and supplied to country i is pik ≡ wk τik zkθ . The relative
price ratio of good z between countries n and i is:
                                            n                  1             1o
                                         min mink6=i [wk τnk zkθ ], wi τni ziθ
                               vni (z) =    n                  1             1 o.                         (b.1)
                                         min mink6=n [wk τik zkθ ], wn τin znθ

Take this object to the power of θ:

                                                 mink6=i [wkθ τnk
                                                               θ
                                                                  zk ], wiθ τni
                                                                             θ
                                               
                                           min                                  zi
                              (vni (z))θ =                 θ θ          θ   θ
                                                                                   .                      (b.2)
                                           min mink6=n [wk τik zk ], wn τin zn

We want to characterize the distribution of (b.2), so we will first derive the pdf’s of its com-
ponents. Define z̃ik = wkθ τikθ zk . Since zk ∼ exp(Tk ), it must be that z̃ik ∼ exp(Tk wk−θ τik−θ ). Let
λ̃ik ≡ Tk wk−θ τik−θ .

Next, we derive the distribution of z̃i ≡ mink6=n [wkθ τikθ zk ] = mink6=n [z̃ik ]. Since each z̃ik ∼ exp(λ̃ik )
                                                   P                                   P
and independent across countries k, z̃i ∼ exp( k6=n λ̃ik ). Define λ̃i ≡                 k6=n λ̃ik . Repeat the
procedure for importer n in the numerator.




                                                       47
Given these definitions, (b.2) can be rewritten as:

                                                            z̃n , wiθ τni
                                                                       θ
                                                          
                                                      min                 zi
                                         (vni (z))θ =     
                                                                   θ   θ
                                                                             .                           (b.3)
                                                      min z̃i , wn τin zn

Define ǫni (z) = log(vni (z)). Taking logs of expression (b.3) gives:

                     θǫni (z) =       min {log(z̃n ), [θ log(wi ) + θ log(τni ) + log(zi )]}             (b.4)
                             −        min {log(z̃i ), [θ log(wn ) + θ log(τin ) + log(zn )]} .

Next, we argue that θǫni (z) ∈ [−θ log(τin ), θ log(τni )]. For any good z, θǫni (z) can satisfy one and
only one of the following three cases:

   1. Countries n and i buy good z from two different sources. Then,

                                               θǫni (z) = log(z̃n ) − log(z̃i )                          (b.5)


   2. Country n buys good z from country i. Assuming that trade barriers don’t violate the
      triangle inequality, it must be that i buys the good from itself. Then,

                 θǫni (z) = θ log(wi ) + θ log(τni ) + log(zi ) − θ log(wi ) − log(zi ) = θ log(τni ).   (b.6)


   3. Country i buys good z from n. Then it must be that n buys the good from itself, so:

           θǫni (z) = θ log(wn ) + log(zn ) − θ log(wn ) − θ log(τin ) − log(zn ) = −θ log(τin ).        (b.7)


We claim that the following ordering occurs: −θ log(τin ) ≤ log(z̃n ) −log(z̃i ) ≤ θ log(τni ). To show
this, we need to consider the following two scenarios:

   1. Countries n and i buy good z from the same source k. Then,

                                  log(z̃n ) − log(z̃i ) = log(wkθ τnk
                                                                   θ
                                                                      zk ) − log(wkθ τikθ zk )
                                                       = θ(log(τnk ) − log(τik )).                       (b.8)

      Clearly,

                            θ(log(τnk ) − log(τik )) ≥ −θ log(τin ) ⇐⇒ τin τnk ≥ τik ,

      where the latter inequality is true under the triangle inequality assumption.



                                                          48
  Similarly,

                        θ(log(τnk ) − log(τik )) ≤ θ log(τni ) ⇐⇒ τnk ≤ τni τik ,

  again true by triangle inequality.

2. Country n buys good z from source a and country i from source b, a 6= b. We want to show
   that −θ log(τin ) ≤ log(waθ τna
                                θ
                                   za ) − log(wbθ τibθ zb ) ≤ θ log(τni ).
  Since n imported from a over b, it must be that:

                                              waθ τna
                                                   θ
                                                      za ≤ wbθ τnb
                                                                θ
                                                                   zb                               (b.9)

  Similarly, since i imported from b over a, it must be that:

                                               wbθ τibθ zb ≤ waθ τia
                                                                  θ
                                                                     za                            (b.10)

  To find the upper bound, take logs of (b.9) and subtract log(wbθ τibθ zb ) from both sides:

                     log(waθ τna
                              θ
                                 za ) − log(wbθ τibθ zb ) ≤ log(wbθ τnb
                                                                     θ
                                                                        zb ) − log(wbθ τibθ zb )   (b.11)

  It suffices to show that the right-hand side is itself below the upper bound since, by tran-
  sitivity, so is the left-hand side (which is the object of interest).

                                    log(wbθ τnb
                                             θ
                                                zb ) − log(wbθ τibθ zb ) ≤ θ log(τni )
                             ⇐⇒ θ log(τnb ) − θ log(τib ) ≤ θ log(τni )
                             ⇐⇒ τnb ≤ τni τib ,                                                    (b.12)

  which is true by triangle inequality.
  The argument for the lower bound is similar. Take logs of (b.10), multiply by −1 (and
  reverse inequality) and add log(waθ τna
                                       θ
                                          za ) to both sides:

                    log(waθ τna
                             θ
                                za ) − log(wbθ τibθ zb ) ≥ log(waθ τna
                                                                    θ
                                                                       za ) − log(waθ τia
                                                                                       θ
                                                                                          za )     (b.13)

  It suffices to show that the right-hand side is itself above the lower bound since, by tran-
  sitivity, so is the left-hand side (which is the object of interest).

                                   log(waθ τna
                                            θ
                                               za ) − log(waθ τia
                                                               θ
                                                                  za ) ≥ −θ log(τin )
                            ⇐⇒ θ log(τna ) − θ log(τia ) ≥ −θ log(τin )
                            ⇐⇒ τin τna ≥ τia ,                                                     (b.14)


                                                     49
      which is true by triangle inequality.

Hence, θǫni (z) ∈ [−θ log(τin ), θ log(τni )].

Next, we proceed to derive the distribution of θǫni (z) = log(z̃n ) − log(z̃i ). First, we derive the
pdfs of its two components.

Let yi ≡ log(z̃i ). Then z̃i = exp(yi ). The pdf of yi must satisfy:

                                                                            dz̃i
                     f (yi )dyi = g(z̃i )dz̃i ⇒    f (yi ) = λ̃i exp(−λ̃i z̃i )
                                                                            dyi
                                            ⇒      f (yi ) = λ̃i exp(−λ̃i exp(yi )) exp(yi )
                                            ⇒      F (yi ) = 1 − exp(−λ̃i exp(yi ))            (b.15)

The same holds for n.

Now that we have the pdf’s of the two components, we can define the pdf of ǫ ≡ θǫni (z) ∈
[−θ log(τin ), θ log(τni )] as follows:
                                                        Z   ∞
                                f (ǫ) ≡ fyn −yi (x) =           fyn (y)fyi (y − x)dy,          (b.16)
                                                        −∞


where we have used the fact that yn and yi are independently distributed hence, the pdf of their
difference is the convolution of the pdfs of the two random variables.

Substituting the pdfs of yn and yi into (b.16) yields:
                        Z   ∞
              f (ǫ) =      λ̃n exp(−λ̃n exp(y)) exp(y)λ̃i exp(−λ̃i exp(y − ǫ)) exp(y − ǫ)dy
                        −∞
                                                                                y=+∞
                           −λ̃n λ̃i        λ̃n exp(y + ǫ) + λ̃i exp(y) + exp(ǫ) 
                   =                              n                          o                 (b.17)
                     (λ̃n exp(ǫ) + λ̃i )2     exp exp(y)(λ̃n + λ̃i exp(−ǫ))
                                                                                        y=−∞


Let v(y) be the expression in the bracket.

                                                  0 + 0 + exp(ǫ)
                                    lim v(y) =                   = exp(ǫ)                      (b.18)
                                   y→−∞              exp {0}




                                                        50
For the upper bound, we use l’Hopital rule:

                                           λ̃n exp(y + ǫ) + λ̃i exp(y)
             lim v(y) = lim         n                     o
             y→∞         y→∞
                             exp exp(y)(λ̃n + λ̃i exp(−ǫ)) exp(y)(λ̃n + λ̃i exp(−ǫ))
                                             λ̃n exp(ǫ) + λ̃i
                      = lim         n                     o
                         y→∞
                             exp exp(y)(λ̃n + λ̃i exp(−ǫ)) (λ̃n + λ̃i exp(−ǫ))

                      =0                                                                  (b.19)

Thus, (b.17) becomes:

                                                      λ̃n λ̃i exp(ǫ)
                                        f (ǫ) =                                           (b.20)
                                                  (λ̃n exp(ǫ) + λ̃i )2

The corresponding cdf is:

                                                               λ̃i
                                        F (ǫ) =1 −                                        (b.21)
                                                        λ̃n exp(ǫ) + λ̃i

Given that ǫ is bounded, we can compute the truncated pdf as:

                                                          f (ǫ)
                               fT (ǫ) =
                                          F (θ log(τni )) − F (−θ log(τin ))
                                                       λ̃n λ̃i exp(ǫ)
                                          = γ −1                        ,                 (b.22)
                                                   (λ̃n exp(ǫ) + λ̃i )2

where:

                                       λ̃i                        λ̃i
                     γ=−                              +                                   (b.23)
                            λ̃n exp(θ log(τni )) + λ̃i λ̃n exp(−θ log(τin )) + λ̃i

Similarly, the truncated cdf is:
                                                        Z   ǫ
                                                   −1
                                     FT (ǫ) = γ                         f (t)dt           (b.24)
                                                         −θ log(τin )


Now that we have these distributions, we compute order statistics from them, which allow us
to characterize the trade barriers estimated from price data. We use the following result: Given
L observations drawn from pdf h(x), the pdf of the r-th order statistic (where r = L is the max
and r = 1 is the min) is:

                                          L!
                        hr (x) =                    H(x)r−1 (1 − H(x))L−r h(x)            (b.25)
                                   (r − 1)!(L − r)!


                                                        51
The pdf of the max reduces to:

                                       hmax (x, L) =LH(x)L−1 h(x)

With this pdf defined, we can compute the expectation of the maximum statistic:
                                                        Z       ∞
                                   E[max(xz )] =                    xhmax (x, L)dx                             (b.26)
                                       z∈L                  −∞


Recall that we are interested in computing the expectation of the maximum logged price dif-
ference between countries n and i. But, so far, we have derived the truncated pdf and cdf of
ǫ = θ log(vni (z)). Our object of interest is actually log(vni (z)) = 1θ ǫ. The expectation of this object,
which represents the maximum log price difference, for L draws, is given by:

                                                                               θ log(τni )
                                                        1
                                                                         Z
                    E[max(log(pn (z)) − log(pi (z)))] =                                      ǫfmax (ǫ, L)dǫ,   (b.27)
                      z∈L                               θ                    −θ log(τin )


where:

                    fmax (ǫ, L) =LFT (ǫ)L−1 fT (ǫ)
                                       Z ǫ               L−1
                                     −1                                                   λ̃n λ̃i exp(ǫ)
                                =L γ               f (t)dt     γ −1                                            (b.28)
                                             −θ log(τin )                             (λ̃n exp(ǫ) + λ̃i )2

Hence, the expectation of the maximum of the log price difference is proportional to 1/θ, where
the proportionality object comes from gravity,

                         E[max(log(pn (z)) − log(pi (z)))] = Ψni (L; S, τ˜i , τ˜n ),                           (b.29)
                            z∈L


where:
                                                                 θ log(τni )
                                                      1
                                                            Z
                             Ψni (L; S, τ̃i , τ˜n ) ≡                          ǫfmax (ǫ, L)dǫ,                 (b.30)
                                                      θ      −θ log(τin )


and the values S and τ˜n correspond with the definitions outlined in Definition 1. It is worth
emphasizing the nature of this integral: Other than the scalar in the front, it depends completely
on objects that can be recovered from the standard gravity equation in (22).




                                                            52
Finally, one can rewrite equation (b.30) via integration by parts as:

                                                                                θ log(τni )
                                                              1
                                                                           Z
                E[max(log(pn (z)) − log(pi (z)))] = log τni −                                 Fmax (ǫ, L)dǫ    (b.31)
                  z∈L                                         θ                −θ log(τin )



                                                                               θ log(τni )
                                                              1
                                                                           Z
                log τni = E[max(log(pn (z)) − log(pi (z)))] +                                 Fmax (ǫ, L)dǫ,   (b.32)
                            z∈L                               θ             −θ log(τin )


which implies the following strict inequality:

                    log τni > E[max(log(pn (z)) − log(pi (z)))] = Ψni (L; S, τ̃i , τ˜n ),                      (b.33)
                                   z∈L


where the strict inequality simply follows from the inspection of the CDF Fmax (ǫ, L) which has
positive mass below the point θ log(τni ). This then proves claim 1. in Lemma 1.

To prove claim 2. in Lemma 1, we compute the difference in the expected values of log prices
between two countries. We show that they are equal to the (scaled) difference in the price
parameters Φ.

Rather than working with the distribution described above, it is more convenient to directly
compute the expectation of log prices using the equilibrium price distribution. Note that EK
show that the cdf and pdf of prices in country i are G(p) = 1−exp(−Φi pθ ) and g(p) = pθ−1 θΦi exp(−Φi pθ ),
respectively.

For any country i, define the expectation of logged prices as
                                                           Z    ∞
                                        E[log(pi (z))] =            log(p)g(p)dp                               (b.34)
                                                            0


Substituting the pdf of prices and then utilizing some algebra to find an appropriate change in
variables, expression (b.34) yields
                                   Z    ∞
                E[log(pi (z))] =            log(p)pθ−1 θΦi exp(−Φi pθ )dp
                                   Z0 ∞
                                                                                                         dp
                              =             log(p)θΦi exp(θ log(p)) exp(−Φi exp(θ log(p)))
                                    0                                                                    p

Our change of variables will set x = log(p), which yields dx/dp = 1/p. Then, integration by




                                                           53
change of variables allows us to rewrite the above as
                                        ∞
                                                                                                dp
                                   Z
               E[log(pi (z))] =             log(p)θΦi exp(θ log(p)) exp(−Φi exp(θ log(p)))
                                                                                                p
                                   Z0 ∞
                                                                         θ
                             =              xθΦi exp(θx) exp(−Φi exp(θx)) dx
                                    0                                    θ

Let y = θx, so that dy/dx = θ; then, another change of variables gives
                                                       ∞
                                         1
                                                   Z
                        E[log(pi (z))] =                   yΦi exp(y) exp(−Φi exp(y))dy
                                         θ         0


Let t = Φi exp(y), so that dt/dy = Φi exp(y) and y = log(t/Φi ). Then,

                                 1 ∞
                                             
                                               t
                                   Z
                E[log(pi (z))] =        log         exp(−t)dt
                                 θ 0          Φi
                                   Z ∞                       Z ∞                    
                                 1
                               =          log (t) exp(−t)dt −     log (Φi ) exp(−t)dt
                                 θ    0                        0
                                    1
                               = − {γ̃ + log(Φi )} ,                                                 (b.35)
                                    θ

where γ̃ is the Euler-Mascheroni constant. Finally, using (b.35) and taking the expected dif-
ference in log prices between country n and country i, the scaled Euler-Mascheroni constant
cancels between the two countries and leaves the following expression

                                                                     1
                   E[log(pn (z))] − E[log(pi (z))]                = − {log (Φn ) − log (Φi )}        (b.36)
                                                                     θ

                                                                  ≡ Ωni (S, τ˜n , τ̃i ),

which then proves claim 2. in Lemma 1.


2.1.C. Proof of Lemma 2 and Proposition 1

To prove Lemma 2 and Proposition 1, we invert EK’s estimator for the elasticity of trade:

                                            P P                                        
                              1                n       i log τ̂ni + log P̂i − log P̂n
                                   =−                                                              (b.37)
                              β̂
                                                       P P             Xni /Xn
                                                         n     i log   Xii /Xi


Given the assumption that the trade data are fixed, equation (b.37) is linear in the random
variables log τ̂ni and (log P̂n −log P̂i ). With this observation, taking expectations of these random




                                                             54
variables yields
                                                                           
                                     P P
                          1      1        i (θΨni (L) − (log Φi − log Φn ))  1
                                   
                                        n
                     E         =     −                                      < ,              (b.38)
                          β̂     θ          P P
                                                    log   Xni /Xn            θ
                                                         n    i        Xii /Xi


by substituting in for the expectation of the maximum log price difference using (b.30), and
the difference in expectations of log prices using (b.36). Inspection of the bracketed term above
implies that the following strict inequality must hold,
                                                             
                             P P (θΨ (L) − (log Φ − log Φ )) 
                                     ni           i       n
                         1 > − n i P P                        > 0,                           (b.39)
                                              X  /X
                                       log ni n     n   i
                                                              
                                                                  Xii /Xi


with the reason being that Ψni (L) < log τni from Lemma 1; otherwise, the bracketed term would
correspond exactly with equation (5) in logs and, thus, equal one. Now, inverting the expression
above and applying Jensen’s inequality results in the following:
                                                                   
                                       P P            Xni /Xn
                     −1
                      1                 n    i log   Xii /Xi
                                                                      
            E(β̂) ≥ E       = θ −P P                                    > θ,                   (b.40)
                      β̂         n i (θΨni (L) − (log Φi − log Φn )) 


with the strict inequality following from (b.38) and (b.39). This proves Proposition 1.

2.2. Proof of Proposition 2

In this subsection, we prove Proposition 2. To prove the claims in Proposition 2, we start with
claim 1.

To prove claim 1., we argue that the sample maximum of scaled log price differences is a consis-
tent estimator of the scaled trade cost. In particular, we argue that as the sample size becomes
infinite, the probability that the sample scaled trade cost is arbitrarily close to the true scaled
trade cost is one.

To see this, consider an estimate of the scaled trade barrier, given a sample of L goods’ prices,
                                                                                
                                       L
                               θ log τ̂ni   =θ       max (log pn (ℓ) − log pi (ℓ)) .           (b.41)
                                                 ℓ=1,...,L


The cdf of this random variable is the integral of its pdf, which is given in expression (b.28),
over the compact interval in which the scaled logged price difference lies, [−θ log τin , θ log τni ].
                      L                 L
Denote this cdf by Fmax . From (b.28), Fmax ≡ (FT )L , where FT is the truncated distribution of the
                                                                                              L
scaled log price difference over the domain [−θ log τin , θ log τni ]. By definition, FT and Fmax take
on values between zero and one, as they are cdfs. In particular, for any realization x < θ log τni ,

                                                             55
                            L
FT (x) < 1. For any L > 1, Fmax (x) = (FT (x))L ≤ FT (x) < 1.
                                                          L
Take L → ∞. Then, for any x ∈ [−θ log τin , θ log τni ), Fmax = (FT )L becomes arbitrarily close to
                                                   L
zero since FT < 1. Hence, all the mass of the cdf Fmax becomes concentrated at θ log τni . Thus, as
the sample size becomes infinite, the estimated scaled trade barrier converges to the true scaled
                                                                    1
trade barrier, in probability. Rescaling everything by              θ
                                                                        then implies

                                 L
                      plim log τ̂ni = plim max (log pn (ℓ) − log pi (ℓ)) = log τni .           (b.42)
                      L→∞                   L→∞ ℓ=1,...,L


This proves claim 1. of Proposition 2.

To show consistency of the estimator β̂, we argue that

                                                plim β̂ (L; S, τ̃ , X) = θ,                    (b.43)
                                                L→∞


or, equivalently, that ∀δ > 0,
                                         h                            i
                                   lim Pr k β̂ (L; S, τ̃ , X) − θ k< δ = 1.                    (b.44)
                                   L→∞


Basically, we will argue that, by sampling the prices of an ever-increasing set of goods and
applying the estimator β over these prices, with probability one, we will obtain estimates that
are arbitrarily close to θ.

Inverting the expression for the estimator β̂ in expression (12), rearranging, and multiplying
and dividing by the scalar θ yields

                                           P P                L
                                                                                   
                              1        1    n     i    θ log τ̂ni
                                                            − θ[log P̂n − log P̂i ]
                                   =                                              .          (b.45)
                              β̂       θ              − n i log XXniii /X
                                                       P P             /Xn
                                                                          i



By assumption, the denominator is trade data and is not a random variable.

In the numerator, log P̂n − log P̂i is the difference in the average of logged prices for countries n
and i, given a sample of L goods. In particular,

                                                           L                  L
                                              1X                 1X
                          log P̂n − log P̂i ≡       log pn (ℓ) −       log pi (ℓ)              (b.46)
                                              L ℓ=1              L ℓ=1

We refer the reader to Davidson and MacKinnon (2004) for a proof of the well known result
that the sample average is both an unbiased and consistent estimator of the mean. Since the
difference operator is continuous, the difference in the sample average of logged price is an
unbiased and consistent estimator of the difference in mean logged prices. Finally, multiply-


                                                               56
ing these sample averages by a scalar θ, a continuous operation, ensures convergence to true
difference in the price terms Φ.

We have argued that the two components in the numerator converge in probability to their true
parameter counterparts, as the sample size becomes infinite. Taking the difference
                                                                             h P ofP
                                                                                   these two       i
components, summing over all country pairs (n, i), and dividing by the scalar − n i log XXniii /X
                                                                                               /Xi
                                                                                                  n
                                                                                                       ,
all of which are continuous operations, allows us to conclude that

             P P                 L
                                                                 
                 n      i θ log τ̂ni − θ[log P̂n − log P̂i ]
      plim                                        
                         − n i log XXniii /X
                           P P                   n
      L→∞
                                              /Xi



             P P                                                       h P                                           i
                            θ maxℓ=1,...,L (log pn (ℓ) − log pi (ℓ)) − θ L1 Lℓ=1 log pn (ℓ) −   1
                                                                                                    PL
                 n      i                                                                       L    ℓ=1 log pi (ℓ)
  = plim                                                                      
                                                       − n i log XXniii /X
                                                         P P                 n
      L→∞
                                                                           /Xi


          P P
      −      n   i   (θ log τni − [log Φi − log Φn ])
  =                                                 .                                                           (b.47)
                     P P           Xni /Xn
                       n   i log   Xii /Xi


To complete the argument, consider the log of expression (5), which involves Φ. Summing this
expression over all (n, i) country pairs gives:
                                                       
                        XX                    Xni /Xn         XX
                                    log                     =−   (θ log τni − [log Φi − log Φn ]).                (b.48)
                            n   i
                                              Xii /Xi            n    i


Substituting expression (b.48) in the denominator of (b.47) above makes the fraction in that
expression equal to unity. Hence, 1/β̂ converges to 1/θ in probability. Since, for β ∈ (0, ∞), 1/β̂
is a continuous function of β̂, β̂ converges to θ in probability. This proves claim 2. of Proposition
2.

Claim 3. of Proposition 2 follows from the fact that β̂ is a consistent estimator of θ (see Hayashi
(2000) for a discussion).


2.3. Deriving the Inverse Marginal Cost Distribution

To simulate the model, we argue that by using the coefficients S estimated from the gravity
regression (22), we have enough information to simulate prices and trade flows. The key insight
is that the S’s are sufficient to characterize the inverse marginal cost distribution. Thus, we can
sample from this distribution and then compute equilibrium prices and trade flows.

To see this argument, let zi ∼ Fi (zi ) = exp(−Ti zi−θ ) and define ui ≡ zi /wi . The pdf of zi is


                                                                     57
fi (zi ) = exp(−Ti zi−θ )θTi zi−θ−1 . To find the pdf of the transformation ui , mi (ui ), use the fact that
fi (zi )dzi = mi (ui )dui , or mi (ui ) = fi (zi )(dui /dzi )−1 . Let S̃i = Ti wi−θ . Using fi (zi ), S̃i , and the fact
that dui /dzi = 1/wi , we obtain:
                                                −1                                          −1
                                           dui                                            1
                 mi (ui ) = fi (zi )                   =   exp(−Ti zi−θ )θTi zi−θ−1
                                           dzi                                            wi
                                                                          −θ                             −1
                                                                                                                wi−θ
                                                                                               
                                                                     −θ wi                           1
                                                       =   exp −Ti zi          θTi zi−θ−1
                                                                        wi−θ                         wi         wi−θ
                                                                    zi−θ       zi−θ−1
                                                                        
                                                       =   exp −S̃i −θ θS̃i −θ−1
                                                                   wi          wi
                                                                     
                                                       = exp −S̃i u−θ
                                                                   i    θS̃i u−θ−1
                                                                              i


Clearly mi (ui ) is the pdf that corresponds to the cdf Mi (ui ) = exp(−S̃i u−θ
                                                                             i ), which concludes the
argument.


C. EK’s Alternative Estimators of θ
EK use two other alternative methods to estimate θ than the one described in the main body
of the paper. Through these alternative methods they are able to establish a range from 3.6 to
12.86. In this section, we explore the properties of one of these alternative estimators. We show
that the estimator associated with the estimate of 12.86 is biased by economically meaningful
magnitudes for the same reasons as the estimator discussed in the paper. Similar to our earlier
arguments, we then use the moments associated with the biased estimator as the basis for our
estimation. Doing so allows us to establish a range from 3.6 to 4.3 with EK’s data rather than
the range between 3.6 and 12.86.

Before proceeding, we should note that we have little to say about EK’s estimation approach
that leads to an estimate of 3.6. To arrive at this estimate, they use wage data and proxies for
the productivity parameters, T , and find a value of 3.6.25 While one may have objections to the
particular statistics that they employ, the resulting estimate is in line with the estimates that we
obtain, which we view as reassuring.

  25
     Similarly, Costinot, Donaldson, and Komunjer (2011) estimate θ using trade data and proxies for productiv-
ity at the industry level for 21 developed countries. They provide a wide range of estimates depending on the
specification, with a preferred estimate of 6.53.




                                                                   58
3.1. EK’s 2SLS Approach

EK propose an alternative estimator for θ that uses the same variation in price data discussed
in the text. First, they use the object Dni defined as
                                                    !
                                         P̂i τ̂ni
                           Dni = log                                                        (b.49)
                                          P̂n

                           where     log τ̂ni (L) = max {log pn (ℓ) − log pi (ℓ)} ,
                                                        ℓ∈L


                                                    L
                                             1X
                           and     log P̂i =       log(pi (ℓ)),
                                             L ℓ=1

to proxy trade costs in the gravity equation (22). By using this measure in the gravity equation
(rather than using distance and fixed effects), they can then interpret the coefficient on Dni as
an estimate of the trade elasticity.

When using (22) and (b.49) to approximate trade costs, EK are concerned about measurement
error, so they employ instrumental variables to alleviate this concern. Specifically, they use the
geography variables (distance, border, language) in (23) as instruments for Dni . The resulting
two stage least squares (2SLS) estimate of θ is 12.86.

3.2. A Monte Carlo Study of EK’s 2SLS Approach

Here we apply the same experiment described in Section 4: we simulate trade flows and sam-
ples of micro-level prices under a known θ. Then, we apply EK’s 2SLS estimator to the artificial
data. We employ the same simulation procedure described in Steps 1-3 in Section 5.2 and we
estimate all parameters (except for θ) using the trade data from EK. We set the true value of θ
equal to 8.28. The sample size of prices is set to L = 50, which is the number of prices EK had
access to in their data set.

Table 13 presents the results. The first row shows that the estimates using EK’s 2SLS approach
are almost 100 percent larger than the true θ of 8.28. Comparing theses results with the study
of the method of moment estimator in Table 1, the bias takes the same form, but in the 2SLS
approach the bias is significantly larger (12.5 vs. 15.9). This suggests (and our estimation below
confirms) that any difference between EK’s original results using method of moments vs. 2SLS
arises because of how the particular estimator interacts with the bias in the approximation of
the trade friction.

The next three rows show how these results change as the number of sampled prices increases.
Here increasing the sample size systematically reduces the bias similar to the method of mo-


                                                        59
              Table 13: Monte Carlo Results, EK’s 2SLS Approach, True θ = 8.28

       Approach = 2SLS, Gravity            Mean Estimate of θ (S.E.)         Median Estimate of θ

       50 sampled prices                            15.9 (0.24)                         15.6

       500 sampled prices                           10.5 (0.05)                         10.4

       5,000 sampled prices                         8.72 (0.02)                         8.73

       50,000 sampled prices                        8.33 (0.01)                         8.33
      Note: S.E. is the standard error of the mean. In each simulation there are 19 countries and 500,000
      goods. 100 simulations performed.



ment results in Table 2. This shows that the key problem with EK’s approach is not the estimator
per se, but, instead, the poor approximation of the trade costs. Once the sample size of prices
becomes large enough, trade costs are better approximated and the bias in the estimate of θ is
reduced.

Recall that the purpose of EK’s 2SLS estimator was to alleviate an error-in-variables problem.
However, 2SLS only works if the error-in-variables problem is classical in the sense that the
measurement error is mean zero. The issue identified in this paper is a situation where the
measurement error is not classical. The approximated trade friction always underestimates the
true trade friction and the approximation error is never mean zero, thus it is not obvious that
2SLS corrects the problem. In fact, the results in Table 13 suggest that 2SLS makes the bias in θ
worse when compared to alternative estimators.

3.3. Using EK’s 2SLS Estimates as a Basis For Estimation

The estimates from EK’s 2SLS approach can be used as the basis for our estimation rather than
the estimates from EK’s method of moments approach. Specifically, in the exactly identified
case, we compare the empirical moment from EK’s 2SLS estimation to the averaged simulation
moment, which yields the following zero function:

                                                     S
                                       "                              #
                                                  1X
                               y(θ) = β2SLS     −       β2SLS (θ, us ) .                                    (b.50)
                                                  S s=1

Our estimation procedure is based on the same moment condition described in the main text:

                                             E [y(θo )] = 0,



                                                      60
where θo is the true value of θ. Thus, our simulated method of moments estimator is

                                    θ̂ = arg min [y(θ)′ y(θ)] ,                                (b.51)
                                              θ


where we abstract from the weighting matrix since we focus on the exactly identified case in
this section.

                     Table 14: Estimation Results: 2SLS Moments, EK Data

                                                        Estimate of θ (S.E.)    β2SLS

                Data Moments                                      —              8.03

                2SLS Moments, Exactly Identified              4.39 (0.86)        8.03



Table 14 presents the result using EK’s data. The first row presents the data moments. Here the
estimate of β2SLS is 8.03. This differs from EK’s number of 12.86 only because we are using the
maximum price difference rather than the second order statistic used in EK. The second row
presents the estimate of θ which is 4.39, the standard error, and the model-implied moment.

Note that, while a very different moment is the basis of our estimation, the estimate is nearly
identical to the exactly identified results in Table 6, i.e. 4.39 vs. 4.42. On its own, this is a
reassuring result because it shows that alternative moments are giving similar answers. More-
over, it suggests that any difference between the results using method of moments vs. 2SLS
in EK arises primarily because of how the particular estimator interacts with the bias in the
approximation of the trade friction. Yet once this bias is corrected for, we find similar results
independent of the particular moment used.


D. Feenstra’s 1994 Methodology in the Ricardian Model
In this section we analyze Feenstra’s (1994) method to estimate the elasticity of substitution
from cross-country data in the context of the Ricardian model. We show that Feenstra’s (1994)
method recovers the elasticity of substitution across goods, i.e. the ρ parameter in CES preferences.
It does not recover the θ parameter controlling the trade elasticity, i.e. how trade flows change in
response to changes in trade costs and the welfare gains from trade. Thus, using the estimates
from Feenstra (1994) or Broda and Weinstein (2006) to calibrate the θ parameter in the Ricardian
model is inappropriate.

We show this result by asking the following question: given prices and shares generated from
the Ricardian model, what would Feenstra’s (1994) method recover — the θ or the ρ? To answer


                                                  61
this question we will briefly describe Feenstra’s (1994) method and its application to simulated
data from the Ricardian model. In the description, we will mainly follow Feenstra (2010).

First, we will define an individual variety in Feenstra’s (1994) language as a specific good j on
the zero-one interval. In the Ricardian model, the expenditure share for good j in country k at
date t is given by the following formula:

                                                       p(j)1−ρ
                                                           kt
                                  s(j)kt = Z      1               1−ρ                    (b.52)
                                                             1
                                                            1−ρ
                                                       p(ℓ)kt dℓ
                                               0


which is the standard formula for expenditure shares from CES demand structures. Recall that
the prices p(j) and p(ℓ) are optimal, i.e. they correspond to the lowest cost producer. Aggregate
expenditure shares in (4) come from integrating (b.52) over country pair combinations.

Taking logs, differencing, and expressing the denominator (b.52) as a time fixed effect yields

                       ∆ log s(j)kt = φt − (ρ − 1)∆ log p(j)kt + ǫ(j)kt .                  (b.53)

The final term ǫ(j)kt represents both trade cost shocks and productivity shocks that will gener-
ate variation in shares and prices across time/simulations. Equation (b.53) is the same equation
that Feenstra’s (1994) methodology exploits.

Feenstra (1994) introduces an upward sloping log-linear supply curve into the estimation of
(b.53). Define the “reduced form” supply elasticity as η. By differencing the supply and demand
equations with respect to a reference county i and then multiplying these equations together
(see Feenstra (2010)) he arrives at the following equations:

                                    Ykt = θ1 Xkt + θ2 X2kt + ukt,                          (b.54)

where

                   Ykt = (∆ log p(j)kt − ∆ log p(j)it )2 ,                                 (b.55)


                   X1kt = (∆ log s(j)kt − ∆ log s(j)it )2 ,                                (b.56)


                   X1kt = (∆ log p(j)kt − ∆ log p(j)it )(∆ log s(j)kt − ∆ log s(j)it ),    (b.57)

                                 η                          2η − 1
                   θ1 =                    ,   θ2 =                                        (b.58)
                          (ρ − 1)2 (1 − η)              (ρ − 1)2 (1 − η)



                                                       62
                     Table 15: Estimates of Demand Elasticity, Feenstra’s Method

                                                 Mean Estimate            Median Estimate

                  Model, θ = 4, ρ = 1.5            1.51 (0.001)                   1.51

                  Model, θ = 4, ρ = 2.5            2.52 (0.003)                   2.52

                  Model, θ = 8, ρ = 1.5            1.51 (0.001)                   1.51

                  Model, θ = 8, ρ = 2.5            2.51 (0.004)                   2.51
                 Note: In the simulation there are 19 countries with trade frictions and produc-
                 tivity parameters calibrated to fit Eaton and Kortum’s (2002) data. 29 periods of
                 data were generated and used, which is consistent with the time series in Broda
                 and Weinstein (2006). Means and medians are over 100 simulations.



ukt is an error term composed of the shocks to the demand curve and the supply curve. Then
averaging these equations across time yields:

                                         Ȳk = θ1 X̄1k + θ2 X̄2k + ūk .                                     (b.59)

Equation (b.59) relates second moments of price and share changes that linearly depend on
demand and supply elasticities. Given the appropriate assumptions on the variances of the
error terms across countries and across demand and supply shocks, least squares estimates of
(b.59) are consistent. Finally, given the estimates of θ1 and θ2 one can recover the demand and
supply elasticity by using (b.58).

There is an important point to note here. First — and this should be clear from equations (b.58)
and (b.59) — Feenstra’s (1994) method can only speak to and recover the parameter ρ, which
our Monte-Carlo experiment confirms below. This is an important observation because the
parameter ρ does not affect aggregate trade flows or measures of the welfare gains from trade
in the Ricardian model.26

4.1. Monte-Carlo Study of Feenstra’s Method in the Ricardian Model

To further illustrate what Feenstra’s (1994) method recovers, we performed the following ex-
ercise: We simulated prices and expenditure shares for individual varieties from the Ricardian
model when calibrated as in Section 4. To generate time series variation we introduced trade
cost shocks, cost shocks, and measurement error in the prices. These shocks are independent
  26
    We suspect that a similar result can be derived for the Melitz (2003) model as articulated in Chaney (2008)
because the aggregate trade elasticity there relates to the underlying shape parameter of the Pareto distribution of
firm productivity.


                                                        63
across time and countries. All the shocks are multiplicative and log normally distributed with
the mean of the associated normal distribution set equal to zero and a standard deviation pa-
rameter picked by us.

Given a sequence of prices and shares as described above we apply Feenstra’s (1994) method.
Mechanically we implement Feenstra’s (1994) method by estimating (b.59) by least-squares
while constraining θ1 > 0. This constraint ensures that the recovered demand elasticity is a
real number.

Table 15 presents the results for different θ’s and ρ’s. In all cases, the mean and median elasticity
correspond essentially with the ρ parameter in the calibrated model. In no case does Feenstra’s
(1994) method correspond with the θ parameter in the model. Thus, Feenstra’s (1994) method
can only speak to and recover the parameter ρ.




                                                 64
     Table 16: 2004 ICP Data, Step 1 Country-Specific Estimates
     Country                     Ŝi    S.E.    exi    S.E.   Country               Ŝi    S.E.    exi    S.E.   Country                 Ŝi    S.E.    exi    S.E.
     Angola                     −1.04   0.21   −2.67   0.35   Fiji                 −0.58   0.20   −2.06   0.31   Nepal                   0.48   0.24   −3.00   0.32
     Argentina                   1.13   0.18    2.34   0.25   Finland               1.09   0.17    2.15   0.23   New Zealand            −0.25   0.30    3.17   0.24
     Armenia                     0.83   0.20   −3.91   0.29   France                0.39   0.16    5.09   0.22   Nigeria                −0.85   0.25   −1.00   0.29
     Australia                   0.24   0.16    3.59   0.23   Gabon                −1.07   0.18   −1.52   0.27   Norway                  0.33   0.37    1.88   0.23
     Austria                     0.39   0.16    2.71   0.22   Gambia, The          −2.40   0.22   −2.32   0.34   Oman                   −0.19   0.36   −0.74   0.26
     Azerbaijan                 −0.03   0.20   −2.76   0.28   Georgia              −2.78   0.19    0.70   0.27   Pakistan                0.55   0.29    2.03   0.23
     Bangladesh                  0.76   0.18    0.46   0.24   Germany               0.40   0.16    5.57   0.22   Paraguay                0.04   0.36   −0.74   0.28
     Belarus                     1.27   0.18   −0.98   0.25   Ghana                −1.32   0.21    0.44   0.29   Peru                    0.47   0.24    1.10   0.25
     Belgium                    −2.75   0.16    8.26   0.22   Greece                0.78   0.16    0.58   0.23   Philippines            −0.34   0.39    2.64   0.24
     Benin                      −0.62   0.22   −3.66   0.36   Guinea               −1.76   0.22   −2.16   0.33   Poland                  0.84   0.34    1.76   0.23
     Bhutan                      0.37   0.30   −5.45   0.43   Guinea-Bissau        −0.40   0.28   −5.77   0.48   Portugal               −0.20   0.24    2.71   0.23
     Bolivia                     0.28   0.19   −1.65   0.29   Hungary               0.86   0.17    0.98   0.23   Romania                 0.60   0.25    0.75   0.23
     Bosnia and Herzegovina      1.14   0.23   −3.68   0.32   Iceland              −0.26   0.18   −0.55   0.26   Russian Federation      1.32   0.34    2.12   0.23
     Botswana                    0.97   0.25   −3.73   0.37   India                 0.94   0.16    3.53   0.25   Rwanda                  0.09   0.27   −5.05   0.36
     Brazil                      1.30   0.16    3.67   0.23   Indonesia             1.34   0.16    3.07   0.23   Sierra Leone           −0.97   0.25   −3.61   0.41
     Brunei Darussalam           1.68   0.25   −5.15   0.37   Iran, Islamic Rep.    1.02   0.21   −0.85   0.28   Saudi Arabia            0.70   0.30    0.70   0.28
     Bulgaria                    0.30   0.17    0.39   0.24   Ireland              −3.21   0.16    6.39   0.22   Senegal                −0.86   0.27   −0.63   0.25
     Burkina Faso                0.32   0.20   −4.07   0.31   Israel                0.59   0.17    1.70   0.24   Slovak Republic        −0.31   0.26    1.34   0.23
     Burundi                    −1.52   0.20   −3.12   0.34   Italy                 0.58   0.16    4.56   0.22   Slovenia                1.02   0.38   −0.20   0.24
65




     Cameroon                    1.54   0.21   −3.34   0.30   Japan                 1.51   0.16    4.89   0.23   South Africa            0.41   0.25    3.61   0.23
     Canada                     −0.27   0.16    4.59   0.22   Jordan               −0.25   0.18   −0.65   0.25   Spain                   0.29   0.31    4.09   0.22
     Cape Verde                 −0.37   0.21   −4.86   0.38   Kazakhstan            0.28   0.18   −0.03   0.26   Sri Lanka              −0.14   0.42    0.65   0.25
     Central African Republic    0.55   0.25   −4.67   0.36   Kenya                −0.53   0.16   −0.07   0.23   Sudan                  −0.12   0.33   −3.47   0.32
     Chad                        0.54   0.24   −6.49   0.40   Korea, Rep.           1.04   0.16    4.38   0.22   Swaziland               2.10   0.38   −3.30   0.33
     Chile                       0.27   0.18    1.96   0.25   Kyrgyz Republic       0.03   0.20   −2.86   0.30   Sweden                  0.75   0.31    3.34   0.22
     China                       1.13   0.16    5.74   0.23   Lao PDR               1.43   0.27   −3.92   0.35   Switzerland             0.10   0.25    3.69   0.27
     Colombia                    0.38   0.17    0.50   0.24   Latvia               −0.46   0.19   −0.10   0.26   Syrian Arab Republic   −0.34   0.31   −0.86   0.26
     Comoros                    −0.84   0.27   −4.54   0.42   Lebanon               0.60   0.20   −2.29   0.28   Tajikistan              1.10   0.37   −3.19   0.34
     Congo, Dem. Rep.           −0.65   0.24   −2.31   0.34   Lesotho               1.09   0.30   −5.44   0.44   Tanzania               −1.01   0.26   −1.41   0.31
     Congo, Rep.                −0.95   0.21   −1.08   0.30   Lithuania             0.67   0.21   −0.88   0.29   Thailand                0.86   0.29    3.57   0.28
     Cte d’Ivoire                0.78   0.21   −1.22   0.30   Macedonia, FYR        0.41   0.18   −2.71   0.27   Togo                   −1.40   0.25   −1.34   0.27
     Croatia                     1.08   0.16   −1.29   0.24   Malawi               −0.63   0.19   −2.59   0.28   Tunisia                 0.34   0.36   −0.30   0.24
     Cyprus                     −0.86   0.17    0.45   0.24   Malaysia             −1.43   0.16    6.58   0.22   Turkey                  0.93   0.28    2.38   0.23
     Czech Republic              0.43   0.16    2.02   0.23   Mali                 −1.03   0.23   −2.66   0.32   Uganda                 −0.71   0.29   −2.30   0.26
     Denmark                    −0.24   0.16    3.63   0.23   Mauritania           −1.97   0.23   −1.79   0.33   Ukraine                 1.41   0.24    0.88   0.28
     Djibouti                   −2.04   0.24   −2.37   0.38   Mauritius            −1.63   0.17    1.44   0.24   United Kingdom         −0.29   0.32    5.59   0.22
     Ecuador                    −0.24   0.18    0.12   0.26   Mexico                0.21   0.16    2.61   0.24   United States           0.06   0.34    6.87   0.22
     Egypt, Arab Rep.            0.44   0.17    0.62   0.23   Moldova              −0.47   0.19   −2.12   0.29   Uruguay                −0.51   0.29    1.40   0.27
     Equatorial Guinea           0.47   0.24   −4.24   0.39   Morocco              −0.39   0.17    1.32   0.23   Venezuela, RB           0.72   0.29   −0.60   0.26
     Estonia                    −1.74   0.17    1.61   0.24   Mozambique           −0.16   0.22   −2.06   0.33   Vietnam                −0.44   0.24    2.69   0.28
     Ethiopia                   −0.66   0.21   −2.15   0.31   Namibia               1.09   0.23   −3.64   0.33   Zambia                 −3.99   0.30    2.59   0.27
                                   Table 17: EK Data, Step 1 Country-Specific Estimates
                                   Country       Ŝi     S.E.     exi    S.E.   Country              Ŝi    S.E.    exi    S.E.
                                   Australia    −0.20    0.15     0.54   0.24   Japan                2.54   0.13    1.74   0.21
                                   Austria       0.50    0.12    −1.65   0.18   Netherlands         −3.09   0.12    0.80   0.18
                                   Belgium      −4.38    0.12     0.98   0.18   New Zealand         −1.42   0.15    0.37   0.24
                                   Canada       −0.46    0.13     1.06   0.22   Norway              −0.34   0.12   −1.01   0.18
                                   Denmark      −1.16    0.12    −0.67   0.18   Portugal            −0.28   0.12   −1.38   0.19
                                   Finland       0.82    0.12    −1.33   0.18   Spain                1.56   0.12   −1.35   0.18
                                   France        1.15    0.12     0.05   0.18   Sweden               0.05   0.12   −0.06   0.18
                                   Germany       1.44    0.12     0.82   0.18   United Kingdom       0.52   0.12    0.89   0.18
                                   Greece       −0.38    0.12    −2.51   0.18   United States        1.34   0.13    2.83   0.22
                                   Italy         1.81    0.12    −0.12   0.18




     Table 18: EIU Data, Step 1 Country-Specific Estimates
     Country                     Ŝi    S.E.    exi     S.E.    Country               Ŝi    S.E.    exi    S.E.   Country                 Ŝi    S.E.    exi    S.E.
     Argentina                   0.71   0.17    0.74    0.24    Iceland              −0.06   0.17   −3.09   0.24   Poland                  0.56   0.16    0.26   0.23
     Australia                  −0.23   0.16    2.19    0.24    India                 0.54   0.16    1.76   0.24   Portugal               −0.03   0.16    0.31   0.23
     Austria                     0.11   0.16    1.31    0.23    Indonesia             1.01   0.16    1.39   0.23   Romania                 0.13   0.16   −0.42   0.23
66




     Azerbaijan                  0.06   0.17   −5.28    0.25    Iran, Islamic Rep.    0.75   0.18   −2.71   0.26   Russian Federation      1.17   0.16    0.55   0.24
     Belgium                    −2.79   0.16    6.16    0.23    Ireland              −3.13   0.16    4.65   0.23   Saudi Arabia            0.22   0.18   −0.59   0.26
     Brazil                      0.59   0.16    2.33    0.23    Israel                0.08   0.17    0.37   0.24   Senegal                −0.70   0.17   −3.76   0.25
     Brunei Darussalam           1.59   0.21   −7.49    0.32    Italy                 0.35   0.16    2.93   0.23   Slovak Republic        −0.45   0.16   −0.21   0.23
     Bulgaria                    0.03   0.17   −1.23    0.24    Japan                 1.09   0.16    3.49   0.23   South Africa            0.00   0.16    1.76   0.23
     Canada                     −0.44   0.16    2.89    0.23    Jordan               −0.81   0.17   −1.88   0.24   Spain                   0.03   0.16    2.48   0.23
     Central African Republic    0.69   0.21   −7.07    0.31    Kazakhstan            0.55   0.17   −2.45   0.24   Sri Lanka              −0.25   0.17   −1.06   0.24
     Chile                      −0.04   0.17    0.56    0.24    Kenya                −0.65   0.16   −2.69   0.24   Sweden                  0.42   0.16    1.86   0.23
     China                       0.71   0.16    4.04    0.23    Korea, Rep.           0.58   0.16    3.06   0.23   Switzerland            −0.04   0.18    2.05   0.25
     Colombia                    0.11   0.16   −1.18    0.24    Malaysia             −1.93   0.16    5.33   0.23   Syrian Arab Republic   −0.41   0.17   −3.04   0.24
     Cote d’Ivoire               0.80   0.18   −3.42    0.27    Mexico               −0.23   0.16    1.43   0.24   Thailand                0.51   0.18    1.87   0.25
     Czech Republic              0.05   0.16    0.68    0.23    Morocco              −0.47   0.16   −0.65   0.23   Tunisia                 0.10   0.16   −2.02   0.24
     Denmark                    −0.37   0.16    1.74    0.23    Nepal                 0.43   0.21   −5.07   0.28   Turkey                  0.71   0.16    0.51   0.23
     Ecuador                    −0.32   0.17   −1.84    0.24    New Zealand          −0.62   0.17    1.75   0.24   Ukraine                 1.52   0.18   −1.21   0.26
     Egypt, Arab Rep.            0.29   0.16   −1.30    0.23    Nigeria              −1.02   0.18   −2.98   0.26   United Kingdom         −0.38   0.16    3.71   0.23
     Ethiopia                   −0.68   0.18   −4.15    0.27    Norway                0.35   0.16    0.00   0.23   United States          −0.25   0.16    5.19   0.23
     Finland                     0.60   0.16    0.93    0.23    Oman                 −0.36   0.17   −2.94   0.25   Uruguay                −0.53   0.18   −0.59   0.25
     France                      0.38   0.16    3.04    0.23    Pakistan              0.30   0.16    0.09   0.23   Venezuela, RB           0.85   0.17   −2.51   0.24
     Germany                     0.11   0.16    3.95    0.23    Paraguay             −0.03   0.18   −3.03   0.26   Vietnam                −0.37   0.18    0.63   0.26
     Greece                      0.33   0.16   −0.92    0.23    Peru                  0.22   0.17   −0.73   0.24   Zambia                 −1.91   0.17   −1.84   0.26
     Hungary                     0.59   0.16   −0.17    0.23    Philippines          −0.72   0.16    1.50   0.23
                           Table 19: Step 1 Trade Cost Estimates and Summary Statistics
     Geographic Barriers         ICP 2004 Data                  EK Data                     EIU Data
     Barrier                Parameter Estimate    S.E.   Parameter Estimate   S.E.   Parameter Estimate   S.E.
     [0, 375)                      − 5.30         0.21        −2.89           0.14        −5.02           0.19
     [375, 750)                    − 6.29         0.14        −3.56           0.10        −5.28           0.11
     [750, 1500)                   − 7.27         0.09        −3.87           0.07        −5.71           0.07
     [1500, 3000)                  − 8.50         0.06        −4.10           0.15        −6.63           0.05
     [3000, 6000)                  − 9.65         0.04        −6.15           0.09        −7.70           0.04
67




     [6000, maximum]              −10.35          0.05        −6.60           0.10        −8.41           0.04
     Shared border                  1.25          0.12          0.44          0.14          1.04          0.16
     Summary Statistics
                                  ICP 2004 Data                  EK Data                    EIU Data
     No. Obs                          10, 513                       342                       4, 607
     TSS                             152, 660                     2, 936                     47, 110
     SSR                              30, 054                     76.56                       8, 208
     σν2                                2.93                       0.25                        1.84
     Table 20: 2003-2005 ICP Data, List of 62 Tradable Basic Headings
     Product Name                                            Product Name
     Rice                                                    Glassware, tableware and household utensils
     Other cereals and flour                                 Major tools and equipment
     Bread                                                   Small tools and miscellaneous accessories
     Other bakery products                                   Non-durable household goods
     Pasta products                                          Pharmaceutical products
     Beef and veal                                           Other medical products
     Pork                                                    Therapeutical appliances and equipment
     Lamb, mutton and goat                                   Motor cars
     Poultry                                                 Motor cycles
     Other meats and preparations                            Bicycles
     Fresh or frozen fish and seafood                        Fuels and lubricants for personal transport equipment
     Preserved fish and seafood                              Telephone and telefax equipment
     Fresh milk                                              Audio-visual, photographic and information processing equipment
     Preserved milk and milk products                        Recording media
     Cheese                                                  Major durables for outdoor and indoor recreation
     Eggs and egg-based products                             Other recreational items and equipment
     Butter and margarine                                    Newspapers, books and stationery
     Other edible oils and fats                              Appliances, articles and products for personal care
     Fresh or chilled fruit                                  Jewellery, clocks and watches
     Frozen, preserved or processed fruits                   Metal products and equipment
68




     Fresh or chilled vegetables                             Transport equipment
     Fresh or chilled potatoes
     Frozen or preserved vegetables
     Sugar
     Jams, marmalades and honey
     Confectionery, chocolate and ice cream
     Food products n.e.c.
     Coffee, tea and cocoa
     Mineral waters, soft drinks, fruit and vegetable juices
     Spirits
     Wine
     Beer
     Tobacco
     Clothing materials and accessories
     Garments
     Footwear
     Furniture and furnishings
     Carpets and other floor coverings
     Household textiles
     Major household appliances whether electric or not
     Small electric household appliances
     Table 21: 2004 EIU Data, List of 110 Tradable Goods
     Product Name                        Product Name                              Product Name
     White bread, 1 kg                   Ham: whole (1 kg)                         Business shirt, white
     Butter, 500 g                       Chicken: frozen (1 kg)                    Men’s shoes, business wear
     Margarine, 500g                     Chicken: fresh (1 kg)                     Bacon (1 kg)
     White rice, 1 kg                    Frozen fish fingers (1 kg)                Men’s raincoat, Burberry type
     Spaghetti (1 kg)                    Fresh fish (1 kg)                         Socks, wool mixture
     Flour, white (1 kg)                 Instant coffee (125 g)                    Dress, ready to wear, daytime
     Sugar, white (1 kg)                 Ground coffee (500 g)                     Women’s shoes, town
     Cheese, imported (500 g)            Tea bags (25 bags)                        Women’s cardigan sweater
     Cornflakes (375 g)                  Cocoa (250 g)                             Women’s raincoat, Burberry type
     Yoghurt, natural (150 g)            Drinking chocolate (500 g)                Tights, panty hose
     Milk, pasteurized (1 l)             Coca-Cola (1 l)                           Child’s jeans
     Olive oil (1 l)                     Tonic water (200 ml)                      Child’s shoes, dresswear
     Peanut or corn oil (1 l)            Mineral water (1 l)                       Child’ s shoes, sportswear
     Potatoes (2 kg)                     Orange juice (1 l)                        Girl’s dress
     Onions (1 kg)                       Wine, common table (1 l)                  Boy’s jacket, smart
     Mushrooms (1 kg)                    Wine, superior quality (700 ml)           Compact disc album
     Tomatoes (1 kg)                     Wine, fine quality (700 ml)               Television, colour (66 cm)
     Carrots (1 kg)                      Beer, top quality (330 ml)                Kodak colour film (36 exposures)
     Oranges (1 kg)                      Scotch whisky, six years old (700 ml)     International foreign daily newspaper
     Apples (1 kg)                       Gin, Gilbey’s or equivalent (700 ml)      International weekly news magazine (Time)
69




     Lemons (1 kg)                       Vermouth, Martini & Rossi (1 l)           Paperback novel (at bookstore)
     Bananas (1 kg)                      Cognac, French VSOP (700 ml)              Personal computer (64 MB)
     Lettuce (one)                       Liqueur, Cointreau (700 ml)               Low priced car (900-1299 cc)
     Eggs (12)                           Soap (100 g)                              Compact car (1300-1799 cc)
     Peas, canned (250 g)                Laundry detergent (3 l)                   Family car (1800-2499 cc)
     Tomatoes, canned (250 g)            Toilet tissue (two rolls)                 Deluxe car (2500 cc upwards)
     Peaches, canned (500 g)             Dishwashing liquid (750 ml)               Regular unleaded petrol (1 l)
     Sliced pineapples, canned (500 g) Insect-killer spray (330 g)                 Cost of six tennis balls eg Dunlop, Wilson
     Beef: filet mignon (1 kg)           Light bulbs (two, 60 watts)
     Beef: steak, entrecote (1 kg)       Batteries (two, size D/LR20)
     Beef: stewing, shoulder (1 kg)      Frying pan (Teflon or good equivalent)
     Beef: roast (1 kg)                  Electric toaster (for two slices)
     Beef: ground or minced (1 kg)       Aspirins (100 tablets)
     Veal: chops (1 kg)                  Razor blades (five pieces)
     Veal: fillet (1 kg)                 Toothpaste with fluoride (120 g)
     Veal: roast (1 kg)                  Facial tissues (box of 100)
     Lamb: leg (1 kg)                    Hand lotion (125 ml)
     Lamb: chops (1 kg)                  Shampoo & conditioner in one (400 ml)
     Lamb: Stewing (1 kg)                Lipstick (deluxe type)
     Pork: chops (1 kg)                  Cigarettes, Marlboro (pack of 20)
     Pork: loin (1 kg)                   Business suit, two piece, medium weight
