                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              THE ECONOMICS OF STATE AND LOCAL PUBLIC PENSIONS

                                          Jeffrey R. Brown
                                            Robert Clark
                                            Joshua Rauh

                                        Working Paper 16792
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16792


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2011




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Jeffrey R. Brown, Robert Clark, and Joshua Rauh. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Economics of State and Local Public Pensions
Jeffrey R. Brown, Robert Clark, and Joshua Rauh
NBER Working Paper No. 16792
February 2011
JEL No. G18,G23,H55,H7

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper provides an overview of an economics-based perspective on the financial aspects of state
and local public pensions in the U.S. Drawing on the research commissioned for an NBER research
program on this topic, we discuss the large degree to which public pension liabilities exceed the assets
set aside to fund them. We summarize issues related to the optimality of pre-funding, portfolio allocation,
the discounting of liabilities, as well as how plans operate in practice. We also lay out an agenda for
future research related to financial aspects of public pensions, retiree health plans for public employees,
as well as issues related to plan design and labor market outcomes.


Jeffrey R. Brown                                     Joshua Rauh
Department of Finance                                Kellogg School of Management
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign           Northwestern University
515 East Gregory Drive                               2001 Sheridan Road
Champaign, IL 61820                                  Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER                                             and NBER
brownjr@illinois.edu                                 joshua-rauh@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Robert Clark
Poole College of Management
Box 7229
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, NC 27695
robert_clark@ncsu.edu
                   The Economics of State and Local Public Pensions
                       By Jeffrey R. Brown, Robert Clark and Joshua Rauh

1. Introduction


       The financial status of public pensions and retiree health plans is one of the most

important public finance questions confronting state and local governments. Hardly a day goes

by without a major story appearing about the rising cost and soaring unfunded liabilities of

these plans and the impact of the recession on the value of their assets. By many accounts the

financial demands of paying public employee pensions threatens the ability of governments to

adequately fund other priorities including essential public services. The primary aim of this

special issue is to provide greater understanding of the problems facing public retirement plans

and to highlight important questions for future research on the economics of public pension

systems.


       Retirement benefits are an important aspect of the compensation packages of many

workers in the U.S. However, there is a substantial disparity between public and private sector

workers. The great majority of full‐time public sector employees are covered by employer‐

sponsored defined benefit (DB) pension plans as well as retiree health insurance. In

comparison, fewer than 15% of non‐unionized private sector workers in the U.S. are covered by

a DB pension plan, and over one‐third of non‐unionized private sector workers do not have

access to any retirement benefits at all including 401(k)‐type plans.1 Few have access to retiree

health insurance. Around two‐thirds of unionized private‐sector workers have access to a DB

pension plan, and retiree health insurance is more prevalent than in the non‐unionized sector,

although unionized public sector workers comprise only around 12% of the workforce.
                                                                                                 1
       Trends over time paint a picture of divergence between the public sector and private

sector. In the private sector of the economy, coverage by defined benefit (DB) plans has

declined dramatically over the past three decades since the passage of the Employee

Retirement Income Security Act in 1974 and the advent of the 401(k) plan a few years later.

Moreover, retiree health insurance is a rapidly declining employee benefit in the private sector.

In the public sector, DB plans and retiree health coverage remain the norm. If state and local

governments can meet their retirement promises, then public sector employees will benefit by

bearing less individual risk in retirement. However, the cost and unfunded liabilities associated

with retirement plans in the public sector have become a major policy issue for state and local

governments with substantial economic implications.


       While the divergence in retirement benefits between public and private employees is

not a new trend, the differences have come into sharper focus over the past few years as a

result of growing fiscal pressures on state and local governments. The recent credit crisis and

recession resulted in sharp decline in asset values held in pension trusts and very low interest

rates which have inflated the present discounted value of pension liabilities. Lower assets and

greater liabilities have resulted in sharp declines in funding ratios for many public DB plans. The

collective underfunding of public pensions is estimated to be as high as $3 trillion (Novy‐Marx

and Rauh, forthcoming). The decline in the funding status of these plans comes at a time when

state and local governments are also struggling with a shrinking tax base and increasing

demand for services. Taxpayers, the popular press, analysts, and policymakers are taking notice

of the funding shortfalls. They are finding, however, that the solutions are few, difficult, and




                                                                                                    2
politically painful. Many are concerned that the rising costs of retirement plans will restrict the

ability of governments to adequately fund other priorities such as resources for public schools.


       This article summarizes some of the most important lessons from a recent NBER project

on state and local pensions. We begin in section 2 by assessing the state of public sector

pension funding in the U.S., discussing the magnitude of underfunding both in absolute terms

and relative to other economic measures. We then turn in section 3 to an analysis of the

optimal funding and asset allocation of public pension systems. In section 4 we discuss how we

got here, before turning in section 5 to the much harder question of the likely effects of a

number of policies that have been proposed in other forums. Section 6 highlights many

unanswered questions about the labor market effects of public pensions and expands the

analysis to include retiree health plans.




2. What is the State of Public Pension Funding in the U.S.?


   Although there is disagreement between economists and plan administrators on the size of

the unfunded liabilities, everyone agrees that state and local pensions in the U.S. have assets

that are substantially below the present value of the promises that have been made to public

sector workers and retirees. The extent of disagreement over the size of the liabilities is

nonetheless surprising. While some uncertainty over the size of the liabilities is warranted

given the need to project future wages, for example, the core debate in this area is over the

choice of the appropriate discount rate.



                                                                                                   3
      Most Ph.D. economists and finance scholars believe that the appropriate way to discount

any stream of cash flows is to use a discount rate that reflects the risk of the cash flows being

discounted. Even with that near‐consensus, however, there is considerable room for discussion

about how to come up with an appropriate rate for discounting future public pension liabilities,

given that public pension liabilities are not traded assets and the fact that in some states (e.g.,

Illinois), public pension promises are backed by constitutional non‐impairment clauses while in

others (e.g., Indiana) the state has much more flexibility to reduce pensions. For example,

Brown and Wilcox (2009) and Novy‐Marx and Rauh (forthcoming) discuss the pros and cons of

using treasury rates, municipal bond rates, and swap rates. Using such an approach, Novy‐

Marx and Rauh (forthcoming) estimate that the present value of state and local liabilities

exceeded the value of public pension assets by approximately $3 trillion as of June 2009.


   In sharp contrast to modern finance theory and the views of most economists, many plan

administrators, policy‐makers, DB plan actuaries, labor unions, and at least one think tank2 hold

the view that it is appropriate to discount the future value of liabilities using the expected rate

of return on plan assets. It is difficult to assess the degree to which the reason this view is so

widely held is a result of widespread financial illiteracy or for political economy reasons (e.g., it

is easier to maintain public support for public DB plans and/or to circumvent balanced budget

rules if the true cost to taxpayers is understated.) Indeed, discounting at an expected return has

no rigorous theoretical foundation. Yet it is an integral part of the Government Accounting

Standards Board (GASB) guidelines that all state and local pension systems follow. As a result,

nearly all public plans discount their liabilities using an inappropriately high discount rate,

usually 7 to 9 percent instead of a rate closer to 4 percent that would approximate the real

                                                                                                        4
rate. This is a methodological choice that results in the official measures of underfunding being

much smaller than the true liabilities facing the plan. For example, Munnell et al (2011) find,

using a sample of 126 public plans, a funding ratio in 2009 of only 78 percent when assessed

using GASB standards, which translates into an aggregate under‐funding of about $800 billion.

While this is still a very large number, it is only a fraction of the estimates using more

appropriate discount rates.


3. Should Public Pensions be Pre‐Funded, and, If So, How?


    Much of the academic and public discussions over pension funding implicitly assume that

the appropriate benchmark is 100% funding. In the context of the private sector in the U.S., the

fact that corporate pension benefits are guaranteed by the Pension Benefit Guaranty

Corporation creates clear economic reasons for the federal government to enforce full funding

in order to limit taxpayer liability.3


    At the other extreme, it is quite common for national DB plans – including the U.S. Social

Security system – to be funded primarily on a pay‐as‐you‐go basis, with little if any pre‐funding

of benefit obligations. Indeed, even after netting out the $2.54 trillion balance in the Social

Security trust funds at the end of 2009, the U.S. Social Security system is underfunded by $5.4

trillion over the next 75 years on an open‐group basis, or $16.1 trillion over an infinite horizon

(2010 OASDI Trustees Report). The optimality of pay‐as‐you‐go versus funded systems is a

long‐standing debate in the economics literature, starting with Samuelson’s classic paper (1958)

in which he showed that a pay‐as‐you‐go system provides a rate of return that is equivalent to

the growth in the tax base. Subsequent work, such as Feldstein’s (1974) paper, showed that an


                                                                                                     5
important economic cost of such a system is that it has a substantial negative impact on the

capital stock in the U.S.4


   This raises a natural – and important – question: what is the optimal level of funding for

state and local DB plans? There are a number of important arguments in favor of a high level (if

not full) funding. For example, Munnell, et al (2011), argue that “each generation of taxpayers

should pay the full cost of the public services it receives. If a worker’s compensation includes a

defined benefit pension, the cost of the benefit earned in that year should be recognized, and

funded, at the time the worker performs that service, not when the pension is paid in

retirement.” An important question addressed by several of the papers in the volume is how to

quantify that cost.


   Assuming that the true costs of providing DB pensions can be properly measured, the

question of the optimal funding level is a question that relates to the optimal level of public

debt. Munnell et al (2011) point out that requiring that state and local governments pay the

full annual costs might also limit the accounting “game” by which governments award

excessively generous pensions as a substitute for current wages, thereby transferring the fiscal

burden from current to future generations. If pension accounting is opaque to taxpayers but

the costs regular borrowing through bonds is transparent, then to the extent that a state has to

borrow, there would be a justification for doing so in the form of bonds and not from public

employees in the form of pensions. Indeed, in terms of the intergenerational consequences of

state debt, a starting point is the famous doctrine of Ricardo (1820), which postulates the

irrelevance for public welfare of financing current spending with debt versus taxes. Of course,



                                                                                                   6
one of the conditions required for Ricardian equivalence is that the public is aware of the level

of total state indebtedness (see Novy‐Marx and Rauh, 2009).


   Furthermore, borrowing from public employees in the form of pensions can have

particularly dire consequences if the state becomes unable (or taxpayers become unwilling) to

meet the full obligation. Thirty percent of public employees in the U.S. are not on Social

Security, and there would be serious legal, practical, and political consequences of attempts to

restructure this pension debt.


    However, there are also a number of potential reasons that full‐funding of pensions may

not emerge as the optimal decision. For example, one can imagine a positive political economy

model (that, at least anecdotally, appears to have some historical support in states like Illinois)

in which short‐time‐horizon politicians have an incentive to increase pension benefits when

funding levels are high, not placing sufficient weight on the fact that they might be unable to

reduce them (due to constitutional prohibitions) when funding levels are lower.


   Bohn (2011) develops a model that indicates that state and local governments should not

fund these plans but rather pay for all benefits out of current revenues. This is a provocative

idea that merits further consideration by other scholars as it goes against much conventional

wisdom and is in opposition to the decisions of virtually all state and local governments to at

least partially fund their plans. In a model in which most citizens are borrowers, to the extent

that a state has the ability to borrow more cheaply than taxpayers (a condition that may or may

not hold once one takes into account the tax subsidy for borrowing), Bohn shows conditions

under which the optimal level of funding may, in fact, be zero. He explores the role that


                                                                                                      7
differences in intermediation costs between voters and governments plays in the optimal

pension funding problem.


   Once an entity decides on the level of funding that it wishes to undertake, a related decision

is how to invest the assets that it sets aside for this purpose. Some authors (for example Black

(1989), Bodie (1990)) have suggested that already‐accrued public pension liabilities (technically,

the Accumulated Benefit Obligation, or ABO) ought to be backed by a bond portfolio with a

comparable duration. Such a portfolio would effectively insulate a plan’s funding status from

fluctuations in interest rates (and would obviously insulate plan funding from equity market

fluctuations as well). Others (e.g., Lucas and Zeldes, 2006)), have suggested that to the extent

that part of the pension liabilities are a function of future wages growth, and to the extent that

wages and stock returns are correlated over long time horizons, that an optimal portfolio would

include some equity holdings. The same authors have also pointed out that this effect must be

balanced against the distortionary costs of potentially having to increase taxes substantially in

the future if the assets fall short of the required levels to pay benefits (Lucas and Zeldes, 2009).


   Pennacchi and Rastad (2011) enter this discussion of optimal asset allocation by considering

cases in which pension fund managers maximize the utility of wealth of a representative

taxpayer. They find that there is a strong case to be made for hedging the liabilities in order to

minimize funding risk. They also discuss, however, circumstances in which pension funding risk

might be more or less beneficial to taxpayers. For example, if a significant portion of taxpayers

lack access to risky investments, taking on some pension investment risk could provide those

taxpayers with such exposure. Additionally, they discuss that when a pension fund runs a



                                                                                                     8
surplus, the surplus may not accrue to the taxpayer.5 If the surplus is shared with public

employees (through higher benefits or reduced contributions), then the taxpayers may not

benefit from the risk premia generated by equity investment.


       Shifting from a normative to a positive theory of public pension investment behavior,

Pennacchi and Rastad note that the practice of delegating pension fund management could

lead to agency problems, such as if the pension board or staff maximized their own utility

rather than that of a representative taxpayer. Because the stated objectives used to guide

pension plan investment decisions often downplay the risk of pension liabilities, the board and

staff may be judged against an alternative benchmark such as the investment performance of

peer pension plans. These agency‐problems can lead to excessive equity investment.


   They then test these models using panel data on 125 state pension funds from 2000 – 2009.

Consistent with the hypothesis of agency behavior on the part of public pension fund

managers, they find evidence that funds chose greater overall asset – liability portfolio risk

following periods of relatively poor investment performance. In addition, they find that

pension plans that use higher discount rates for their liabilities tend to choose riskier asset

portfolios. Interestingly, consistent with a desire to gamble for higher benefits, pension plans

take more risk when they have greater representation by plan participants on their Boards of

Trustees.




                                                                                                   9
4. How did we get here?


   The proximate cause of the current funding problems facing many state and local pensions

is the “Great Recession.” As discussed in Munnell, et al (2011), the substantial decline in asset

values reduced the market value of equities held by state and local plans by approximately $1

trillion. There is no question that a $1 trillion loss had an enormous impact on funding levels.

However, it is also important to recognize that the real roots of the funding shortfalls go far

deeper.


   As a starting point, a natural first question is why state and local pension plans were

exposed to so much equity risk in the first place. As discussed in Pennacchi and Rastad (2011),

a portfolio that hedges the pension liabilities would have a majority of its funds invested in

fixed income securities. Instead, however, the typical portfolio held by public pension plans has

only about a 25% allocation to fixed income, with the rest in equities and equity‐like asset

classes including private equity and real estate. As noted in the prior section, the authors also

find evidence that funds chose greater overall asset liability portfolio risk following periods of

relatively poor investment performance. Overall their evidence is consistent with the notion

that public funds have an incentive to gamble for higher returns with risky assets.


   A second important contributor to the poor funding status of state and local pension plans

is – in many states – the history of consistently failing to make sufficient annual contributions.

Schieber (2011) provides an interesting history of the development of public sector retirement

plans. Clark, Craig and Sabelhaus (2011) provide a comprehensive history of the development


                                                                                                     10
of public pension plans in the twentieth century that explains the consolidation of plans within

states, the decisions to adopt DB plans throughout the century, and the reassessment of these

plans at the beginning of the twenty‐first century.


   A third factor is a history of increasing benefits during “good times” without taking into

account constraints against lowering benefits during bad times. Schieber (2011) discusses a

number of cases in which states and municipalities raised benefits for public employees without

adequate consideration of the long run consequences of the higher benefits.6 An interesting

question for future research is whether such benefit increases are related to the funding status

of the plan as measured using the expected rate of return on assets. If the liabilities had been

measured using the real interest rate the funding ratios would have been much lower and so

one can wonder whether reporting the true liabilities would have forestalled the rush to

increase benefits.


   The tendency to increase pension benefits is related to the question of whether benefits in

the public sector are greater than those in the private sector in order to offset lower wages.

Schieber (2011) reviews the literature that compares the compensation of public employees to

that of comparable employees in the private sector and concludes that if the objective of

policymakers has been to offer generous benefits to offset lower wages, they have been

successful and perhaps even provided benefits that make total compensation for public

employment greater than that in the private sector of the economy.


   Putting it all together, the reason public pensions find themselves under‐funded is the

result of insufficient contributions, excessive benefit increases during times of reported


                                                                                                 11
overfunding, and poor asset‐liability risk management. The real question for academics and

policymakers is whether rigorous empirical and theoretical research can affect accounting

standards, funding strategies, and the actions of political bodies concerning public pension

plans. There are important issues that need additional study if the current pension problems

are to be resolved.




5. Where Do We Go From Here?


   Diagnosing the problem is the easy part. Much more difficult is determining how to solve

the funding problem that now faces most state and local governments. To be clear, the

difficulty is not a conceptual one – one must either dedicate new revenue to the pension

systems, or one must cut the benefits being paid out from the system. Rather, the difficulty

arises from legal constraints as well as political constraints due to the enormity of the changes

required.


   Starting on the expenditure side, a number of states appear to be constitutionally

constrained in their ability to reduce pension benefits on existing workers. As discussed at

length in Brown and Wilcox (2009), seven states have constitutional “non‐impairment” clauses

that prevent the legislature from undertaking any action that would “impair” benefits to

pension participants. Historically, there has never been a case in which pensioners protected

by such a system have experienced a reduction in their benefits, even in extreme cases such as

the New York City financial crisis of 1975 or the Orange County bankruptcy of 1994. Even in

states without non‐impairment clauses, courts have often interpreted the contracts clauses of

                                                                                                12
state constitutions as providing protections, at least for benefits accrued to date. While some

courts in some states (e.g., Indiana) appear to have provided legislatures with tremendous

flexibility when it comes to reducing pensions, most states are constrained. Of course, even in

those states that are legally permitted to reduce pension benefits, politicians face tremendous

political pressure from public sector workers and the unions which represent many of them.


    As a result of these constraints, benefit reductions are sometimes targeted at “future”

workers, i.e., those not yet hired. For example, in 2010 Illinois passed a pension reform law

that substantially reduced DB pension benefits for workers hired on or after January 1, 2011.

As a result, the state now has a “two tier” pension system, with meaningful differences in

benefit generosity based on whether one was hired before or after that date.


    Novy‐Marx and Rauh (2011) study the financial impact of several policy reforms.

Unfortunately, they find that even rather significant cuts in benefits would not be sufficient to

close the funding gap. For example, they calculated that a one percentage point reduction in

Cost‐of‐Living Adjustments (COLA’s) would reduce total pension liabilities by approximately 10

percent. Adjusting early retirement benefits in an actuarially fair way would reduce liabilities

by, only 2‐ 5 percent. Similarly, increasing the retirement age by one year would reduce

liabilities by 2‐4 percent. Even more dramatic reforms – such as the complete elimination of

COLAs or moving to a retirement age that mirrors Social Security – would still leave enormous

unfunded liabilities (in the range of $1.5 trillion).


    As a result, it appears that taxpayers are going to bear the brunt of the legacy pension costs

facing state and local governments. Importantly, even fundamental changes in the pension


                                                                                                   13
structure (e.g., moving state and local workers into Social Security, or partially or wholly

replacing the states’ DB plans with DC plans) would not eliminate the existing debt overhang.

Such reforms may be a useful way forward if they impose funding discipline on states and/or if

existing participants are willing to accept a benefit reduction in return for the opportunity to

diversify out of an under‐funded state pension plan. But such reforms – unless they reduce the

present value of future benefits to employees – will not eliminate the obligation of states to

make good on already‐accrued pension benefits.




6. Other Key Aspects of Retirement Benefits


   The first five papers in this special issue primarily focus on the funding status and financial

management of pension plans. Each of these papers represents new research on one or more

aspects of the funding of pension plans for public employees. There are several other

important aspects of retirement benefits that merit further research. The final three papers in

the volume examine plan design issues, labor market effects of public pension plans, and

retiree health plans. The focus of these papers is highlighting what we know about these issues

from research on private plans and to identify important areas in need of further research.


   State and local pension plans different in several respects from such plans in the private

sector. Beshears et al (2011) provides an in depth review of the basic plan characteristics for

the largest state and local plans. Their analysis shows that public plans are in large measure still

DB plans, they have much lower normal retirement ages than private sector plans, are more

generous, and they are not subject to ERISA legislation. Career employees in the public sector

                                                                                                     14
often receive pension benefits that represent 75 to 80 percent of their final average salaries.

This is substantially higher than most private sector plans would provide. In reviewing public

sector pensions, it is important to recognize that in some states public employees are not

covered by Social Security and this explains much of the difference in generosity across these

plans.


   An emerging trend in the public sector is to allow employees the choice of enrolling in the

DB plan or selecting a defined contribution plan (DC). In general, these primary DC plans in the

public sector are mandatory (if the individual chooses not to enroll in the DB plan) and

contribution rates are required by both the employer and the employee. Other states have

adopted plans that include a less generous DB plan combined with a mandatory DC plan. While

states that are retaining their DB plans are making changes in an effort to reduce plan costs

including raising retirement ages, increasing vesting requirements, increasing the years used to

determine the final average salary, adopting anti‐spiking rules, and increasing employee

contributions. It seems clear that the next decade will consist of fundamental changes in public

pension plans around the country. Given the pace of change, it is important for economists to

provide critical assessments of the features of DB and DC plans to help policymakers develop

optimal plan design for their employees.


   Retirement plans are a component of total compensation and employers adopt and

structure these plans in order to achieve certain human resource objectives. DB benefit plans

have important economic incentives that affect the desirability of employment, turnover rates,

and age specific retirement rates. Friedberg (2011) reviews the literature concerning the



                                                                                                  15
importance of these effects in the private sector and also for public school teachers. The value

of participating in a DB plan is rather low in the first years of employment, spikes at vesting,

rises rapidly as the employee approaches the early and normal retirement ages and then

declines. Understanding the incentives associated with this pattern of accrual is essential to

developing the optimal pension plan for a firm or government. In today’s labor market,

governments must decide if they want to encourage workers to retire in their 50s as most

current public DB systems do through actuarially generous early retirement packages.


   Another key aspect of most public DB plans is how they treat employees who are first

employed in their 20s and leave public service after 5, 10 or even 20 years. These shorter

career employees often receive very low retirement benefits despite years of employment. An

important question is whether public employers want to continue to offer plans that discourage

individuals from working entering public employment if they do not plan to remain for a full

career. DC plans treat shorter career workers much better than DB plans as pension accruals

are greater in the DC plans in the early working years. Additional research on the incentives of

alternative plan designs and different characteristics of DB and DC is very important if public

plans are to be reform while continuing to help attract, retain, and ultimately retire quality

workers into public employment.


   In addition to participating in pension plans, virtually all public employees also are eligible

for retiree health plans. Over the past 5 years, public employers have been required to issue

actuarial statements showing the accrued liabilities of these plans, any assets in funds, and the

unfunded liabilities associated with the promise of health insurance to retirees. While total



                                                                                                     16
liabilities of public retiree health plans are much lower than those associated with public

pension plans, the reported unfunded liabilities are of the same magnitude. In general, these

plans are the same health plan offered to active workers. Clark and Morrill (2011) provide

evidence on the characteristics of state retiree health plans and examine their variation across

the states.7


   The rising cost of these plans has become a major issue for state and local governments and

the public finance implications are very important. In contrast to the funding of pension plans,

most states operate these plans on a pay as you go basis and only a few states have established

trust funds for their plans. The basic characteristics of retiree health plans differ substantially

across the states. Some states allow retirees to be covered by the health plan for life without

paying any premium to be covered by the plan while other states require the retiree to pay the

full premium associated with its health plan. Not surprisingly, the unfunded liabilities

associated with the plans differ substantially depending on the portion of the premium paid by

the state. It would be interesting to have a better understanding of why these plans differ so

greatly across the states.


   Economists have produced numerous papers estimating the effect of pensions on worker

behavior but almost none of the effects of retiree health plans of turnover and retirement. As

the annual cost of providing health insurance to retirees soars, governments are struggling with

methods of slowing the increase in expenditures. It is important for governments to

understand how changes in their plans will affect cost and also the behavior of their employees.

Specifically, changes in retiree health plans are likely to affect retention and retirement



                                                                                                      17
decisions. Recognizing how employees will respond is essential to determining the best

methods of restraining the growth of expenditures and liabilities of these plans.


7. Conclusions


       The research in this special issue along with other research suggests several important

conclusions concerning public sector retirement benefits. First, public sector pension plans are

more generous than comparable plans in the private sector. They tend to pay higher benefits

per year of service and encourage younger retirement ages. Because of these plan

characteristics, these plans cost more than private sector pension plans. Second, many

governmental units have not provided sufficient annual contributions to their pension funds

and as a result, their plans are underfunded and in some cases dramatically so. The economic

downturn and decline in equity values has exacerbated the poor funding of these plans. Third,

compared to reported liabilities, public sector plans are even more poorly funded than official

estimates indicated due to the use of discount rates that are much higher than the rate that

should be used to value accrued liabilities.


       Fourth, public pension fund managers do not appear to invest in a manner consistent

with asset‐liability matching. The portfolios of public pension systems bear some resemblance

to those of university endowments and foundations, despite the fact that public pensions have

even less ability to scale back spending if risky assets underperform expectations.


       Fifth, plan design and characteristics are very important and they influence worker

decisions. Virtually all full‐time public employees are covered by a pension plan and, in contrast

to private sector plans, they tend to be in DB plans which discourage turnover during most of

                                                                                                 18
one’s career and provide large incentives to retire at relatively young ages. However, these

plans treat shorter career workers very poorly. Furthermore, one approach taken by some

states to mitigating funding problems is to hire new workers into DB benefit structures that are

less generous but entail the same level of employee contributions. New generations of public

employees might worry that they will effectively be taxed to pay for unfunded legacy liabilities

of more senior generations of workers. As a result, public employers seeking to reduce pension

costs must consider the impact of such changes on their ability to attract, retain, and retire

quality workers.


       Seventh, the cost of retiree health plans is soaring and, in most states, and these plans

are completely pay‐as‐you‐go. The variation in the cost of health plans across the states is

much greater than the variation in pension plans. Similar to private employers, employers in

the public sector are struggling with the cost of these plans and are implementing an

assortment of policy changes in an attempt to slow the growth rate of their costs.


       Finally, public retirement plans have received far too little attention from pension

policymakers, academic economists and finance experts, and taxpayers. New empirical and

theoretical research is needed to provide needed information to policymakers as they attempt

to reform public sector retirement plans. This special issue is a first step in the effort to shed

new light on these important problems.




                                                                                                     19
References

Beshears, John, James J. Choi, David Laibson and Brigitte Madrian. (2011). Behavioral
Economics Perspectives on Public Sector Pension Plans. Journal of Pension Economics and
Finance, Vol 10 (2).

Black, Fischer. (1989) Should You Use Stocks to Hedge Your Pension Liability? Financial Analysts
Journal, 45(1): 10‐12.

Bodie, Zvi (1990) The ABO, the PBO, and Pension Investment Policy. Financial Analysts Journal,
46(5): 27‐34.

Bohn, Henning. (2011) Should Public Retirement Plans be Fully Funded? Journal of Pension
Economics and Finance, Vol 10 (2).

Brown, Jeffrey R. (2008) Guaranteed Trouble: The Economic Effects of the Pension Benefit
Guarantee Corporation. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 22(1): 1 177‐198

Brown, Jeffrey R and David Wilcox (2009) Discounting State and Local Pension Liabilities.
American Economic Review, 99(2): 538‐542.

Center on Budget and Policy Priorities (2011) Misunderstandings Regarding State Debt,
Pensions, and Retiree Health Costs Create Unnecessary Alarm,
http://www.cbpp.org/cms/index.cfm?fa=view&id=3372

Clark, Robert L. and Melinda Sandler Morrill. (2011). The Funding Status of Retiree Health Plans
in the Public Sector. Journal of Pension Economics and Finance, Vol 10 (2).

Clark, Robert and Melinda Morrill. (2010). Retiree Health Plans in the Public Sector: Is There a
Funding Crisis? Northhampton, MA: Edward Elgar Publishing.

Clark, Robert, Lee Craig, and John Sabelhaus. (2011). State and Local Retirement Plans in the
United States. Northhampton, MA: Edward Elgar Publishing.

Feldstein, M. (1974)., Social Security, Induced Retirement and Aggregate Capital Accumulation,
Journal of Political Economy 82, 905‐926.

Feldstein, Martin and Jeffrey Liebman (2002) Social Security. In Alan Auerbach and Martin
Feldstein, Ed. Handbook of Public Economics Vol. 4. Elsevier Science. Pp. 2245‐2326.

Friedberg, Leora. (2011). Labor Market Aspects of State and Local Retirement Plans: A Review
of Evidence and a Blueprint for Future Research. Journal of Pension Economics and Finance, Vol
10 (2).



                                                                                                   20
Lucas, Deborah and Stephen P. Zeldes (2006) Valuing and Hedging Defined Benefit Pension
Obligations: The Role of Stocks Revisited. Mimeo, Columbia University Graduate School of
Business.

Lucas, Deborah and Stephen P. Zeldes (2009) How Should Public Plans Invest? American
Economic Review, 99(2): 527‐532.

Munnell, Alicia H., Jean‐Pierre Aubry, and Laura Quinby. (2011) Public Pension Funding in
Practice. Journal of Pension Economics and Finance. Vol 10 (2).

Novy‐Marx, Robert and Joshua D. Rauh (2011). Policy Options for State Pension Systems and
Their Impact on Plan Liabilities. Journal of Pension Economics and Finance. Vol 10 (2).

Novy‐Marx, Robert, and Joshua D. Rauh (Forthcoming) Public Pension Promises: How Big Are
They and What Are They Worth? Journal of Finance.

Novy‐Marx, Robert, and Joshua D. Rauh (2009) The Risks and Liabilities of State Sponsored
Pension Plans. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 23(4): 191‐210.

Pennacchi, George and Mahdi Rastad. (2011). Portfolio Allocation for Public Pension Funds.
Journal of Pension Economics and Finance. Vol 10 (2).

Ricardo (1820) Essay on the Funding System. Various Editions.

Samuelson, P. (1958). An Exact Consumption Loan Model of Interest With or Without the Social
Contrivance of Money, Journal of Political Economy 66, 467‐482.

Schieber, Sylvester J. (2011). Political Economy of Public Sector Retirement Plans. Journal of
Pension Economics and Finance. Vol 10 (2).




                                                                                                 21
Endnotes


1
 Unionized private sector workers are substantially more likely than their non‐unionized counterparts to
have access to DB plans, as well as to have retiree health insurance. See the National Compensation
Survey by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, specifically
http://www.bls.gov/ncs/ebs/benefits/2010/ownership/private/table02a.pdf
2
 See Center on Budget and Policy Priorities (2011).
http://www.cbpp.org/cms/index.cfm?fa=view&id=3372
3
 For a fuller discussion of the PBGC and the structural flaws in the program’s design that result in large
underfunded pension liabilities being hoisted on the PBGC, see Brown (2008).
4
 For a rich discussion of the economics of pay‐as‐you‐go versus funded social security systems, see
Feldstein and Liebman (2002)
5
 This is related to Bodie (1990), in which it is pointed out that in a corporate pension plan, shareholders
may not fully benefit from overfunding, which similarly informs the asset allocation choice for corporate
sponsors.
6
 Clark, Craig and Sabelhaus (2011) estimate that between 1982 and 2006 the generosity of public plans
was increased by about 10 percent for career employees.
7
 Clark and Morrill (2010) analyze retiree health plans for general state employees and public school
teachers in all 50 states including plan characteristics and unfunded liabilities.




                                                                                                         22
