                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  SEX RATIOS, ENTREPRENEURSHIP, AND ECONOMIC GROWTH IN THE PEOPLE’S
                          REPUBLIC OF CHINA

                                            Shang-Jin Wei
                                            Xiaobo Zhang

                                        Working Paper 16800
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16800


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2011




This research is supported by U.S. National Science Foundation grant SES-1024574, which we gratefully
acknowledge. The authors would like to thank Patrick Bolton, Qingyuan Du, Lena Edlund, Amit Khandelwal,
Hongbin Li, Rick Mishkin, Meng Xin, Nancy Qian and seminar/conference participants at the NBER
conferences in Cambridge and Beijing, annual Chinese Economists Society meetings in Xiamen, Columbia
University, Cornell University, National University of Singapore, and Carleton University for helpful
discussions, and Kyle Gerry, Joy Glazener, and Jin Yang for assistance. All errors are the authors’
responsibilities. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Shang-Jin Wei and Xiaobo Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Sex Ratios, Entrepreneurship, and Economic Growth in the People’s Republic of China
Shang-Jin Wei and Xiaobo Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 16800
February 2011
JEL No. E2,F3,F43,J1,J2,O1,O4

                                            ABSTRACT

China experiences an increasingly severe relative surplus of men in the pre-marital age cohort. The
existing literature on its consequences focuses mostly on negative aspects such as crime. In this paper,
we provide evidence that the imbalance may also stimulate economic growth by inducing more
entrepreneurship and hard work. First, new domestic private firms – an important engine of growth
– are more likely to emerge from regions with a higher sex ratio imbalance. Second, the likelihood
for parents with a son to be entrepreneurs rises with the local sex ratio. Third, households with a son
in regions with a more skewed sex ratio demonstrate a greater willingness to accept relatively dangerous
or unpleasant jobs and supply more work days. In contrast, the labor supply pattern by households
with a daughter is unrelated to the sex ratio. Finally, regional GDP tends to grow faster in provinces
with a higher sex ratio. Since the sex ratio imbalance will become worse in the near future, this growth
effect is likely to persist.


Shang-Jin Wei
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
Uris Hall 619
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027-6902
and NBER
shangjin.wei@columbia.edu

Xiaobo Zhang
International Food Policy Research Institute
2033 K Street, NW
Washington, DC 20006
x.zhang@cgiar.org
                                                  1


1. Introduction

       This paper explores the implications of sex ratio imbalance for entrepreneurial activities
and economic growth in China.
       A sex ratio imbalance in the marriage age cohort – too many men relative to women – is
a common demographic feature in many Asian economies, including Korea, India, Vietnam,
Singapore, Taiwan, and Hong Kong. In many such economies, parents voluntarily limit the
number of children they wish to have. This, together with a strong preference for sons, and the
availability of inexpensive technology to screen the gender of a fetus (most commonly by
Ultrasound B) to abort the unwanted pregnancy, leads parents to engage in sex selective
abortions in favor of sons. But nowhere else has a more skewed sex ratio than China today,
where a strict family planning policy has restricted the number of children most families can
have to one or two and has greatly reinforced the incentive for sex selective abortions. In 1980,
when the strict family planning policy was first introduced in China, its sex ratio at birth was
1.07 boys per girl, which was basically in line with the natural rate observed in most countries.
The Chinese sex ratio deteriorated steadily to 1.12 boys per girl in 1990, 1.18 in 2000, and 1.22
in 2007 (Li, 2007; Zhu, Lu, and Hesketh, 2009). As a result, roughly one out of every nine young
men today has no realistic hope to get married, mathematically speaking. In some provinces, one
out of every six men cannot get married. This situation is projected to deteriorate in the next ten
years based on the population census data.
       The existing literature has identified several negative consequences of a serious sex ratio
imbalance. First, the scale of involuntarily single men is frightening. For example, the number of
excess Chinese men under age 20 exceeded 32 million in 2005 (Zhu, Lu, and Hesketh, 2009).
This number is greater than the entire male population of Italy or Canada. Second, the imbalance
may cause crimes. Using data across Chinese provinces, Edlund, Li, Yi, and Zhang (2007)
estimate that every one basis point increase in the sex ratio (e.g., from 1.10 to 1.11 boys per girl)
raises violent and property crime rates by 3%, and the rise in the sex ratio imbalance may
account for up to one-seventh of the overall rise in crime in China. Den Boer and Hudson (2004)
boldly hypothesize that the sex ratio imbalance should generate security concerns for other
countries since the one with a high sex ratio “might actively desire to send its surplus young
males to give their lives in a national cause,” although they provide no rigorous data analysis to
back up their theory. Third, the imbalance may also trigger competitive savings among
                                                  2


households – men and households with sons forego current consumption to accumulate wealth in
order to improve a young man’s standing in the marriage market relative to other men. This
increase in the savings rate is inefficient since it does not alter the number of unmarried men in
the aggregate. Wei and Zhang (2009) estimate that about half the increase in the household
savings rate in China during 1990-2005 can be attributed to the rise in the sex ratio. By raising
the aggregate savings, the sex ratio imbalance contributes to China’s current account surplus,
which is a source of international frictions. Since some believe that China’s current account
surplus was a significant factor in the asset price bubbles during 2002-2007 (according to
Greenspan, 2009, and Rajan, 2010, among others), the sex ratio imbalance, by an extension of
that logic, is a contributing factor to the onset of the 2007-2009 global financial crisis.
       In this paper, we study a possibly positive effect of the sex ratio imbalance on economic
growth. If the family wealth of a man relative to those of other men is a sorting variable for a
man’s relative standing in the marriage market, then a rise in the sex ratio can inspire men and
parents with a son to find ways to accumulate more wealth. Working harder or longer, and
becoming more entrepreneurial are ways to achieve this objective. As a result, the economy may
grow faster than it would have otherwise. As far as we know, this effect has never been
investigated before.
       We conduct the empirical analysis using data from censuses of firms, censuses and
surveys of population, and household surveys. Several reasons make China a particularly good
candidate for this research topic. First, China presents one of the fastest increases in the sex ratio
in the world due to its draconian family planning policy. As a result, there is a better chance to
detect this growth effect if one exists. Second, a within-country study has advantages over cross-
country studies as the legal system and other institutions can be more plausibly held constant
across regions within a country than across countries. As a very large country, there are many
sub-national geographic units in China that allow us to have sufficient statistical power when
exploring regional variations. Moreover, due to government restrictions on household
registrations, internal mobility for marriage purpose is low (nearly 90% of marriages take place
between men and women from the same county; see Wei and Zhang, 2009). This makes each
marriage market highly localized. Third, while the Chinese economy is about half the size of the
United States on a PPP-adjusted basis, the contribution of Chinese growth to the incremental
world GDP has been the largest in the world since 2002 (IMF 2009). Therefore, understanding
                                                   3


the determinants of Chinese growth has intrinsic value for international macroeconomics due to
its direct global implications.
       The empirical results not only support the hypothesis qualitatively, but also are
significant quantitatively. Based on the two most recent censuses of firms, we estimate that an
increase in the sex ratio by one standard deviation can account for about half of the extensive
margin of the private sector growth (i.e., the birth of new private firms) across regions.
       To address concerns about possible biases due to measurement errors, endogeneity, and
missing regressors, we employ four different approaches that complement each other. Both an
instrumental variable approach and a placebo test suggest that there is a causal effect from a
higher sex ratio to more entrepreneurship. Two different household-level data provide additional
information. For example, from a random sample of a national population survey in 2005, we
document that parents with a son are more likely to be entrepreneurs in regions with a higher sex
ratio. In comparison, the likelihood for parents with a daughter to be entrepreneurs is
uncorrelated with the local sex ratio. From a separate survey of rural households in 2002, we
estimate that households with a son respond to a rise in the sex ratio by a combination of
working more days off farms (including as migrant workers) and becoming more willing to
accept unpleasant or relatively dangerous jobs. In contrast (but consistent with our hypothesis),
the labor supply pattern of daughter-households is not linked to the local sex ratio.
       Finally, to capture the general equilibrium effect, we also directly check whether the
growth of per capita GDP across regions is linked to the local sex ratio imbalance and find that
the answer is affirmative. We estimate that about 20% of the growth rate of GDP per capita in
recent years can be attributed to a rise in the sex ratio. Since the sex ratio imbalance is projected
to become worse in the next decade, this effect may become relatively more important over time.
       The rest of the paper is organized in the following way. In Section 2, we develop the
argument more fully and connect to related literatures. In Section 3, we provide statistical
evidence. Finally, in Section 4, we conclude and discuss possible future research.


2. The connection between the hypothesis and the existing literature


       The hypothesis that a higher sex ratio can be an important driver for entrepreneurial
activities in China is related to four sets of literature: (a) status goods, (b) economics of family,
                                                                4


(c) entrepreneurship, and (d) causes and consequences of sex ratio imbalance. Each of them is
too vast to be referenced comprehensively here. Instead, we selectively discuss some of them,
with a view to highlight some insight most relevant for our empirical investigation.
            Several theoretical papers have pointed out a connection between concerns for status
(one’s relative position in a society), the savings rate, and the economic growth rate (Cole,
Mailath and Postlewaite, 1992; Cornero and Jeanne, 1999; and Hopkins and Kornienko, 2009).
When wealth defines one’s status in the marriage market, a greater concern for status may lead to
an increase in the growth rate. In principle, concerns for status could also produce the opposite
effect on savings and growth. In particular, if status is enhanced by conspicuous consumption,
then a greater concern for status can translate into a reduction in savings (Frank, 1985 and 2005).
It is interesting to note that, while many papers on the topic of status use competition in the
marriage market to illustrate the idea, the sex ratio is always assumed to be balanced. In other
words, no explicit comparative statistics are derived in terms of a rise in sex ratio imbalance.1
            Du and Wei (2011b) develop a model that explores the effect of a higher sex ratio on
entrepreneurial activities. As it is the only model that explicitly studies such a topic, we review it
with some details. The model features overlapping generations with two genders and a desire to
marry. Everyone lives for two periods, and can marry with a member of the opposite sex at the
beginning of the second period. There are two benefits associated with marriage. First, a husband
and a wife can pool their income and enjoy a partial public good feature of their joint
consumption. That is, the sum of their consumptions can be more than the sum of their incomes.
Second, a married person derives additional emotional utility (or “love”) from his/her spouse.
The amount of emotional utility that a person can bring to her/his future spouse is a random
variable in the first period, but its value is revealed and becomes public knowledge when she/he
enters the marriage market. Men and women are identical in their utility function and the form of
the budget constraint, except that by assumption only men can be entrepreneurs (a simplification
that is relaxed in an extension).
            At the beginning of the second period, men and women voluntarily participate in the
marriage market. The matching between men and women is assumed to follow the Gale-
Shapely algorithm, which produces positive assortative matching in equilibrium. More precisely,
the best woman (defined by a combination of her wealth and the amount of emotional utility she

1
    Edlund (1996) showed that a higher sex ratio imbalance may have a nonlinear impact on women’s status and dowry price.
                                                  5


can bring to her spouse) and the best man (also defined by a combination of wealth and
emotional utility) are matched; the second best woman and the second best man are matched;
and so on. If there are more men than women, the least attractive men are not married. By Gale
and Shapely (1962) and Roth and Sotomayer (1990), this equilibrium is both unique and stable.
       In the first period, both men and women solve an optimization problem that takes into
account the effect of their choices on the outcome in the marriage market. A representative man
makes a sequential choice, first deciding whether to be an entrepreneur and then deciding on a
savings rate. Deciding to be an entrepreneur means to pay a fixed fee in order to get a random
draw on his productivity, which follows a binominal distribution. If his productivity is high, he
becomes a monopolistically competitive producer. If it is low, he becomes a worker. A
representative woman simply decides on a savings rate (as she is always a worker by a
simplifying assumption). Even with a balanced sex ratio, the Nash equilibrium would feature a
fraction of men becoming entrepreneurs. This is because entrepreneurship is a higher risk and a
higher return activity (relative to being a worker). Similar to a portfolio choice problem, there is
generally an interior solution in which a certain fraction of men choose the riskier activity.
       Du and Wei (2011b) derive the following key proposition: As the sex ratio rises, as long
as it is beyond a (low) threshold, more men choose to become entrepreneurs. Here is the intuition.
By the structure of the model, successful entrepreneurs can always succeed in getting married,
but failed entrepreneurs do not. When the sex ratio exceeds a threshold, an increase in the sex
ratio raises the probability that a male worker will not get married, while it does not alter the
expected utility of being an entrepreneur (to a first-order approximation). If the utility from a
marriage is sufficiently large, more men would respond to a higher sex ratio by becoming
entrepreneurs.
       The entrepreneurship model in Du and Wei (2011b) builds on the previous models in Du
and Wei (2010 and 2011a). While the effect of a higher sex ratio on the aggregate savings rate
and current account is the topic of Du and Wei (2010), one result from that model may be
relevant here. If resource allocation within a marriage depends on the husband and the wife’s
bargaining power, which in turn depends on the relative level of wealth that the two bring into
the marriage, then a representative woman could in principle raise her savings rate in response to
a higher sex ratio. This incentive faced by the representative woman – to protect the bargaining
power within a marriage – can offset an opposite incentive – to free ride on the higher expected
                                                  6


wealth from her future husband, and render the net effect of a higher sex ratio on a woman’s
savings rate ambiguous in general. We conjecture that a similar result could hold for
entrepreneurship: If women can also choose to be entrepreneurs, the net effect of a higher sex
ratio on the likelihood of women choosing to be entrepreneurs is ambiguous.
       In a setup that features nontradable goods, Du and Wei (2011a) study channels through
which a higher sex ratio could reduce the value of the real exchange rate. One of the channels is
change in effective labor supply. In particular, as the sex ratio rises, under some conditions, men
choose to cut down leisure and supply more labor, with an aim to raise his wealth level and
improve his chance of success in the marriage market.
       In terms of the empirical literature, Angrist (2002) examined variations in the sex ratio
across immigrant groups in the United States. He documented that a higher male/female sex ratio
has a large positive effect on the female marriage rate, and a large negative effect on female
labor market participation. Interestingly, he found that “higher sex ratios also appear to have
raised male earnings and the incomes of parents with young children.” These results are
consistent with what we report in this paper. It is important to note that Angrist (2002) did not
directly study the effects of sex ratio imbalance on entrepreneurial activities and economic
growth, which are the central focus of this paper.
       There is an extensive literature in demography that documents the phenomenon of
unbalanced sex ratios in Asia (for example, Gu and Roy, 1995; Guilmoto, 2007; and Li, 2007).
Several papers have examined the determinants of sex ratio imbalance (including Das Gupta,
2005; Ebenstein, 2009; Edlund, 2009; Li and Zheng, 2009; and Bulte, Heerink and Zhang, 2011).
In an influential paper, Oster (2005) proposes that the prevalence of Hepatitis B is a significant
cause of the sex ratio imbalance in Asia. But this conclusion is later shown to be incorrect,
including by Lin and Luoh (2008) and Oster, Chen, Yu and Lin (2008). In a paper with a clever
instrumental variable approach, Qian (2008) shows that an improvement in the economic status
of women tends to reduce the sex ratio imbalance. Her instrument for the economic status of
women is the world price of tea, whose production is apparently particularly suitable for women
laborers. Wei and Zhang (2009) document that a higher sex ratio induces more savings. However,
the paper does not examine how labor supply and entrepreneurship respond to a change in the
sex ratio, which is the central focus of the current paper.
                                                   7


        This discussion has clear implications for the empirical work in this paper. First, it is
interesting to find out if entrepreneurial activities are indeed linked to local sex ratios. Second,
given the hypothesized mechanisms, it is informative to check whether and how households with
a son and those with a daughter respond differently to a rise in the sex ratio. Third, given the
possibility that a higher sex ratio could also raise crime rates and have other consequences that
are potentially negative for economic growth, it is important to check the general equilibrium
effect – whether the economy-wide entrepreneurial activities and work effort increase on net, as
reflected in a higher overall growth rate, in response to a rise in the sex ratio.
        Because Wei and Zhang (2009) have provided extensive evidence on the effects of a
higher sex ratio on savings behavior, we will not look at savings in this paper, and concentrate
instead on evidence related to entrepreneurship, work effort, and economic growth. In our view,
pursuing entrepreneurial activity (for higher income) and raising savings rate (out of a given
level of income) are two alternative ways to improve a household’s future wealth.


3. Statistical Evidence


        We start by providing some basic facts about Chinese growth, which are summarized by
two 70% rules. We then use data from the two most recent censuses of manufacturing firms (in
1995 and 2004) to investigate whether local sex ratio imbalance is a predictor of the extent of
local entrepreneurial activities. To zoom in on possibly distinct responses by families with a son
versus those with a daughter, we turn to household-level evidence. Finally, to capture the general
equilibrium effect of a rise in the sex ratio, we conduct a panel growth regressions across
Chinese provinces over 1980-2005.


Background information: the two 70% rules about the Chinese growth
        Since our first piece of evidence has to do with regional variations in entrepreneurial
activity, we work with the two most recent censuses of firms in 1995 and 2004, respectively, so
we can compute the growth in the number of firms by region. During this period, the country’s
industrial value added (at the current price) grew by 266%.
        The growth of the private sector is a major part of the overall growth story. The private
sector is not just restricted to firms that were legally registered private firms. In fact, very few
                                                      8


firms were registered as private firms in the 1980s and 1990s. According to Huang (2009), many
private entrepreneurs at that time found it necessary to set up firms as nominally owned by local
governments (in the form of “township-and-village enterprises,” or “collectively owned firms”).
The goal was presumably to buy “protection” from the local government and to minimize the
risk of state expropriation. Such a practice was widespread and was called “private entrepreneurs
wearing a red hat.” Most entrepreneurs later engineered or attempted to engineer a change in the
firm ownership through which they would become a majority shareholder without injecting
much additional personal capital. Wu (2007) provides fascinating accounts of many
entrepreneurs both when they first “wore a red hat,” setting up a nominally collectively owned
firm, and when they tried to take off the hat, with uneven success rates. Because of the
recognition that most newly established “collectively owned firms” were private firms in
disguise, we adopt a broad definition of domestic private firms to include all such firms.
       In Table 2, we report a simple exercise that decomposes the contributions to the growth
by firm ownership type (domestic private firms, majority state-owned firms, and foreign-
invested firms). Let X(total, t) be the industrial value added for the country as a whole in year t.
Define X(private, t), X(FDI, t), and X(SOE, t) to be the industrial value added in year t by the
domestic private sector, foreign invested firms, and state-owned firms, respectively. X(total, 04)
= X(private, 04) + X(FDI, 04) + X(SOE, 04). Let s(private, 95), s(FDI, 95), and s(SOE, 95) be
the share of the domestic private sector, foreign firms, and state-owned firms, respectively, in the
natural industrial output in 1995. We can decompose the overall growth rate into a weighted
average of the growth rates from the three types of firms:


       (1) G(total) = X(total, 04)/X(total, 95) – 1
                          = g(private)*s(private, 95) + g(FDI) s(FDI, 95) + g(SOE) s(SOE, 95)


       From this equation, we can compute the contribution of the domestic private sector to the
overall growth as: Private sector’s share of the contribution = g(private)s(private,95)/g(total) =
6.22*30.7%/2.66 = 71.9%. Similarly, foreign invested firms account for 30.8% of the overall
growth. The state sector accounts for -2.7% as many state-owned firms were either closed or
taken over by private firms. (Note that the decomposition of the real or nominal growth rates
gives the same result.)
                                                                  9


            We next decompose the private sector growth into the extensive margin (the growth in
the number of firms) and the intensive margin (the growth of average output per firm):


            (2) Ln[X(private, 04)/X(private, 95)] = Ln[N(private, 04)/N(private, 95)] +
                 Ln{[X(private,04)/N(private, 04)]/ [X(private, 95)/N(private, 95)]}


The first term on the right hand side denotes the extensive margin, while the second term denotes
the intensive margin growth. In Table 3, we report the result of the decomposition. The
contribution of the extensive margin = the first term on RHS/LHS = 0.499/0.728 =68.5%.
            To summarize, a little over 70% of the Chinese growth is attributable to the rise of the
private sector. In addition, almost 70% of the private sector growth is attributable to the birth and
the growth of new private firms2. Therefore, the birth and the growth of new private firms are a
significant part of the Chinese growth story.


Where are domestic private firms most likely to emerge?
            We now examine whether there is any connection between the sex ratio and the extensive
margin of private sector growth. To reduce noise, we sort all counties into bins based on their sex
ratios for the age cohort of 5-19 in 1995. All counties in a bin have an identical sex ratio. In
Figure 1, we plot the average growth rate in the number of private firms across all counties in a
bin against the initial sex ratio imbalance for that bin. There is a strong positive relationship
between the growth of the count of private firms and the sex ratio. That is, regions with a more
skewed sex ratio are also places where new private firms are more likely to emerge.
            Many factors could affect the birth and growth of new firms. The age structure of the
local population, the growth rate of the population, local income and education levels, local
industrial structure, and initial scale of the private sector could all matter. We are interested in
investigating whether the local sex ratio also plays a role. We do so by looking at variations in
the growth rate of the count of private firms and local sex ratios across 1790 counties,
conditional on other factors. The specification is as follows:


            (3) Growth_in_firm-countk, 95-04, = β Sex_ratiok, 95, +Xk Γ +e k


2
    Using a provincial level panel data, Li et. al. (2009) show entrepreneurship is a key engine of Chinese economic growth.
                                                  10


        The result is reported in Column 1 of Table 4. The coefficient on initial sex ratio for the
age cohort 5-19 is 0.017 and statistically significant. To see if the effect of the local sex ratio
comes entirely from the local savings rate, we add log local bank savings balance per capita in
1995 as an additional control. The new regressor is not statistically significant. In any case, the
coefficient on the sex ratio is virtually unaffected. To see which sex ratio imbalance in terms of
age cohort matters the most, in Columns 3-5, we restrict the sex ratio to the age cohorts 5-9, 10-
14, and 15-19, respectively. All three seem to matter, but the cohort 10-14 seems to matter the
most. (While the coefficient on the sex ratio for the cohort 15-19 is not statistically significant, it
is mostly due to a greater standard error. The point estimate on the sex ratio in Columns 3 and 5
are virtually the same.) Interestingly, the coefficient on the sex ratio for each age cohort is
smaller than the one for the combined age cohort 5-19. Because most Chinese families have one
or two children, most families with children in the three age brackets do not overlap. As a result,
the effect of the sex ratio for the combined age cohort of 5-19 on the growth of private firms is
approximately the sum of the effects of the sex ratio for the three age cohorts.
        As an alternative measure of the sex ratio, we use the average of the sex ratio for the age
cohort 5-19 in 1995 and the sex ratio for the age cohort of 4-18 in 2004 (inferred from the 1990
and the 2000 censuses, respectively). Due to the way that the sex ratios are reported in the two
censuses (at five-year intervals), we are not able to make an exact match in age cohort. In any
case, the regression results are reported in the last five columns of Table 4. In all regressions, the
coefficients on the sex ratio are positive and statistically significant. In other words, more
domestic private firms were established in regions with a higher sex ratio.


Possible problems with the OLS estimation and solutions
        The OLS estimation may produce biased estimates. First, there could be errors in
measuring the sex ratio for the pre-marital age cohort. For example, with migration in and out of
a county (in spite of the policy restrictions), the sex ratio recorded in the population census may
not exactly correspond to the sex ratio in the local marriage market. The measurement errors tend
to produce a downward bias. Second, the sex ratio might be endogenous. In particular, the
positive association between the local sex ratio and the rate of growth of private firms may
reflect a reverse causality. For example, if private entrepreneurs have a stronger urge to have a
male heir to take over their business when they retire, then regions that happen to see a lot of
                                                                11


private firms may also exhibit a strong son preference and a high sex ratio imbalance. Third, the
sex ratio may be endogenous if it is correlated with some missing regressors. For example, in
spite of our best effort to control for determinants of the growth of private firms, there may be
other variables that are good predictors of future profitability in a region that are not captured by
our list of control variables. If these variables happen to be correlated with the local sex ratio, we
may find a positive association between the local sex ratio and the growth of local private firms
even when there is no direct economic association between the two.
          To address these problems, we adopt four approaches that we hope would complement
and reinforce each other. First, we implement a two-stage least squared (2SLS) procedure in
which the local sex ratio is instrumented by variables that affect regional variations in the sex
ratio but are otherwise unlikely to affect directly the growth of local private firms. Second, we
use data from a population survey and check if the likelihood for parents with a son to become
entrepreneurs differs from parents with a daughter when the sex ratio rises. Third, we adopt a
placebo test on the growth of other profit-seeking firms. If the local sex ratio is simply a proxy
for missing regressors that help to forecast local growth potential, then the sex ratio should also
forecast the extensive margin growth of foreign-invested firms. Finally, we go to household-level
data where we can check possible interactions between local sex ratios and son-families in ways
that will also help us to rule out the endogeneity story. In particular, our theory suggests that son
families and daughter families may alter their work effort in different ways in response to a
common rise in the local sex ratio. We will discuss these approaches in turn.


Approach 1: Instrumental variable approach
          A strategy to address both the measurement error problem and the endogeneity problem
is to employ an instrumental variable approach. A key determinant of the sex ratio imbalance is a
strict family planning policy introduced at the beginning of the 1980s3. We explore three
determinants of local sex ratios that are unlikely to be affected by the growth of local private
firms, and for which we can get data. First, while the goals of family planning are national, the
enforcement is local. Ebenstein (2009) proposes to use regional variations in the monetary

3
  China’s family planning policy, commonly known as the “one-child policy,” has many nuances. Since 1979, the central
government has stipulated that Han families in urban areas should normally have only child (with some exceptions). Ethnic Han
families in rural areas can have a second child if the first one is a daughter (this is referred to as the “1.5 children policy” by
Ebenstein, 2008). Ethnic minority (i.e., non-Han) groups are generally exempted from birth quotas. Non-Han groups account for
a relatively significant share of local populations in Xinjiang, Yunnan, Ganshu, Guizhou, Inner Mongolia, and Tibet.
                                                              12


penalties for violating the birth quotas, originally collected by Scharping (2003), as instruments
for the local sex ratio. The idea is that, in regions with stiff penalties, parents may engage in
more sex-selective abortions, rather than paying a penalty and having more children. The
monetary penalty is often on the order of between one to five times the local average annual
household income. In addition, Ebenstein (2008) coded a dummy for the existence of extra fines
for violations at higher-order births. For example, an additional penalty may kick in on a family
for having the 3rd or 4th child in a one-child zone, or the 4th or 5th child in a two-child zone. Such
a non-linear financial penalty scheme was introduced by different local governments in different
years (if at all), generating variations across regions and over time. These two monetary penalty
variables constitute the first two candidates for our instrumental variables.4
         The third instrumental variable explores the legal exemptions in the family planning
policy. While the policy imposes a strict birth quota on the Han ethnic group (the main ethnic
group in the country), the rest of the population (i.e., some 50 ethnic minority groups) do not
face or face much less stringent quotas. (The government allowed the exemption, possibly to
avoid criticism for using the family planning policy to marginalize the minority groups.) As a
result, the share of non-Han Chinese in the total population has risen from 6.7% in 1982 to 8.5%
in 2000 (Bulte, Heerink, and Zhang, 2011). Non-Han Chinese are not uniformly distributed
across space. In regions with relatively more ethnic minorities, marriages between Han and non-
Han peoples are not uncommon, reducing the competitive pressure for men in the marriage
market (Wei and Zhang, 2009). Therefore, the share of non-Han Chinese in the local population
offers another possible instrument.5
         The first stage regressions are reported in Table 5. The dependent variable in the first
three regressions is the initial sex ratio for the age cohort 5-19, whereas that for the last three
regressions is the average sex ratio of the same age cohort over 1995 and 2004. The coefficients
on the share of the local population not subject to birth quotas are negative and statistically
significant in four regressions. This is consistent with the notion that sex selective abortions are
less prevalent when birth quotas apply to less people.

4
  Edlund et al (2007) conduct some diagnostic checks and conclude that the level of financial penalties is uncorrelated with a
region’s current economic status. We will perform and report a formal test on whether the proposed instruments and the error
term in the second stage regressions are correlated.
5
  In principle, variations in the cost of sex screening technology especially the use of an Ultrasound B machine (as documented
by Li and Zheng, 2009), and the economic status of women (such as that documented in Qian 2008) could also be candidates for
instrumental variables. Unfortunately, we do not have the relevant data. Note, however, for the validity of the instrumental
variable regressions, we do not need a complete list of the determinants of the local sex ratio in the first stage.
                                                              13


         The financial penalties for violating birth quotas generate a positive coefficient in all six
regressions (and significant in four of them). The dummy for the existence of extra penalties for
violations at higher-order births also produces a positive coefficient in all six regressions. These
results imply that a more severe penalty for violating legal birth quotas tends to induce parents to
more aggressively abort girls, resulting in a higher sex ratio imbalance. In other words, when the
penalties are light, many couples with daughters may opt to keep the daughter, pay the penalties,
and have another child, rather than abort the female fetus.
         The adjusted R2’s are in the range between 0.09-0.21. The F statistics (for the null that all
slope parameters are jointly zeros) ranges from 22.8 to 37.5. The Kleibergen-Paap statistics (for
weak instruments) for five out of six regressions are greater than the Stock-Yogo 10% critical
value of 19.9. The Kleibergen-Paap statistic for the second regression is 18.1, which is greater
than the Stock-Yogo 15% critical value of 11.6.
         The second stage regressions are reported in Table 6. The Durbin-Wu-Hausman test
easily rejects the null that the 2SLS and OLS estimates are the same in all six regressions,
implying that the sex ratio variable is likely to be either measured with errors or endogenous.
The Hansen’s J statistics do not reject the null that the instruments and the error term are
uncorrelated.6 The point estimates in Table 6 are generally much larger than their OLS
counterparts in Table 4. This suggests that the downward bias in Table 4 generated either by
missing regressors or by measurement errors is substantial.
         We can compute the economic significance of the estimates. Using the most conservative
estimate in Column 6 of Table 6, an increase in the sex ratio by 3 basis points (e.g., from 1.08 to
1.11), which is equal to the increase in the average sex ratio from 1995 to 2004 (see Table 1),
generates an increase in the natural log number of private firms by 0.39 (=13x0.03). Since the
actual increase in log number of firms in this period is log 0.83 (see Row 3 of Table 1A), the rise
in the sex ratio can potentially explain 47% (=0.39/0.83) of the actual increase in the number of
private firms in China during this period. In other words, the economic impact of the rise in sex
ratio in promoting entrepreneurial activities in rural China is potentially very big.




6
  In household-level regressions to be reported in Tables 11 and 12, we check if the ethnic minorities have a different labor
supply pattern from Han Chinese, holding constant local sex ratio imbalance and other determinants of labor supply, and cannot
reject the null that there is no difference.
                                                              14


         We now perform similar regressions for the urban sample, and report the results in Table
7. The first two columns report OLS results, where the local sex ratio either at the beginning of
the period (1995) or averaged over 1995 and 2004 is positive and statistically significant.
         In columns 3 and 4 of Table 7, we conduct 2SLS estimation. Again, the coefficient on the
sex ratio is positive and statistically significant in both cases. This is consistent with the notion
that a higher sex ratio imbalance has induced more people to engage in entrepreneurial activities.
         It is noteworthy that the IV coefficients on the sex ratio variable for the urban sample in
Table 7 (0.08 and 0.06) are smaller than the corresponding coefficients for the rural sample in
Table 6 (between 0.13 and 0.20). Using the point estimate in the last column of Table 7 (0.06),
an increase in the sex ratio in the urban area by 3 basis points (e.g., from 1.08 to 1.11) would
generate an increase in the natural log number of private firms by 0.18 (=6*0.03), which is about
20% of the actual increase in the number of private firms during this period. While this number
is smaller than for the rural sample, it is still economically significant.


Approach 2: What types of families are most susceptible to stimulation from a higher sex ratio?
         Our story is about how a rise in the sex ratio may encourage more parents with a son, but
not necessarily parents with a daughter, to take up entrepreneurial activities. Since the firm
census data do not have information on the number and gender composition of the children of the
firm owners, we now look at the China Population 1% Survey in 2005 which contains some
information.7 To maximize comparability, we focus on nuclear families with both parents alive
and below the age of 40, and with one or two children. We cap the age of the household head at
40 in order to minimize the probability that an adult child with unknown gender has moved away
and therefore is not counted in the household survey.
         We define occupationkl = 1 if at least one parent in household k in location l is a business
owner or self-employed, and zero otherwise. We run the following Probit regression:


         Prob (occupationkl = 1) = λ sex_ratiol + β sex_ratiol *dunmmy for sonk + Xkl Γ+ ekl




7
  The population census is done once a decade with the latest two rounds in 2000 and 2010. In between the censuses, a stratified
random household survey of 1% of the population was conducted in 2005. We were given access to a 20% random sample of the
2005 survey, which covers 325 cities and 343 rural prefectures.
                                                                15


where sex_ratiol is the sex ratio for the age cohort of 5-19 in location l, dummy for sonk takes the
value of one if family k’s first child is a son and zero otherwise, and Xkl is a vector of control
variables including household wealth (proxied by the value of the house8), household head’s age,
gender, years of education, and years of education squared, whether there is any household
member who has a severe health problem, and the number and the age of the children. λ, β and Γ
are parameters to be estimated. ekl is an iid normally distributed random variable.
          The key parameter of interest is β: If a combination of having a male first child and living
in a region with a high sex ratio makes it more likely for parents to become entrepreneurs, we
would expect β > 0. The regression results for this specification for urban and rural nuclear
families, respectively, are reported in Columns 1 and 4 of Table 8. In both cases, coefficient β is
indeed positive and statistically significant.
          The coefficient λ describes how families without a male first child respond to the local
sex ratio. It is statistically not different zero in both the rural and urban samples. This means that
having a male first child per se does not make parents more likely to be entrepreneurs. Instead, it
takes a combination of having a male child and living in a region with a skewed sex ratio for
parents to be more inclined to be entrepreneurs.
          The above specification requires that the effects of all control variables such as the
household head’s age and gender on parental inclination to be entrepreneurs are identical
regardless of the sex composition of children and the number of children. This requirement may
not be realistic. One way to relax this (unnecessary) restriction is to run separate regressions for
different types of households (so that the coefficients on the control families are allowed to take
different values for different household types). Running separate regressions this way would
reduce possible bias in the estimates of β at the cost of a lower efficiency. Given the relatively
large sample size, we can afford to sacrifice some efficiency in exchange for an improved chance
to obtain unbiased estimates of the key parameters.
          We focus on two specific sub-samples: nuclear families with a son versus nuclear
families with a daughter. A major advantage of these subsamples is that they can help rule out
the possibility that some unobserved family characteristics simultaneously determine the gender


8
 This is the house value at the time of purchase. The population survey asks for the value at the time of purchase and the year of
construction but not the year of purchase. If we pretend that the year of construction is the same as the year of purchase, and
adjust the house value by the national housing price index, we obtain similar results for the rural sample, but the sign on housing
wealth turns negative for the urban sample. In both samples, the patterns on the sex ratio remain unchanged.
                                                                16


of a child and the parental propensity to become entrepreneurs. As Ebenstein (2009) documented,
sex selections are mostly done on the second or higher-order births9. There are few sex selections
on the first-born children, especially in rural areas where the official policy allows for a second
child if the first child is a girl. Since most parents prefer having a daughter and a son to having
two sons, there is very little reason to select gender on the first child. In other words, the gender
of the first child is the choice of nature, not that of the parents. This allows us to focus on the
effect of the child’s gender on the parental propensity to engage in entrepreneurial activity.
          We run separate Probit regressions for nuclear families with a son and nuclear families
with a daughter, respectively,


          Prob (occupationkl = 1) = β sex_ratiol + Xkl Γ+ ekl


where the variables are similar to those explained earlier. The results for the rural sample are
reported in Columns 2 and 3 Table 8. For families with a son, the local sex ratio is a positive and
significant predictor for whether the parents are entrepreneurs. In comparison, for families with a
daughter, the local sex ratio is not significant. The results for the urban sample are reported in
Columns 5 and 6 of Table 8. Again, the local sex ratio is associated with a greater likelihood for
parents to be entrepreneurs for families with a son, but not for families with a daughter.
          While the gender of the first child may be determined by nature, the number of children
in a family is still the choice of parents. To ascertain whether this is important for our conclusion,
we augment the above regression with an additional Heckman selection equation that models
parental choice to stop at one child. This becomes a system of two Probit regressions. For the
selection equation (which families are likely to stop at one child), we add the age of the first
child, a dummy for whether the first child has a disability, and whether the household head is a
minority to the list of regressors represented in the main regression. The additional regressors are
motivated by features of the national family planning policy. First, if a family decides to have a
second child (in regions where a second child is allowed), the family planning policy requires the
parents to wait for the first child to be at least five years old. Second, if the first child is disabled,




9
 The ratio of boys and girls for first born children is close to being natural, whereas the ratio becomes progressively more
skewed when one looks at second born children and third born children, respectively (Ebenstein, 2009).
                                                   17


then the family can have a second child (even in areas where normally only one child is allowed).
Third, minority families are often exempted from birth quotas.
        We report these regressions in Appendix Table A. With the Heckman selection equation,
we still find that the local sex ratio has a positive and significant effect on the parental propensity
to be entrepreneurs for son families. For daughter families, the sex ratio is insignificantly
different from zero. The pattern holds for both the rural and the urban samples.


Approach 3: Placebo tests
        We next turn to a placebo test. The basic idea is to examine the birth of new foreign
invested firms, and to check if they are related to the local sex ratio imbalance. If the positive
association between the local sex ratio and the growth in the number of domestic private firms is
purely an artificial outcome of missing regressors that predict relative profitability across regions
and happen to be correlated with the local sex ratio, we would expect to also find a similarly
positive association between the growth in the number of foreign firms and the local sex ratio.
On the other hand, if our theory is right that a higher sex ratio imbalance drives more risk-taking
by local Chinese for a given level of growth opportunity, then the local sex ratio won’t
necessarily affect how foreign-invested firms choose to locate their productions in China.
        The placebo tests are reported in Table 9. In the first three regressions, the dependent
variable is the growth in the number of foreign-invested firms from 1995 to 2004. The right-
hand-side regressors are identical to those in Table 4. In none of the cases can we reject the null
that the coefficient on the sex ratio variable is zero. In other words, statistically speaking, the
location of new foreign-invested firms is uncorrelated with the local sex ratio imbalance. In
Columns 4-6 of Table 9, we perform 2SLS regressions with the same set of instruments for the
sex ratio as in Table 6. In all cases, the coefficient on the sex ratio is not statistically different
from zero. Taken together, the placebo tests make it unlikely that the local sex ratio is a proxy for
missing regressors that predict future profitability in a region. This bolsters our confidence in the
interpretation that a higher sex ratio imbalance stimulates more entrepreneurship.


Approach 4: Differential work effort at the household level
        Not everyone can be an entrepreneur. However, if the desire to pursue wealth is strong
enough, virtually anyone can make more money by working harder or longer. We now turn to a
                                                               18


second household data that allows us to examine a household’s supply of labor and willingness
to accept a relatively dangerous job (in exchange for relatively good pay). The data comes from
Chinese Household Income Project (CHIP) of 2002, which covers 9,200 households in 122 rural
counties in 22 provinces.
            To make the households as comparable as possible, we construct a sub-sample of
households with two living parents and a child.10 This sub-sample consists of 480 families with a
son and 262 families with a daughter in 122 rural counties. Since most unmarried young people
live with their parents, the survey does not contain many unmarried young man or woman as the
household head. Therefore, we are not able to analyze single-person households directly.
            We focus on two key aspects of a household’s labor supply that are captured in the
survey. The first is a household’s willingness to accept a relatively dangerous (or unpleasant) job.
A dangerous/unpleasant job is defined as one in the mining or construction sector, or one with
exposure to extreme heat, extreme cold, or hazardous materials. While the survey does not
contain occupation-specific wage information, we may expect that, in equilibrium, the wage rate
is higher for a dangerous (or unpleasant) job than other jobs, holding constant skill requirement
and other determinants of the wage. In other words, people presumably accept a more dangerous
(or a less pleasant) job in exchange for higher pay.
            The second variable that we look at is the total number of days in a year that members of
a household worked off the farm (mostly as a migrant worker). Off farm work usually pays
better, but one has to endure all the difficulties and inconvenience associated with working away
from the hometown. Given the policy restrictions on internal migration in China, most migrant
workers treat out-of-town jobs as temporary, do not expect to settle in the cities where they work,
and likely return to their hometowns eventually.
            The summary statistics on these two variables across the rural counties are reported in
Table 10. The last panel (first row) indicates that, on average, 27.6% of all three-person
households in a county have at least one family member working in a relatively dangerous job.
The average fraction is only moderately higher for households with a son (27.7%) than
households with a daughter (27.4%). However, the standard deviation across the counties
(around 45%) is big. As for the total number of days members of a household worked off the
farm, the unconditional average is 35.6 days per household. The son families work significantly

10
     We also place an age limit of 40 for household heads to exclude possibly uncounted adult children who have moved away.
                                                   19


more days off farm (41.4 days) than the daughter families (24.9 days). From the summary
statistics, we cannot rule out the possibility that the differences across the two types of
households simply reflect a greater ability for a man to work away from home than for a woman.
Our theory, however, implies a particular regional variation in the labor supply: son families are
more willing to take a relatively dangerous job or work more days if they are located in a region
with a more unbalanced sex ratio. Therefore, to test our theory, we have to explore interactions
between a household’s labor supply and the local sex ratio, while controlling for other
determinants of labor supply.
        In Table 11, we start with three Probit regressions on household propensity to accept a
relatively dangerous job. They are for families with a son, families with a daughter, and a
combined sample of families with a child. All the regressions control for family income,
children’s ages, and characteristics of the head of the household (age, education, and ethnic
background). It also controls for health shocks to the family by a dummy denoting “poor health”
if the family has a disabled or severely ill member. In Column 1, we focus on households with a
son. The local sex ratio has a positive and significant coefficient, implying that a son-family is
more willing to take a relatively dangerous job if it lives in a region with a higher sex ratio
imbalance. An increase in the sex ratio by 4.3 basis points (which is equal to one standard
deviation across the rural counties in the sample as reported in Table 10B) is associated with an
increase in the probability for a son-family to accept a dangerous job by 4.1 percentage points
(e.g., an increase from 20% to 24.2%). Column 2 of Table 11 looks at households with a
daughter. The coefficient on the sex ratio is not statistically significant. In other words, the
willingness to accept a dangerous job for a daughter-family is unrelated to the local sex ratio.
        In the third column of Table 11, we combine the two sets of households and add a
dummy for households with a son and an interaction term between the dummy and the local sex
ratio. The local sex ratio is insignificant while the dummy for son-families has a negative
coefficient. Most interestingly, the interaction term between the local sex ratio and the dummy
for son families is positive and statistically significant. Our interpretation is that it is not having a
son per se that motivates families to be more willing to accept a dangerous job. Rather, it takes a
combination of having a son and living in a region with a high sex ratio imbalance to induce
families to be more eager to accept a relatively dangerous job.
                                                  20


       One may wonder if the intensity of the work effort response to a given rise in the sex
ratio depends on the household’s initial income. In particular, do poorer households exert
stronger effort? To see this, we classify all households into four brackets based on their income
and use four dummies (“the poorest income quartile,” “the second income quartile,” and so on)
to denote them. In the last three columns of 11, we interact the local sex ratio with each of the
income quartile dummies. As one can see, there is no real difference across income groups. In
particular, poor and rich households with a son all increase their willingness to accept a
dangerous or less pleasant job equally to a given rise in the sex ratio. Similarly, households with
a daughter in all income quarters are equally insensitive to the sex ratio in their willingness to
accept dangerous jobs.
       Table 12 performs Tobit estimations on the total number of days in the year before the
survey that household members worked off farm. In the first column, we look at households with
a son. The coefficient on the local sex ratio is positive and statistically significant. An increase in
the sex ratio by 4.3 basis points is associated with an increase in the supply of off farm labor by
0.9 day/year (=20.8x0.043). Since the unconditional mean in the sample is 35.6 days per year per
household (Column 5, second row, of Table 10A), this represents a non-trivial although not a
huge effect. In the second column of Table 12, we look at households with a daughter. The
coefficient on the sex ratio is not statistically significant. This implies that the supply of off-farm
labor by daughter families is uncorrelated with the sex ratio. In the third column of Table 12, we
combine the two sets of households, and add a dummy for son families and an interaction term
between the dummy and the sex ratio. Similar to Table 11, only the interaction term is positive
and statistically significant. In other words, a combination of having a son and living in a region
with a high sex ratio motivates these households to be more willing to work away from home.
       We again check if the supply of labor in response to a higher sex ratio varies by the
income level of households. This is done in the last three columns of Table 12. It turns out that
there is no statistical difference across income groups.
       Over all, the patterns in Tables 11 and 12 are consistent with each other, and consistent
with our hypothesis. Of course, accepting a relatively dangerous job and working more days
away from home are not mutually exclusive. Taken together, the estimation results suggest that,
as the sex ratio imbalance increases, son families respond by increasing both the number of days
                                                    21


in off-farm work and the willingness to accept a relatively dangerous job, presumably in pursuit
of higher pay. There is no effect of a higher sex ratio on the work effort of daughter families.


General Equilibrium Effect: Sex ratios and per capita GDP growth
       So far, we have discussed evidence on how a higher sex ratio stimulates the extensive
margin of economic growth in the form of the birth of new private firms, and have also presented
some evidence on how it increases the intensive margin of economic growth in the form of a
greater supply of work effort and a greater tolerance of hardship and hazardous work
environment. There can be other partial equilibrium effects of a higher sex ratio; some may be
negative (e.g., a higher crime rate) and some may be positive (e.g., more creativity). To capture
the general equilibrium effect, we now examine the overall relationship between sex ratios and
income growth by using panel data on provincial GDP per capita from 1980 to 2005. We
organize the data into five 5-year periods, 1980-85, 1985-90, 1990-95, 1995-2000, and 2000-05.
Let y(k, t) be the log GDP per capita for province k in period t. We run the following regression:


       [y(k, t+5)-y(k, t)]/5 = β sr(k,t) + X(k,t)Γ + province fixed effects + period fixed effects+ e(k,t)


where the dependent variable is the average annual growth rate in a 5-year period, sr(k,t) is the
sex ratio for the age cohort 5-19 in province k and period t (inferred from the 2000 Population
Census), and X(k,t) is a vector of control variables which includes the beginning-of-period log
income, y(k,t), the share of working age population in local population, the ratio of local
investment to local GDP, the ratio of local foreign trade to local GDP, and birth rate. β is a scalar
parameter and Γ is a vector of parameters to be estimated, and e(k,t) is an error term that is
assumed to be independent and identically normally distributed. The choice of the control
variables is based on the set of robust predictors of growth from the empirical growth literature
(Barro and Sala-i-Martin, 1992; Li and Zhang, 2007). One key missing regressor is human
capital, of which we do not have a good measure that is both across provinces and over time. We
will implement a 2SLS estimation that aims to address this (and other) problems.
       Some summary statistics for the panel are reported in Table 13. During 1980-2005, the
average annual growth rate of per capita GDP across the provinces was 8.8% with a standard
deviation of 2.7%. The average sex ratio in 1980 was 107 boys/100 girls (only slightly higher
                                                  22


than the normal ratio), but there were already variations across the provinces with the standard
deviation being 3.5 and the maximum ratio being 114 boys/100 girls. As indicated earlier, the
sex ratio deteriorates over time.
        The panel growth regressions with both province fixed effects and period fixed effects
are reported in Table 14. In Columns 1-3, we use the initial sex ratio for the age cohort of 5-19
within a five-year interval. The first column includes the sex ratio, initial income, the ratio of
investment to local GDP, population birth rate, and both the province fixed effects and the period
fixed effects. The coefficient on the sex ratio is positive and significant: on average, income
growth is faster in regions/periods with a higher initial sex ratio. The coefficients on the first two
control variables are consistent with the standard growth regressions. In particular, poor regions
tend to grow faster; regions with heavier investment also tend to grow faster. The coefficient on
the birth rate is negative (consistent with the Malthusian idea) but statistically insignificant.
        In Column 2, we expand the list of controls to include share of working age adults in the
local population and a measure of trade openness. Neither of the new regressors is significant.
The coefficient on the sex ratio remains positive and significant. In Column 3, we add the
savings rate as a control. Given the findings in Wei and Zhang (2009), we wish to find out if the
sex ratio has a positive on economic growth beyond raising the household savings rate. The
positive and significant coefficient on the savings variable implies that higher savings rate and
higher income growth tend to go together. However, holding constant the savings effect, the
coefficient on the sex ratio is still positive and significant. This implies that a higher savings rate
is not the exclusive conduit for a higher sex ratio to affect economic growth.
        In Columns 4-6, we use the average sex ratio during a 5-year period (instead of the
beginning-of-period value) but otherwise replicate the previous three regressions. In all cases,
the coefficients on the sex ratio are positive and statistically significant. This is consistent with
the idea that a higher sex ratio is associated with a higher growth rate.
        One might worry about endogeneity of the sex ratio, birth rate, and savings rate, and
possible correlation between the initial income and the error term in the dynamic panel
specification. In addition, measurement error for the sex ratio variable can also be present. To
deal with these concerns, we implement a generalized method of moments (GMM) estimation. In
addition to the standard instruments (i.e. lagged regressors) in a GMM setting, we utilize some
possibly exogenous instruments as discussed in Table 5.
                                                              23


            The results are reported in Table 15. In the first two columns, we report GMM results
with no exogenous IVs. In the middle two columns, we add the two penalties for violating birth
quotas in the set of instruments. In the last two columns, we further expand the set of instruments
to include the share of local population not subject to birth quotas. For robustness, in each case,
we use both initial sex ratio and average sex ratio.
            All six coefficients on the sex ratio variable are positive and statistically significant.
Strikingly, the point estimates are also stable across the three sets of IVs. To understand the
economic significance of the estimates, we take the point estimate in Column 2 (0.51) at the face
value. An increase in the sex ratio by 4 basis points (which is the level of increase from 2000 to
2005 according to Table 13), holding other variables constant, would raise the growth rate by
2.04 percentage points per annum (= 0.51x 0.04 x 100). This accounts for about 20% (=2.04/10.2)
of the actual mean increase in the annual income growth during this period. This means that the
effect of the sex ratio is economically significant. Note that both because the sex ratio for the
pre-marital age cohort is projected to be higher over the next decade, and because the “natural”
growth rate expected from the convergence force in the Solow model will decline, the relative
importance of the sex ratio effect on economic growth is likely to rise in the medium term.


4. Concluding Remarks


            Robert M. Solow, the Nobel Prize winner for his pioneering work on the theory of
economic growth, once said, “Everything reminds Milton (Friedman) of the money supply.
Well, everything reminds me of sex, but I keep it out of the paper.”11 Well, Solow might have
missed something economically significant by not linking sex with economic growth. This paper
proposes that an unbalanced sex ratio may be one of the significant drivers for economic growth.
            A strong sex ratio imbalance is present in China, Vietnam, Korea, India, Taiwan,
Singapore and several other economies due to a combination of a parental preference for sons,
easy availability of technology to screen the sex of a fetus, and a limit on the number of children
that a couple either desires to have or is allowed to have. As men face a diminishing prospect of
finding a wife, parents of a son or the son himself are more eager to do something to improve his
standing in the marriage market relative to other men in the same cohort. Since wealth is a

11
     “The concise encyclopedia of economics: Robert Merton Solow (1924- ).” www.ecolib.org/library/Enc/bios/Solow.html.
                                                 24


significant determinant of one’s relative standing, parents with a son and men respond to a rise in
the sex ratio by engaging in more entrepreneurial activities, supplying more labor, and becoming
more willing to take unpleasant or dangerous jobs, all in pursuit of a higher expected pay.
       We find strong supportive evidence across regions and households in China. Using data
from two censuses of industrial firms in 1995 and 2004, we find that the local sex ratio is a
significant predictor of which regions are more likely to have new domestic private firms
(beyond other determinants of the birth of new firms). The economic impact is also significant:
an increase in the sex ratio by one standard deviation can potentially explain 50% of the
difference in the rates of growth of new private firms across regions. Across households, we find
that a combination of having a son and living in a region with a skewed sex ratio raises the
likelihood for parents to be business owners or self-employed. We also find that families with a
son respond to a higher sex ratio by increasing both the number of days that they work off farm
(mostly as migrant workers) and their willingness to take a relatively dangerous job, presumably
in exchange for higher pay. Households with a daughter do not respond to a higher sex ratio in
the same way. These patterns are consistent with our story.
       Before the sex ratio reaches 150 boys per 100 girls, parents would likely re-evaluate their
preference for sons. However, very few regions have shown signs of a reversal. This means that
if the sex ratio follows a mean-reverting process, the speed of reversion must be slow. In any
case, we know with a high degree of confidence that the sex ratio for the pre-marital age cohort
in China will be getting worse in the medium term, since the sex ratio at birth today is
significantly worse than the ratio for today’s 10-year-olds, which in turn is worse than the ratio
for today’s 20-year-olds. This means that the effect of the sex ratio imbalance on growth will
continue to be a force to reckon with in the foreseeable future. This will partially offset the
natural force of a declining growth rate that one may expect from the Solow growth model.
       Accumulating more wealth is not the only way for men or households with a son to
compete in the marriage market. Parents may also invest more in the education of their sons, and
push them to work harder in school. There may also be a spillover from a boy’s education to a
girl’s education. Such mechanisms have not been empirically investigated. In addition, as noted
earlier, several other economies also have a strong sex ratio imbalance. Some of them are also
known to have a high rate of economic growth. We leave a rigorous investigation of these topics
to future research.
                                                  25


References:

        Angrist, Joshua, 2002, “How Do Sex Ratios Affect Marriage and Labor Markets?
Evidence from America’s Second Generation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117 (3): 997-
1038.
        Barro, Robert J. and Xavier Sala-i-Martin, 1992, “Convergence,” Journal of Political
Economy, 100 (2): 223-251.
        Bhaskar, V, 2011, “Parental Sex Selection and Gender Balance,” American Economic
Journal: Microeconomics, 3(1): 214-44.
        Blanchard, Olivier J. and Francesco Giavazzi, 2005, “Rebalancing Growth in China: A
Three-Handed Approach.” MIT Department of Economics Working Paper No. 05-32.
        Bulte, Erwin, Nico Heerink, and Xiaobo Zhang, 2011, “China’s One-Child Policy and
‘the Mystery of Missing Women: Ethnic Minorities and Male-Biased Sex Ratios,” Oxford
Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 73 (1): 21-39.
       Cole, Harold L., George J. Mailath, and Andrew Postlewaite, 1992, “Social Norms,
Savings Behavior, and Growth,” Journal of Political Economy, 100(6): 1092-1125.
      Corneo, Giacomo and Olivier Jeanne, 1999, “Social Organization in an Endogenous
Growth Model,” International Economic Review, 40(3): 711-25.
       Den Boer, Andrea, and Valerie M. Hudson, 2004, “The Security Threat of Asia’s Sex
Ratios,” SAIA Review 24(2): 27-43.
      Du, Qingyuan, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2010, “A Sexually Unbalanced Model of Current
Account Imbalances,” NBER working paper 16000.
       Du, Qingyuan, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2011a, “Sex Ratios and Exchange Rates,” working
paper, Columbia University.
       Du, Qingyuan, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2011b, “Sex Ratios and Entrepreneurship,” working
paper, Columbia University.
       Gu, Baochang and Krishna Roy, 1995, “Sex Ratio at Birth in China, with Reference to
Other Areas in East Asia: What We Know,” Asia-Pacific Population Journal, 10(3): 17-42.
       Das Gupta, Monica, 2005, “Explaining Asia’s ‘Missing Women’: A New Look at the
Data,” Population and Development Review 31(3): 529-535.
      Ebenstein, Avraham, 2009, “Estimating a Dynamic Model of Sex Selection in China,”
Harvard University. Available from pluto.huji.ac.il/~ebenstein/Ebenstein_Sex_Selection_March_09.pdf.
       Edlund, Lena, 1996, “Dear Son – Expensive Daughter: Do Scarce Women Pay to
Marry?” Essay Two in The Marriage Market: How Do You Compare. Dissertation, Stockholm
School of Economics.
       Edlund, Lena, and Chulhee Lee, 2009. "Son Preference, Sex Selection and Economic
Development: Theory and Evidence from South Korea," Discussion Papers 0910-04, Columbia
University, Department of Economics.
       Edlund, Lena, Hongbin Li, Junjian Yi, and Junsen Zhang, 2007, “Sex Ratios and Crime:
Evidence from China's One-Child Policy,” IZA DP no. 3214.
                                                 26


        Frank, Robert H., 1985, “The Demand for Unobservable and Other Nonpositional
Goods,” American Economic Review, 75 (1): 101-116.
        Frank, Robert H., 2004. “Positional Externalities Cause Large and Preventable Welfare
Losses,” American Economic Review, 95 (2): 137-141.
        Gale, D., and L. S. Shapley, 1962, "College Admissions and the Stability of Marriage",
American Mathematical Monthly, 69: 9-14.
        Greenspan, Alan, 2009, “The Fed didn’t cause the housing bubble,” The Wall Street
Journal, March 11.
        Guilmoto, Christophe Z. 2007, “Sex-ratio imbalance in Asia: Trends, consequences and
policy responses.” Available from: www.unfpa.org/gender/docs/studies/summaries/regional_analysis.pdf.
        Hopkins, Ed, and Tatiana Kornienko, 2004, “Running to Keep in the Same Place:
Consumer Choice as a Game of Status,” American Economic Review 94(4): 1085-1107.
        Hopkins, Ed, and Tatiana Kornienko, 2009, “Which Inequality? The Inequality of
Endowments versus the Inequality of Rewards,” University of Edinburgh working paper.
        Huang, Yasheng, 2009, Capitalism with Chinese Characteristics, Cambridge University
Press.
        International Monetary Fund, 2009, World Economic Outlook, April. Washington DC:
International Monetary Fund.
        Li, Hongbin and Junsen Zhang, 2007, “Do High Birth Rates Hamper Economic
Growth?” Review of Economics and Statistics 89: 110-117.
        Li, Hongbin, Zheyu Yang, Xianguo Yao, Junsen Zhang, 2009, "Entrepreneurship and
Growth: Evidence from China," Discussion Papers 00022, Chinese University of Hong Kong.
        Li, Hongbin, and Hui Zheng, 2009, "Ultrasonography and Sex Ratios in China," Asian
Economic Policy Review, 4(1): 121-137.
        Li, Shuzhuo, 2007, “Imbalanced Sex Ratio at Birth and Comprehensive Interventions in
China,” paper presented at the 4th Asia Pacific Conference on Reproductive and Sex Health and
Rights, Hyderabad, India, October 29-31.
        Lin, Ming-Jen and Ming-Ching Luoh, 2008, “Can Hepatitis B Mothers Account for the
Number of Missing Women? Evidence from Three Million Newborns in Taiwan," American
Economic Review, 98(5): 2259–73.
        Mei Fong, 2009, “Its Cold Cash, Not Cold Feet, Motivating Runaway Brides in China,”
Wall Street Journal, June 5.
        Modigliani, Franco, 1970, “The Life Cycle Hypothesis of Saving and Intercountry
Differences in the Saving Ratio,” Introduction, Growth and Trade, Essays in Honor of Sir Roy
Harrod, W.A. Elits, M.F. Scott, and J.N. Wolfe, eds. Oxford University Press.
        Modigliani, Franco, and Shi Larry Cao, 2004, “The Chinese Saving Puzzle and the Life
Cycle Hypothesis,” Journal of Economic Literature, 42: 145-170.
        Mu, Ren and Xiaobo Zhang, 2011,“Why Does the Great Chinese Famine Affect the
Male and Female Survivors Differently? Mortality Selection versus Son Preference,” Economics
and Human Biology, 9: 92–105.
        National Bureau of Statistics, 1988, China Population Statistical Material Compilation
1949-1985. Beijing: China Finance and Economic Press.
        Oster, Emily, 2005, “Hepatitis B and the case of the missing women,” Journal of
Political Economy, 113(6): 1163-1216.
        Oster, Emily, Gang Chen, Xinxen Yu, and Wenyao Lin, 2008, “Hepatitis B Does Not
Explain Male-Biased Sex Ratios in China,” University of Chicago working paper.
                                               27


        Qian, Nancy, 2008, “Missing Women and the Price of Tea in China: The Effect of Sex-
specific Earnings on Sex Imbalance,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(3): 1251-1285.
        Rajan, Raghuram G., 2010, Fault Lines: How Hidden Fractures Still Threaten the World
Economy, Princeton University Press.
        Roth, A. E., and Sotomayor, M. A. O., 1990, Two-sided Matching: A Study in Game-
theoretic Modeling and Analysis, Cambridge University Press.
        Scharping, Thomas, 2003, Birth Control in China 1949-2000, New York, NY: Routledge
Curzon.
        Wei, Shang-Jin, and Xiaobo Zhang, 2009, “The Competitive Saving Motive: Evidence
from Rising Sex Ratios and Savings Rates in China,” NBER working paper 15093, June.
        Wu, Xiaobo, 2007, Thirty Years of China Business, China CITIC Press, in Chinese.
        Zhu, Wei Xing, Li Lu, and Therese Hesketh, 2009, “China’s excess males, sex selective
abortion, and one child policy: analysis of data from 2005 national intercensus survey,” British
Medical Journal, 2009 (338):b1211.
                                                                                  28


Table 1A: Summary Statistics for Variables Used in County Level Analyses

                                                                                                                    Mean          Median        Standard deviation
Left hand variables
# of private firms in 1995 per 10,000 people                                                                         2.80            2.20                    3.68
# of private firms in 2004 per 10,000 people                                                                         6.82            4.34                    8.76
log(# of private firms in 2004 / # of private firms in 1995)                                                         0.83            0.80                    0.84
# of SOEs in 1995 per 10,000 people                                                                                  0.73            0.55                    0.88
# of SOEs in 2004 per 10,000 people                                                                                  0.21            0.12                    0.29
log(# of SOEs in 2004 / # of SOEs in 1995)                                                                          -1.42           -1.39                    0.82
# of foreign firms in 1995 per 10,000 people                                                                         0.16            0.03                    0.57
# of foreign firms in 2004 per 10,000 people                                                                         0.34            0.04                    1.34
log(# of foreign firms in 2004 / # of foreign firms in 1995)                                                         0.52            0.47                    0.87

Right hand variables
Sex ratio for the age cohort 5-19 in 1995 inferred from 1990 census                                                107.55          106.74                     4.61
Sex ratio for the age cohort 4-18 in 2004 inferred from 2004 census                                                111.24          109.44                     7.58
Averaged sex ratio of 1995 and 2004                                                                                109.40          108.25                     5.59
GDP in 1995 (million yuan)                                                                                          2061            1174                     2748
Average year of schooling based on 2000 census                                                                       6.90            7.21                     1.26
Share of agricultural output in gross output values in 1995                                                           0.44            0.41                    0.24
The ratio of local revenues to total government employees in 1995 (yuan/person)                                      4355            4126                    2420
Population growth from 1990 to 2000                                                                                  0.06            0.05                     0.18
Share of labor force (aged 20-64) in total population in 1995                                                         0.62            0.62                    0.04
Share of population aged 65 and above                                                                                0.08            0.08                     0.02
Residential bank deposit per capita in 1995 (yuan)                                                                  1516            1096                     1691

Instrumental variables
Share of minority population in 1990                                                                                 0.20            0.01                    0.32
Average penalties for family planning violations                                                                     1.00            1.06                    0.18
Average extra penalty for higher order births                                                                        0.42            0.33                    0.28

Note: Authors’ calculation. The sex ratio, population growth, share of labor force, and year of schooling variables are based on China Population Censuses in
1990 or 2000. Because the available age data at the county level are in five-year interval, the cohort aged 0-14 in China Population Censuses in 1990 and 2000
would be 5-19 and 4-18 by 1995 and 2004. Local GDP, gross output values, revenues and total government employees in 1995 are from China Local Public
Finance Statistical Yearbook 1995. Residential bank deposits are from Chinese County Database on Social Economic Statistics.
                                                                               29


Table 1B: Summary Statistics for Variables Used at the City Level Analysis

                                                                                                                    Mean          Median        Standard deviation
Left hand variables
# of private firms in 1995 per 10,000 people                                                                        10.40            6.32                   16.24
# of private firms in 2004 per 10,000 people                                                                        21.42            9.73                   35.98
log(# of private firms in 2004 / # of private firms in 1995)                                                         0.91            0.85                    0.69
# of SOEs in 1995 per 10,000 people                                                                                  2.26            1.76                    2.37
# of SOEs in 2004 per 10,000 people                                                                                  0.52            0.39                    0.42
log(# of SOEs in 2004 / # of SOEs in 1995)                                                                          -1.11           -1.08                    0.64
# of foreign firms in 1995 per 10,000 people                                                                         1.31            0.37                    2.76
# of foreign firms in 2004 per 10,000 people                                                                         2.02            0.37                    4.81
log(# of foreign firms in 2004 / # of foreign firms in 1995)                                                         0.52            0.45                    0.79

Right hand variables
Sex ratio for the age cohort 5-19 in 1995 inferred from 1990 census                                                108.10          107.12                    4.45
Sex ratio for the age cohort 4-18 in 2004 inferred from 2004 census                                                111.42          109.18                    6.69
Averaged sex ratio of 1995 and 2004                                                                                109.76          108.30                    4.99
Industrial GDP in 1995 (million yuan)                                                                              80601           37939                  118000
Average year of schooling based on 2000 census                                                                       6.75            6.73                    0.99
Population growth from 1990 to 2000                                                                                  0.35            0.22                    0.62
Share of labor force (aged 20-64) in total population in 1995                                                        0.68            0.70                    0.04
Share of population aged 65 and above                                                                                0.08            0.08                    0.02

Instrumental variables
Share of minority population in 1990                                                                                 0.20            0.01                    0.32
Average penalties for family planning violations                                                                     1.00            1.06                    0.18
Average extra penalty for higher order births                                                                        0.42            0.33                    0.28

Note: Authors’ calculations. The sex ratio, population growth, share of labor force, and year of schooling variables are based on China Population Censuses in
1990 or 2000. Because the available age data at the county level are in five-year interval, the cohort aged 0-14 in China Population Censuses in 1990 and 2000
would be 5-19 and 4-18 by 1995 and 2004. Industrial GDP is from China Industrial Census 1995.
                                                                 30




Table 2: Contributions to the growth of Chinese industrial output by ownership




Table 3: The extensive versus intensive margins in the growth of the Chinese private sector

                                   Number         Average output               Total VA
                                   of firms       (million yuans/firm) (billion 1995 yuans)
                                   (a)            (b)                  (c)
1      1995                         807821        3.66                   2956
2      2004                        2549888        6.20                 15815
3      Growth rate                   0.499        0.229                 0.728
       = log(row 2)-log(row 1)
4      Share in growth (%)           68.5         31.5                  100

Note: The cumulative CPI inflation rate over 1995-2004 is 35%.
                                                                                        31



Table 4: Sex Ratios and the Growth in the Number of Private Firms at the County Level from 1995 to 2004
                                                                            Sex ratio for the age cohort in 1995                Sex ratio for the average age cohort between 1995 and 2004
                                                         5-19        5-19         5-9        10-14         15-19         5-19           5-19              5-9          10-14         15-19
Initial sex ratio                                    0.017**     0.016**     0.008**       0.012**         0.007     0.021**        0.020**          0.015**         0.019**       0.014**
                                                       (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)        (0.00)        (0.01)      (0.00)         (0.00)           (0.00)          (0.00)        (0.01)
Log number of firms in 1995                         -0.493**    -0.497**    -0.489**      -0.493**     -0.484**     -0.518**       -0.518**         -0.530**       -0.523**       -0.491**
                                                       (0.03)      (0.03)      (0.03)        (0.03)        (0.03)      (0.03)         (0.03)           (0.03)          (0.03)        (0.03)
Log GDP in 1995                                      0.267**     0.272**     0.264**       0.272**      0.273**      0.261**        0.267**          0.258**         0.261**       0.270**
                                                       (0.04)      (0.05)      (0.04)        (0.05)        (0.05)      (0.04)         (0.05)           (0.04)          (0.04)        (0.05)
Average year of schooling based on 1990 census      -0.070**    -0.086**    -0.072**      -0.071**     -0.075**      -0.056*       -0.078**         -0.063**         -0.056*      -0.064**
                                                       (0.03)      (0.03)      (0.03)        (0.03)        (0.03)      (0.03)         (0.03)           (0.03)          (0.03)        (0.03)
Share of agricultural output in
gross output values in 1995                         -0.911**    -0.915**    -0.929**     -0.913**      -0.909**     -0.915**       -0.909**        -0.930**       -0.917**        -0.905**
                                                       (0.12)      (0.12)      (0.12)       (0.12)        (0.12)       (0.12)         (0.12)          (0.12)         (0.12)          (0.12)
The ratio of local revenues to
total government employees (log) in 1995             0.073*         0.064     0.075*       0.072*        0.072*       0.069*           0.056        0.073*          0.067*          0.070*
                                                      (0.04)       (0.04)      (0.04)       (0.04)        (0.04)       (0.04)         (0.04)         (0.04)          (0.04)          (0.04)
Population growth from 1990 to 2000                 0.428**      0.446**     0.430**      0.424**       0.413**      0.426**        0.431**        0.415**         0.427**         0.420**
                                                      (0.10)       (0.11)      (0.10)       (0.10)        (0.10)       (0.09)         (0.11)         (0.09)          (0.09)          (0.10)
Share of labor force (aged 20-64)
in total population in 1995                           -0.024      -0.039      -0.169          0.025       -0.012        0.569          0.472         0.963*           0.801           0.054
                                                      (0.49)      (0.51)      (0.50)         (0.50)       (0.51)       (0.50)         (0.51)          (0.50)         (0.51)          (0.50)
Share of population aged 65 and above
in total population in 1995                        11.174**     11.210**    11.351**     11.193**      11.165**     11.868**       11.846**       12.092**        12.098**       11.345**
                                                      (1.36)       (1.37)      (1.36)       (1.36)        (1.37)       (1.36)         (1.37)         (1.35)          (1.36)         (1.37)
Dummy for coastal provinces                         0.248**      0.255**     0.245**      0.259**       0.261**      0.263**        0.261**        0.268**         0.267**        0.262**
                                                      (0.04)       (0.05)      (0.04)       (0.04)        (0.04)       (0.04)         (0.05)         (0.04)          (0.04)         (0.04)
Log local household savings per capita in 1995                       0.00                                                              0.015
                                                                   (0.04)                                                             (0.04)
Adjusted R square                                       0.33         0.33        0.33          0.33         0.32         0.34           0.34           0.35            0.34            0.33
AIC                                                    3753         3693        3754          3764         3772         3729           3671           3711            3724            3764
N                                                      1790         1764        1790          1790         1790         1790           1764           1790            1790            1790

Notes: The growth in the number of private firms is measured by the increase in the log number of firms from 1995 to 2004. The definition of private firms includes township-
and-village enterprises and other “collectively owned” firms. The sex ratio for the age cohort 5-19 in 1995 is inferred from the age cohort 0-14 in the 1990 population census;
the sex ratio for the age cohort 4-18 in 2004 is inferred from the age cohort 0-14 in the 2000 population census. Local household savings is measured by residential bank
deposits. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. * and ** denote statistically significant at the 10% and 5% levels, respectively.
                                                                                     32


Table 5: Instrumenting for the Local Sex Ratio ­ First Stage Regressions at the County Level
                                                                                                           R1           R2           R3          R4            R5          R6
Share of minority population in 1990                                                                  -2.58**      -2.27**                  -3.97**      -3.56**
                                                                                                        (0.72)       (0.71)                   (0.83)       (0.83)
Penalties for family planning violations                                                               2.32**        1.95*      2.74**          1.10       0.830       1.75**
                                                                                                        (1.06)       (1.11)      (1.00)       (0.89)       (0.92)       (0.86)
Dummy for extra penalty for higher order births                                                        2.34**       2.19**      2.89**       3.41**       3.31**       4.26**
                                                                                                        (0.45)       (0.47)      (0.38)       (0.56)       (0.57)       (0.50)
Initial number of firms (log) in 1995                                                                   0.24*          0.12     0.44**       0.96**       0.77**       1.26**
                                                                                                        (0.13)       (0.13)      (0.12)       (0.17)       (0.18)       (0.17)
Log GDP in 1995                                                                                        0.36**       0.38**      0.40**       0.66**       0.66**       0.71**
                                                                                                        (0.15)       (0.15)      (0.16)       (0.20)       (0.20)       (0.21)
Average year of schooling inferred from 2000 census                                                   -0.48**         -0.08    -0.34**      -1.08**      -0.52**      -0.87**
                                                                                                        (0.12)       (0.14)      (0.12)       (0.16)       (0.20)       (0.16)
Share of agricultural output in gross output values in 1995                                              -0.34        -0.54       -0.43         0.14        -0.45        -0.01
                                                                                                        (0.77)       (0.73)      (0.78)       (0.78)       (0.77)       (0.79)
The ratio of local revenues to total government employees (log)                                          -0.07         0.18       -0.07         0.03        0.37*         0.04
                                                                                                        (0.16)       (0.17)      (0.17)       (0.21)       (0.22)       (0.22)
Increase in log population                                                                               -0.20         0.72       -0.39         0.28      1.62**         -0.01
                                                                                                        (0.43)       (0.47)      (0.41)       (0.53)       (0.61)       (0.52)
Share of labor force (aged 20-64) in local population in 1995                                            -2.59         0.31       -1.56    -29.54**     -24.71**     -27.96**
                                                                                                        (5.80)       (5.66)      (5.65)       (4.21)       (4.24)       (4.21)
Share of population aged 65 and above in total population in 1995                                         1.33       10.75         6.16    -38.48**     -30.26**     -31.05**
                                                                                                        (9.06)       (7.32)      (8.74)       (9.08)       (8.60)       (8.96)
Dummy for coastal regions                                                                              0.59**       1.02**      0.55**          0.04      0.71**         -0.03
                                                                                                        (0.28)       (0.32)      (0.28)       (0.32)       (0.35)       (0.33)
Log local household savings per capita in 1995                                                                     ‐0.96**                               ‐1.44**
                                                                                                                    (0.18)                                (0.23)
Adjusted R square                                                                                         0.11         0.12         0.09        0.19         0.21        0.17
F Statistic                                                                                             27.39         29.33        22.8         36.8        37.54       34.12
Kleibergen-Paap Wald F statistic                                                                        21.78        18.11        20.51        38.11       33.63        34.96
N                                                                                                        1790         1764         1790         1790        1764         1790

Notes: The dependent variables in R1, R2, and R3 are the sex ratio for age cohort aged 5-19 in 1995, while those in R4, R5, and R4 are the average sex ratio for the age cohort
5-19 in 1995 and 4-18 in 2004. The share of minorities in local population is computed from the 1990 population census at the county level. The two financial penalty variables
are only available at the province level and we use their mean values over the same period of the sex ratio for the age cohort 5-19 in 1995. Robust standard errors are in
parentheses. The dummy for coastal regions defines Beijing, Liaoning, Tianjin, Hebei, Shandong, Jiangsu, Shanghai, Zhejiang, Fujian, Guangdong and Guangxi as coastal
regions. * and ** denote statistically significant at the 10% and 5% levels, respectively. For the Kleibergen-Paap Wald F test for weak instruments, the Stock-Yogo critical
values are: 5% maximal IV relative bias 13.91; 10% maximal IV relative bias 9.08; 20% maximal IV relative bias 6.46; 10% maximal IV size 19.93; 15% maximal size 11.59;
20% maximal size 8.75; 25% maximal IV size 7.25.
                                                                             33

Table 6: 2SLS Estimation on Sex Ratios and Growth in the Number of Private Firms at the County Level
                                                                                           R1          R2          R3          R4          R5          R6
                                                                                        Three IVs   Three IVs   Two IVs     Three IVs   Three IVs    Two IVs
Initial sex ratio for the age cohort 5-19 in 1995                                        0.20**      0.22**      0.18**
                                                                                         (0.03)      (0.03)      (0.04)
Average sex ratio (1995 and 2004)                                                                                             0.14**      0.14**      0.13**
                                                                                                                              (0.02)      (0.02)      (0.02)
Log number of firms in 1995                                                              -0.61**     -0.59**     -0.60**     -0.71**     -0.69**     -0.70**
                                                                                          (0.04)      (0.04)      (0.04)      (0.04)      (0.04)      (0.05)
Log GDP in 1995                                                                          0.22**      0.21**       0.22**      0.21**      0.21**      0.21**
                                                                                          (0.04)      (0.04)      (0.04)      (0.04)      (0.04)      (0.04)
Average year of schooling of local population                                              -0.02     -0.10**       -0.02       0.05        -0.03       0.04
    (inferred from the 2000 census)                                                       (0.04)      (0.04)      (0.04)      (0.04)      (0.04)      (0.04)
Share of agriculture in gross output values in 1995                                      -0.79**     -0.74**     -0.80**     -0.87**     -0.79**     -0.87**
                                                                                          (0.17)      (0.19)      (0.17)      (0.14)      (0.15)      (0.14)
The ratio of local government revenue to government employees (log)                         0.07        0.01       0.07*       0.05        -0.02       0.05
                                                                                          (0.05)      (0.05)      (0.05)      (0.04)      (0.05)      (0.04)
Increase in log population                                                               0.55**      0.35**      0.54**      0.48**      0.29**      0.48**
                                                                                          (0.13)      (0.15)      (0.13)      (0.11)      (0.12)      (0.11)
Share of labor force (aged 20-64) in local population in 1995                               0.66        0.04        0.61      4.13**      3.61**      4.00**
                                                                                          (1.11)      (1.21)      (1.08)      (0.81)      (0.80)      (0.91)
Share of population aged 65 and above in total population in 1995                        9.66**      7.39**      9.77**      14.85**     13.96**     14.74**
                                                                                          (2.07)      (2.08)      (1.97)      (1.70)      (1.72)      (1.72)
Dummy for coastal provinces                                                               0.11*        0.01       0.12*       0.27**      0.18**      0.27**
                                                                                          (0.06)      (0.08)      (0.06)      (0.05)      (0.06)      (0.05)
Log local household savings per capita in 1995                                                        0.22**                              0.21**
                                                                                                      (0.06)                              (0.05)
Adjusted R square                                                                         -0.55        -0.75      -0.42       -0.15         -0.2       -0.11
AIC                                                                                       5258         5396       5108        4718         4730        4664
Durbin-Wu-Hausman test for endogeneity                                                    0.00         0.00       0.00        0.00         0.00        0.00
Hansen's J statistic for over identification                                               0.29        0.54       0.10        0.97         0.88        0.96
N                                                                                         1790         1764       1790        1790         1764        1790

Notes: The share of minority population in 1990 at the county level is excluded as an instrument variable in regressions R3 and R6. Robust standard errors are
in parentheses. * and ** denote statistically significant at the 10% and 5% levels, respectively.
                                                                             34


Table 7: Sex Ratios and Growth in Number of Private Firms in the Urban Sample
                                                                                          OLS                                            2SLS
Initial sex ratio (in 1995)                                                             0.02**                                         0.08**
                                                                                         (0.01)                                         (0.04)
Average sex ratio (in 1995 and 2004)                                                                    0.02**                                         0.06**
                                                                                                         (0.01)                                         (0.03)
Log number of firms in 1995                                                            -0.43**         -0.43**                        -0.38**         -0.40**
                                                                                         (0.06)          (0.06)                         (0.08)          (0.07)
Log industrial GDP in 1995                                                              0.33**          0.33**                         0.31**          0.31**
                                                                                         (0.05)          (0.05)                         (0.06)          (0.06)
Average year of schooling based on 1990 census                                             0.00            0.00                          -0.02           -0.02
                                                                                         (0.04)          (0.04)                         (0.04)          (0.04)
Population growth from 1990 to 2000                                                     0.19**          0.18**                         0.16**            0.13*
                                                                                         (0.07)          (0.07)                         (0.08)          (0.08)
Share of labor force (aged 20-64) in total population in 1995                              1.44            1.87                          3.33*         4.13**
                                                                                         (1.38)          (1.47)                         (1.90)          (2.03)
Share of population aged 65 and above in total population in 1995                       8.89**          9.03**                        13.56**         12.61**
                                                                                         (3.25)          (3.28)                         (4.64)          (3.92)
Dummy for coastal regions                                                               0.45**          0.45**                         0.38**          0.39**
                                                                                         (0.08)          (0.08)                         (0.10)          (0.09)
Adjusted R square                                                                          0.44            0.44                           0.32            0.38
AIC                                                                                        346             346                             390             370
Durbin-Wu-Hausman test for endogeneity                                                                                                    0.08            0.09
Hansen's J statistic for over identification                                                                                              0.59            0.70
N                                                                                           224            224                             224             224

Notes: The growth in the number of private firms is measured by the increase in the log number of firms from 1995 to 2004 at the city level. The sex ratio for
the age cohort 5-19 in 1995 is inferred from the age cohort 0-14 in the 1990 population census; the sex ratio for the age cohort 4-18 in 2004 is inferred from
the age cohort 0-14 in the 2000 population census. The definition of private firms includes township-and-village enterprises and other “collectively owned”
firms. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. * and ** denote statistically significant at the 10% and 5% levels, respectively.
                                                                                35

Table 8: Probit Estimation on Who Are More Likely to Be Entrepreneurs


                                                     Rural nuclear families                       Urban nuclear families

                                              One or two           one          one        One or two        one         one
                                               children            son        daughter      children         son       daughter
Local sex ratio                                  0.26            0.44**         0.08          -0.10        0.47**        0.10
 for age cohort 5-19                            (0.22)           (0.17)        (0.20)        (0.19)        (0.20)       (0.21)
Sex ratio*dummy for first child being a son     0.21*                                        0.55**
                                                (0.12)                                       (0.22)

Log household wealth                           0.19**           0.18**         0.16**         0.03**         0.03*           0.02*
                                                (0.01)           (0.01)        (0.01)         (0.01)        (0.02)          (0.01)
Year of education                              0.20**            0.24**        0.29**         0.23**        0.24**          0.24**
                                                (0.02)           (0.03)        (0.02)         (0.02)        (0.02)          (0.02)
Year of education (squared)                    -0.99**          -1.26**       -1.47**        -1.58**       -1.72**         -1.61**
                                                (0.11)           (0.13)        (0.11)         (0.09)        (0.12)          (0.10)
Household head age                               0.00             0.00        -0.01**         0.01**        0.01**          0.01**
                                                (0.00)           (0.00)        (0.00)         (0.00)        (0.00)          (0.00)
Dummy for female household head                0.23**           0.24**         0.15**          -0.03        (0.01)          -0.06*
                                                (0.03)           (0.05)        (0.05)         (0.02)        (0.03)          (0.03)
Dummy for poor health by family members        -0.28**          -0.33**       -0.25**        -0.34**       -0.31**           -0.17
                                                (0.04)           (0.08)        (0.08)         (0.09)        (0.15)          (0.14)
Dummy for having a child aged 6-10              0.04**           0.07**        0.09**           0.01         -0.03           -0.02
                                                (0.02)           (0.03)        (0.03)         (0.02)        (0.03)          (0.03)
Dummy for having a child aged 11-15              0.03             0.05         0.08**          -0.04         -0.05         -0.10**
                                                (0.02)           (0.04)        (0.04)         (0.03)        (0.04)          (0.04)
Dummy for having a child aged 16-20              0.01             0.05          0.07          0.09**         0.01             0.11
                                                (0.03)           (0.05)        (0.06)         (0.04)        (0.07)          (0.08)
Number of children                             -0.10**                                        0.19**
                                                (0.02)                                        (0.03)
First child being a son                         -0.23*                                       -0.58**
                                                (0.13)                                        (0.24)
Pseudo R squared                                 0.07             0.07          0.08           0.09         0.09            0.08
Number of geographic units                       343              343           343             325         325             325
N                                               81311            29315         22323          34913        15848           13538

Notes: The dependent variable in the Probit is defined as 1 if either the household head or the spouse is a business owner or self employed. The sample is
restricted to those with household heads younger than 40 years old. The sex ratio for the age cohort 5-19 is inferred from the age cohort 0-14 in the 2000
population census at either the city or the prefecture level. Other data are computed by the authors from a 20 percent random sample of the China 1%
Population Survey in 2005. Household wealth is proxied by the value of house at the time of purchase (for the urban sample) or construction (for the rural
sample). Standard errors are clustered at the city (or prefecture) level. * and ** denote statistically significant at the 10% and 5% levels, respectively.
                                                                            36


Table 9: Placebo Tests the Growth in the Number of Foreign-invested Firms at the County Level
                                                                                           OLS                                           2SLS
                                                                               R1           R2            R3                  R4           R5            R6
Sex ratio for the age cohort 5-19 in 1995                                     0.00                                          -0.01
                                                                            (0.01)                                         (0.03)
Sex ratio for the cohort 5-19 averaged over 1995 and 2004                                   0.01         0.01                              0.00         0.01
                                                                                          (0.00)       (0.00)                            (0.02)       (0.02)
Log number of firms in 1995                                               -0.30**       -0.30**      -0.31**             -0.30**       -0.30**      -0.31**
                                                                            (0.03)        (0.03)       (0.03)              (0.03)        (0.03)       (0.03)
Log GDP in 1995                                                            0.13**        0.13**       0.13**              0.14**        0.13**       0.13**
                                                                            (0.05)        (0.05)       (0.05)              (0.05)        (0.05)       (0.05)
Average year of schooling based on 2000 census                               -0.04         -0.03        -0.08               -0.05         -0.04        -0.08
                                                                            (0.05)        (0.05)       (0.05)              (0.05)        (0.05)       (0.05)
Share of agricultural output in gross output values in 1995               -0.76**       -0.75**      -0.72**             -0.77**       -0.75**      -0.72**
                                                                            (0.16)        (0.16)       (0.16)              (0.16)        (0.16)       (0.17)
The ratio of local revenues to total government employees                  0.30**        0.30**       0.29**              0.30**        0.30**       0.29**
                                                                            (0.06)        (0.06)       (0.06)              (0.06)        (0.06)       (0.06)
Increase in log population                                                 0.29**        0.29**          0.25             0.29**        0.29**          0.25
                                                                            (0.14)        (0.14)       (0.17)              (0.14)        (0.14)       (0.17)
Share of labor force (aged 20-64) in local population in 1995                 0.80          1.05         0.85                0.72          0.89         0.87
                                                                            (0.66)        (0.69)       (0.70)              (0.71)        (1.03)       (1.02)
Share of population aged 65 and above in total population in 1995          7.81**        8.08**       7.47**              7.68**        7.91**       7.49**
                                                                            (1.83)        (1.86)       (1.92)              (1.87)        (2.05)       (2.04)
Dummy for coastal regions                                                  0.55**        0.55**       0.53**              0.57**        0.55**       0.53**
                                                                            (0.06)        (0.06)       (0.06)              (0.07)        (0.06)       (0.06)
Log local household savings per capita in 1995                                                           0.07                                           0.08
                                                                                                       (0.06)                                         (0.07)
Adjusted R square                                                             0.21         0.21          0.21               0.21          0.21          0.21
AIC                                                                          2497         2495          2456               2501           2496         2456
Durbin-Wu-Hausman test for endogeneity                                                                                      0.74          0.85          0.98
Hansen's J statistic for over identification                                                                                0.06          0.06          0.06
Kleibergen-Paap Wald F statistic                                                                                           19.97         21.69        18.49
N                                                                            1071         1071          1053                1071          1071         1053

Notes: Foreign invested firms refer to both wholly foreign owned and Sino-foreign joint ventures. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. * and ** denote
statistically significant at the 10% and 5% levels, respectively.
                                                                                             37



Table 10: Some Summary Statistics for Three-person Households
                                                                                 Families with a son (480)      Families with a daughter (262)      All 3-person households in the sample (742)
Variables                                                                        Mean      Standard deviation   Mean        Standard deviation       Mean                    Standard deviation
Share of households with at least one member taking a dangerous/unpleasant job   0.277                   0.45   0.274                     0.45       0.276                                 0.45
Total number of days that a household worked off farms                           41.44                  96.26   24.97                    69.92       35.62                               88.17
Share of households with positive number of off-farm working days                 0.19                   0.39    0.14                     0.34        0.17                                 0.38
Per capita income (yuan)                                                         3388                    2459   3147                      2106       3303                                 2341
Year of education of household head                                               8.02                   2.10    8.19                     2.07        8.08                                 2.09
Either household head or spouse as a minority ethnic group                        0.04                   0.20    0.06                     0.24        0.05                                 0.22
Having at least a family member with bad health                                   0.03                   0.17    0.04                     0.19        0.03                                 0.18
Head younger than 35                                                              0.53                   0.50    0.59                     0.49        0.55                                 0.50
Age of a child 5-9                                                                0.41                   0.49    0.47                     0.50        0.43                                 0.50
Age of child 10 or older                                                          0.48                   0.50    0.45                     0.50        0.46                                 0.50



Table 10B: Summary Statistics for Sex Ratio in 122 Counties

              Mean                                           Median                        Min                                                     Max                Standard deviation
             108.89                                          108.17                      100.92                                                  123.13                             4.33

Note: The sample consists of households with two living parents and a child. The child is at least 4 years old and the household head is 40 or younger. A dangerous/unpleasant
job is defined as one in a mining or construction sector, or with exposure to an extremely high or low temperature or hazardous material at work. The working day count refers
to the number of days members of the household working off-farms (as a migrant worker or in a factory). Bad health is a dummy that takes the value of one if at least one
family member is disabled or sick over three months in the year before the survey. Since the household survey was conducted in 122 counties, we tabulate the sex ratio for age
cohort 0-9 based on the 1990 population census for these counties.
                                                                               38


Table 11: Probit Estimation of Household Propensity to Take a Dangerous Job in 2002 (Marginal Effect)
                                                           One son              One daughter            Total         One son      One daughter               Total
Local sex ratio for age cohort 12-21                         0.96*                     -0.63            -0.70
                                                             (0.50)                   (0.69)            (0.67)
Having a son                                                                                          -0.99**                                                -0.99*
                                                                                                       (0.03)                                                (0.03)
Sex ratio*son                                                                                         1.65**                                                 1.59*
                                                                                                       (0.83)                                                (0.83)
Sex ratio* a dummy for poorest income quartile                                                                          0.87*             -0.77               -0.79
                                                                                                                        (0.51)           (0.69)              (0.67)
Sex ratio* a dummy for second income quartile                                                                            0.90*            -0.73               -0.75
                                                                                                                        (0.50)           (0.70)              (0.67)
Sex ratio* a dummy for third income quartile                                                                             0.93*            -0.59               -0.68
                                                                                                                        (0.50)           (0.70)              (0.67)
Sex ratio* a dummy for richest income quartile                                                                           0.94*             -0.6               -0.68
                                                                                                                        (0.50)           (0.69)              (0.67)
Log per capita income                                          0.02                     0.00             0.01            -0.01            -0.08               -0.04
                                                             (0.03)                   (0.04)           (0.03)           (0.05)           (0.06)              (0.04)
Year of education                                             -0.01                    -0.01            -0.01            -0.01            -0.01               -0.01
                                                             (0.01)                   (0.01)           (0.01)           (0.01)           (0.01)              (0.01)
Dummy for household head as an ethnic minority                -0.07                    -0.11            -0.09            -0.08            -0.13                -0.1
                                                             (0.09)                   (0.10)           (0.07)           (0.09)           (0.09)              (0.07)
Dummy for poor health by at least one family member           -0.07                    -0.19            -0.12            -0.06             -0.2               -0.11
                                                             (0.11)                   (0.10)           (0.08)           (0.12)           (0.09)              (0.08)
Dummy for household head younger than 35                     -0.08*                    -0.01            -0.05           -0.09*                0               -0.06
                                                              (0.05)                  (0.06)           (0.04)           (0.05)           (0.06)              (0.04)
Dummy for having a child aged 5-9                            0.19**                     0.07          0.14**           0.18**              0.07               0.13*
                                                             (0.08)                   (0.12)           (0.07)           (0.08)           (0.11)              (0.07)
Dummy for having a child aged 10 or older                      0.11                     0.12            0.11*             0.10             0.13               0.10*
                                                             (0.07)                   (0.11)           (0.06)           (0.07)           (0.11)              (0.06)

Pseudo R squared                                               0.02                     0.02             0.02            0.02              0.04                0.02
AIC                                                            572                      320              882             577               321                 884
N                                                              480                      262              742             480               262                 742

Notes: The sex ratio for age cohort 12-21 is inferred from that for age cohort 0-14 in the 1990 population census. Other data are derived from the rural
sample of CHIP 2002. The income quartiles are defined based on per capita income at the county level using the whole sample. P-values are in parentheses. *
and ** denote statistically significant at the 10% and 5% levels, respectively. The sex ratio variable is deflated by 100 so that the reported point estimates and
standard errors in rows 1 and 3-6 would not have two extra zeros after the decimal point.
                                                                              39


Table 12: Tobit Estimation on the Number of Off­farm Working Days
                                                             One son      One daughter               Total          One son      One daughter              Total
Local sex ratio for age cohort 12-21                         20.75**              4.43                2.76
                                                               (4.99)           (6.93)              (6.89)
Having a son                                                                                      -1934**                                              -1826**
                                                                                                     (915)                                                (916)
Sex ratio*son                                                                                     18.33**                                              17.32**
                                                                                                    (8.40)                                               (8.42)
Sex ratio* a dummy for the poorest income quartile                                                                  19.80**                3.23            2.04
                                                                                                                       (5.15)            (7.11)          (7.00)
Sex ratio* a dummy for second income quartile                                                                        19.49**               3.81            2.00
                                                                                                                       (5.08)            (7.05)          (6.98)
Sex ratio* a dummy for third income quartile                                                                         20.47**               5.12            3.13
                                                                                                                       (5.06)            (7.07)          (6.98)
Sex ratio* a dummy for the richest income quartile                                                                   20.47**               5.10            3.17
                                                                                                                       (5.02)            (6.96)          (6.94)
Log household income                                         81.56**             -44.66               33.1              39.53       -122.77**            -25.31
                                                              (35.48)           (40.68)            (28.58)            (52.28)           (59.52)         (42.16)
Year of education                                               -3.45             13.39               1.25              -3.51             14.74            1.41
                                                              (10.29)           (15.69)             (8.81)            (10.09)          (15.02)           (8.58)
Household head as minority ethnic group                          87.7              45.8               68.7              82.16             23.91           53.98
                                                              (104.4)           (111.1)             (78.4)          (101.08)          (108.18)          (76.17)
Poor health among at least one family member                    53.53             93.80             -71.29             -49.00          -128.31           -71.65
                                                              (138.4)          (146.47)           (105.60)          (137.69)          (141.20)         (105.09)
Head younger than 35                                           -52.06            -54.17             -52.69             -60.22            -49.85          -58.05
                                                              (48.47)           (67.54)            (40.02)            (47.93)           (64.32)         (39.38)
Age of a child 5-9                                              93.48             52.41              47.47              83.06            -54.68           34.04
                                                              (82.48)          (120.67)            (69.35)            (82.18)         (114.66)          (68.51)
Age of child 10 or older                                        47.87             62.97              13.69            38.210             -56.05            3.23
                                                              (75.67)          (111.23)            (63.27)            (75.96)         (106.66)          (62.82)

Pseduo R squared                                                 0.02              0.00               0.01              0.02              0.01             0.02
AIC                                                             1591               667               2247              1594               668              2246
N                                                                480               262                742               480               262               742

Notes: The coefficients are marginal effects on the latent dependent variables. The sex ratio for age cohort 12-21 in 2002 is inferred from the age cohort 0-14
in the 1990 population census. Other data are derived from the rural sample of CHIP 2002. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. * and ** denote
statistically significant at the 10% and 5% levels, respectively. All regressions have a constant which is not reported.
                                                        40


Table 13: Summary Statistics on Variables Used in Provincial Level Regressions, 1980­2005
                                                                       Mean       Median    Standard deviation
Annual real growth rate of GDP/per capita (1980-2005)                   8.81        8.72                  2.71

Annual real growth rate of GDP/per capita (2000-2005)                  10.20        10.21                1.48

Per capita GDP (yuan in 1985)                                           2737         1849                2732
Share of labor force (aged 15-64) in local population                  68.02        67.80                 4.47
Investment/local GDP (%)                                               35.62        32.72               11.82
Foreign trade/local GDP (%)                                            25.22        10.41               39.12
Outstanding loans per capita (yuan)                                     1631          288                3558
Birth rate (‰)                                                         17.31        17.10                 4.20

Sex ratio for the 5-19 age cohort (%)
     Whole sample (1980-2005)                                         106.79       106.44                3.03
     1980                                                             105.12       105.05                2.84
     1985                                                             105.44       105.07                2.26
     1990                                                             106.68       106.28                1.56
     1995                                                             108.48       108.77                1.90
     2000                                                             109.58       109.50                4.20
     2005                                                             113.57       113.04                4.14
                                                                               41


Table 14: Sex Ratios and Income Growth ­ Provincial Panel Regressions from 1980 to 2005
                                                                            R1            R2            R3            R4           R5            R6
Initial sex ratio for age cohort 5-19                                   0.22**        0.30**        0.33**
                                                                         (0.07)        (0.12)        (0.12)
Average sex ratio for age cohort 5-19                                                                             0.29**       0.40**        0.44**
                                                                                                                   (0.08)       (0.10)        (0.10)
Initial log per capita GDP                                              -8.48**      -9.61**       -11.3**       -8.84**      -10.2**       -11.7**
                                                                          (1.48)       (1.76)         (1.9)        (1.28)        (1.6)         (1.6)
Investment/local GDP                                                     0.14**       0.12**        0.11**        0.15**       0.13**        0.12**
   (average in a five-year interval)                                      (0.04)       (0.04)        (0.04)        (0.04)       (0.04)        (0.04)
Share of labor force (aged 15-64) in total population                                   -0.08          0.02                      -0.08         -0.01
   (average in a five-year interval)                                                   (0.13)        (0.14)                     (0.14)        (0.14)
Foreign trade/local GDP                                                                  0.02          0.02                       0.02          0.02
   (average in a five-year interval)                                                   (0.01)        (0.01)                     (0.01)        (0.01)
Household savings rate                                                                              0.19**                                   0.18**
   (average in a five-year interval)                                                                 (0.05)                                   (0.05)
Birth rate at the beginning of a 5-year interval                          -0.07         -0.05         -0.02
                                                                         (0.08)        (0.08)        (0.08)
Birth rate (averaged over a 5-year interval)                                                                      -0.19*         -0.14         -0.11
                                                                                                                  (0.10)        (0.11)        (0.10)
Province fixed effect                                                      Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
Time fixed effect                                                          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes


Adjusted R-square                                                          0.64          0.64         0.67          0.67          0.68          0.70
AIC                                                                        584           584          571           572           571           558
N                                                                          145           145          144           145           145           144

Notes: The panel regressions are performed over five 5-year periods, 1980-85, 1985-90, 1990-95, 1995-2000, and 2000-05. The dependent variable is the
average annual growth rate of per capita GDP over a 5-year period. Each regression includes both province fixed effects and period fixed effects. The sex
ratio for the first four periods is inferred from the 1990 population census, while the sex ratio for the period of 2000-2005 is inferred from the 2000 population
census. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. The household savings rate is defined as log(income/consumption), which is taken from Wei and Zhang
(2009). * and ** denote statistically significant at the 10% and 5% levels, respectively
                                                                                     42


Table 15: GMM Estimation with Both Exogenous Instruments and Lagged Regressors
– Sex Ratios and Income Growth over 1980 - 2005
                                                                                  R1            R2              R3             R4               R5               R6

Set of instrumental variables                                                  Lagged regressors      + Financial penalties for       + Share of local population
                                                                                                         violating birth quotas       exempted from birth quotas
Initial sex ratio for age cohort 5-19                                        0.28**                        0.28**                           0.28**
                                                                              (0.13)                        (0.12)                           (0.12)
Average sex ratio for age cohort 5-19                                                       0.51**                        0.51**                            0.54**
                                                                                             (0.15)                        (0.15)                            (0.15)
Initial log per capita GDP                                                 -12.13**       -13.36**       -12.03**       -13.34**         -12.02**         -13.52**
                                                                              (2.22)         (2.10)         (2.17)         (2.09)           (2.13)           (2.06)
Investment/local GDP                                                            0.05          -0.03           0.05          -0.03             0.05            -0.02
   (average in a five-year interval)                                          (0.16)         (0.19)         (0.16)         (0.19)           (0.16)           (0.19)
Share of labor force (aged 15-64) in total population                        0.12**         0.13**         0.12**         0.13**           0.12**           0.14**
   (average in a five-year interval)                                          (0.05)         (0.05)         (0.05)         (0.05)           (0.05)           (0.05)
Foreign trade/local GDP                                                         0.01           0.02           0.01           0.02             0.01             0.02
   (average in a five-year interval)                                          (0.02)         (0.02)         (0.01)         (0.02)           (0.01)           (0.02)
Household savings rate                                                       0.23**         0.24**         0.23**         0.24**           0.23**           0.24**
   (average in a five-year interval)                                          (0.07)         (0.07)         (0.07)         (0.07)           (0.07)           (0.07)
Birth rate at the beginning of a 5-year interval                                0.04                          0.04                            0.04
                                                                              (0.12)                        (0.11)                          (0.11)
Birth rate (averaged over a 5-year interval)                                                   0.02                           0.02                             0.00
                                                                                             (0.17)                         (0.17)                           (0.16)

AR (1) in first difference (p-value)                                            0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00             0.00             0.00
AR (2) in first difference (p-value)                                            0.64           0.47           0.64           0.47             0.64             0.44
Hansen's J statistic for over identification                                    0.77           0.76           0.85           0.82             0.87             0.82
N                                                                                114            114            114            114              114              114
Notes: The data is a panel of five 5-year periods, 1980-85, 1985-90, 1990-95, 1995-2000, and 2000-05. The dependent variable is the average annual growth rate of per capita
GDP over a 5-year period. The instrumental variables for regressions R1-R2 include the standard lagged regressors in GMM estimation. Two additional instruments, penalty
for violating family planning policy (% of local yearly income), and a dummy for extra penalty for higher order births, are included in regressions R3 and R4. The share of
minority population is further added in regressions R5 and R6. Both province and time fixed effects are included but not reported here. Robust standard errors are in
parentheses. * and ** denote statistically significant at the 10% and 5% levels, respectively.
                                                                                                 43


Appendix Table: Heckman Estimations on the Likelihood That Families Choose to Have Only One Child
First Probit regression: Dependent variable in the main regression = likelihood that parents are entrepreneur (for one-child families);
Second Probit regression: Dependent variable in the selection equation = likelihood that parents stop at the first child
                                                               Rural nuclear families with                                                    Urban nuclear families
                                                  First child a son                First child a daughter                      First child a son               First child a daughter

                                           Parents being        Stop at         Parents being         Stop at           Parents being        Stop at         Parents being        Stop at
                                           entrepreneurs        1st child       entrepreneurs         1st child         entrepreneurs        1st child       entrepreneurs        1st child
Local sex ratio for age cohort 5-19               0.61**                -1.08             0.34              -1.23*             0.71**             -3.14**              0.50            -3.08**
                                                   (0.21)              (0.83)           (0.27)               (0.70)             (0.30)              (0.39)           (0.35)              (0.51)
Log household wealth                              0.16**              0.06**           0.15**               0.04**             0.03**              0.05**              0.02                0.03
                                                   (0.01)              (0.01)           (0.02)               (0.01)             (0.02)              (0.02)           (0.01)              (0.02)
Year of education                                 0.24**             -0.07**           0.29**              -0.11**             0.25**             -0.16**           0.25**             -0.19**
                                                   (0.02)              (0.01)           (0.02)               (0.01)             (0.02)              (0.03)           (0.02)              (0.03)
Year of education (squared)                      -1.32**              0.91**          -1.57**               1.02**            -1.78**              1.37**          -1.72**              1.60**
                                                   (0.13)              (0.08)           (0.12)               (0.07)             (0.11)              (0.15)           (0.12)              (0.16)
Household head age                                   0.00             0.00**          -0.01**               0.01**             0.01**              0.01**           0.01**              0.01**
                                                   (0.00)              (0.00)           (0.00)               (0.00)             (0.00)              (0.00)           (0.00)              (0.00)
Female household head                             0.20**              0.19**           0.12**               0.29**               -0.02             0.18**          -0.08**              0.24**
                                                   (0.05)              (0.05)           (0.06)               (0.05)             (0.04)              (0.06)           (0.04)              (0.04)
Poor health among at least one parent            -0.32**              0.13**          -0.29**               0.11**            -0.31**              0.34**             -0.18                0.03
                                                   (0.07)              (0.05)           (0.09)               (0.04)             (0.15)              (0.15)           (0.14)              (0.11)
Age of a child 6-10                               0.23**             -1.09**           0.27**              -1.10**                0.02            -1.07**              0.08            -1.00**
                                                   (0.06)              (0.03)           (0.11)               (0.02)             (0.07)              (0.05)           (0.10)              (0.05)
Age of a child 11-15                              0.23**             -1.04**           0.27**              -0.94**                0.01            -0.91**              0.02            -0.76**
                                                   (0.07)              (0.03)           (0.11)               (0.03)             (0.08)              (0.06)           (0.11)              (0.06)
Age of a child 16-20                              0.21**             -0.79**           0.22**              -0.55**                0.07            -0.61**            0.22*             -0.36**
                                                   (0.08)              (0.05)           (0.10)               (0.04)             (0.11)              (0.08)           (0.12)              (0.06)
Age of the oldest child                                              -0.03**                               -0.04**                                -0.07**                              -0.08**
                                                                       (0.00)                                (0.00)                                 (0.01)                               (0.00)
First child being disabled                                           -0.71**                               -0.38**                                -1.07**                                 -0.19
                                                                       (0.15)                                (0.17)                                 (0.26)                               (0.34)
Minority household                                                   -0.45**                               -0.16**                                -0.34**                              -0.22**
                                                                       (0.05)                                (0.04)                                 (0.09)                               (0.07)
Log likelihood                                         -31857                               -29709                                  -12107                               -11966
N                                                      40244                                38255                                   17152                                16026

Notes: The dependent variable in the first Probit (main) regression is defined as 1 if either the household head or the spouse is a business owner or self employed. The
dependent variable in the second Probit (selection) regression takes the value of one if the household has only one child and zero if it has more than one child. The sample is
restricted to those with household heads younger than 40 years old. The sex ratio for the age cohort 5-19 is inferred from the age cohort 0-14 in the 2000 population census at
either the city or the prefecture level. Other data are computed by the authors from a 20 percent random sample of the China 1% Population Survey in 2005. Household wealth
is proxied by the value of the house at the time of purchase (for the urban sample) or construction (for the rural sample). Standard errors are clustered at the city (or prefecture)
level. * and ** denote statistically significant at the 10% and 5% levels, respectively.
                                                                                                                             44




                             a ve ra g e g ro w th in n u m b e r o f p riv a te a n d co lle ctiv e firm s
                                 .6                    .8                       1                     1 .2




                                                                                                              100   105         110           115   120
                                                                                                                          sex ratio in 1995



                 Figure 1: Initial Sex Ratios and Growth Rates of Private Firms during 1995-2004

On the horizontal axis is the sex ratio for the age cohort 5-19 in 1995 inferred from the 1990 Population Census. On the vertical
axis is the growth rate in the number of private firms from 1995 to 2004, averaged over all counties that had the same value of
sex ratio (up to a basis point).
