                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       NEW EVIDENCE ON TEACHER LABOR SUPPLY

                                             Mimi Engel
                                            Brian A. Jacob

                                        Working Paper 16802
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16802


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2011




We would like to thank Toby Park, Sharon Traiberman, and Elias Walsh for their research assistance
and the Chicago Public Schools’ Department of Human Resources for allowing us to collect data at
the 2006 job fairs and for sharing administrative records. We especially thank Nancy Slavin and Raquel
Saucedo at CPS for all of their help at various stages in this project. Generous financial support was
provided by the WT Grant Foundation. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Mimi Engel and Brian A. Jacob. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
New Evidence on Teacher Labor Supply
Mimi Engel and Brian A. Jacob
NBER Working Paper No. 16802
February 2011
JEL No. I21,I28,J01,J08,J2,J45

                                               ABSTRACT

Recent evidence on the large variance in teacher effectiveness has spurred renewed interest in teacher
labor market policies. A substantial body of prior research documents that more highly qualified teachers
tend to work in more advantaged schools, although this literature cannot determine the relative importance
of supply versus demand factors in generating this equilibrium outcome. To isolate the importance
of teacher labor supply, we attended three large teacher job fairs in Chicago during the summer of
2006 and collected detailed information on the specific schools at which teachers interviewed. We
document a substantial variation in the number of applicants per school, with some schools having
fewer than five applicants and others schools having over 300 applicants, even after controlling for
the number and type of positions advertised at the school. We show that the demographic characteristics
of schools strongly predict the number of applicants to the school in the expected direction. Interestingly,
the geographic location of the school is an extremely strong predictor of applications, even after controlling
for a host of observable school and neighborhood characteristics.


Mimi Engel
Vanderbilt University
230 Appleton Place, Box 414
Nashville, TN 37203-5721
mimi.engel@vanderbilt.edu

Brian A. Jacob
Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy
University of Michigan
735 South State Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
bajacob@umich.edu
1. Introduction

       Interest in the distribution of teachers across schools has grown in recent years. Race to

the Top, President Obama’s $4 billion dollar state-level grant competition aimed at school

improvement, focuses on recruiting and retaining effective teachers, particularly in

disadvantaged schools and districts. This renewed focus on teachers as a key element of

education reform stems, at least in part, from a substantial body of research indicating that

teachers make an important contribution to student achievement and that teacher quality varies

substantially (Aaronson, Barrow, & Sander, 2007; Hanushek, Kain, O’Brian, & Rivkin, 2005;

Nye, Konstantopoulos, & Hedges, 2004; Rockoff, 2004).

       The knowledge that teachers matter has been accompanied by an increased interest in

understanding teacher labor markets. Research on teacher sorting finds that low income and

minority students are more likely to have teachers who are both inexperienced and less qualified

(Clotfelter, Ladd, & Vigdor, 2005, 2006; Lankford, Loeb, & Wyckoff, 2002). A substantial

body of research also examines teacher mobility, finding that teachers who switch schools

generally move to schools with lower concentrations of minority and disadvantaged students and

higher levels of achievement (Boyd, Lankford, Loeb, & Wyckoff, 2005a; Hanushek, Kain &

Rivkin, 2004; Scafidi, Stinebrickner, & Sjoquist, 2007), and that teachers who choose to transfer

schools or exit the teaching profession generally have better qualifications (e.g. higher

certification exam scores) than those who remain (Boyd, et al., 2005a; Goldhaber, Gross, &

Player, 2007).

       While we know that disadvantaged students are more likely to be taught by less qualified

(and perhaps) less effective teachers, we know less about whether this disparity is caused by

decisions on the part of teachers or school administrators. The distribution of teachers across



                                                 1
schools is a product of both supply and demand. Thus, it is difficult to parse out the extent to

which this distribution results from supply (e.g. teachers’ decisions to teach in particular districts

or schools) versus demand-related factors (e.g. principals’ hiring preferences or district rules and

regulations). For example, studies of teacher mobility generally cannot tell us whether a

teacher’s exit from a particular school resulted from a decision made by the teacher himself or by

administrators.

       One important exception is a recent analysis that isolates teacher preferences by using

data on teacher applications to transfer across schools (Boyd, Lankford, Loeb, Ronfeldt,

Wyckoff, 2010). The authors find that teachers with better pre-service qualifications are more

likely to apply to transfer, while teachers with higher value-added are less likely to do so. The

authors also find that schools are more likely to select teachers who are better qualified across all

measures. While this study makes an important contribution, it is limited by its focus on

experienced teachers seeking to transfer schools.

       In this paper, we use a unique data set composed of teacher applications to individual

Chicago Public Schools (CPS) to explore the distribution of the teacher applicant pool within a

large urban district. Many school districts maintain teacher applicant files centrally. However,

in most cases, like CPS, the schools to which individual teachers apply remains unknown,

making it very difficult to examine variation in the characteristics and qualifications of teachers

applying to different types of schools within a district. In the summer of 2006, we attended three

large job fairs hosted by CPS. At the job fairs, we compiled extensive data on the schools to

which job fair attendees applied. We link this application data to administrative files containing

candidates’ demographic information, allowing us to describe the applicant pool and examine

differences in applicant qualifications across schools. These data allow us to describe the



                                                  2
preferences of an entire district’s applicant pool, expanding on recent contributions to

understanding teacher labor supply made by Boyd and colleagues (2010).

       We find that schools serving fewer disadvantaged students (as measured by percentage of

students eligible for free lunch) have larger numbers of applicants, and that this measure of

disadvantage is more consistently predictive of number of applicants than are other school

demographic characteristics such as student racial/ethnic composition, academic achievement,

and percent of students with limited English proficiency (LEP). Interestingly, the geographic

location of the school is also an important predictor of applications, with more candidates

applying to schools on the north and northwest sides of Chicago, which are generally more

affluent with a smaller fraction of African-American and Latino households. However, the

geographic region in which the school is located remains a significant and important predictor of

applications even after controlling for a host of student, school and neighborhood characteristics

(including distance from school to the downtown area, census measures of tract-level poverty

and tract-level crime rates provided by the Chicago Police Department). This suggests that some

harder-to-observe factors such as commute time or school/neighborhood reputation are important

determinants of teacher supply.

       We also find that preferences for school characteristics vary by applicant characteristics,

with African American candidates more likely to apply to schools on the city’s south side (a

predominately African American area of Chicago), and Hispanic candidates more likely to apply

to schools serving larger proportions of LEP students. Finally, we find that the small number of

applicants with undergraduate degrees in mathematics or science (only 5% of the applicant

sample) are more likely to apply to schools serving more academically proficient students.




                                                 3
       It is interesting to consider these findings in light of recent efforts by CPS officials to

recruit teacher candidates. While the 2006 applicant pool contained over 11 potential candidates

for each eventual hire, our analyses indicate that the vast majority of those applicants – including

many of the most highly qualified applicants – will not apply to the schools serving the most

disadvantaged students. This suggests that targeted efforts to direct a larger number of qualified

applicants to hard-to-staff schools could have important benefits.

       Our paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 of this paper provides a review of the extant

literature. In section 3, we describe teacher hiring and recruitment policies and procedures for

the CPS. Section 4 describes the data used in this paper. In section 5 we present our findings,

and in section 6 we share our conclusions.



2. Prior Literature on Teacher Labor Markets

       Studies examining the distribution of teachers across both districts and schools find that

teachers in urban schools serving large concentrations of low income and minority children are

less experienced (Clotfelter, Ladd, & Vigdor, 2005; Lankford, et. al., 2002; Rockoff, 2004),

more likely to be teaching out-of-field (Ingersoll, 2003), more likely to be uncertified, score

lower on standardized tests, and tend to have graduated from less competitive colleges and

universities (Lankford, et. al., 2002) than their suburban counterparts. Using data from New

York State, Lankford, et. al. (2002) find that teachers in urban schools are substantially less

qualified on pre-service measures, and that low income, low achieving and non-white students

tend to be taught by the least qualified teachers within urban districts. Studies also find that

variation in wages does not seem to substantially increase the likelihood that qualified teachers

will teach in these school settings (Lankford, et. al. 2002; Hanushek, Kain, & Rivkin, 2004).



                                                  4
Clotfelter, Ladd and Vigdor (2006) find that even within schools, more advantaged students are

taught by more qualified teachers.

         In addition to describing the distribution of teachers across schools and districts, research

also examines entry into teaching as well as teacher mobility and attrition. Teacher attrition rates

are higher in urban schools and districts with larger concentrations of low income and minority

students (Borman & Dowling, 2008; Ingersoll, 2001). Using Texas data to examine teacher

mobility, Hanushek, Kain, and Rivkin (2004) find that teachers who transfer schools tend to

move to schools serving more advantaged and higher achieving student populations, and that

student demographic characteristics including race/ethnicity and academic achievement appear

to exert a larger influence on teacher mobility than salary.

         College graduates with high test scores are less likely to enter and more likely to exit

teaching (Podgursky, Monroe, & Watson, 2004; Stinebrickner, 2002). Studies of teacher

mobility also find that teachers who choose to transfer schools or exit the teaching profession

generally have better qualifications (e.g. higher test scores, degrees from more selective colleges)

than those who remain (Goldhaber, Gross, & Player, 2007; Lankford, Loeb, & Wyckoff, 2002;

Podgursky, Monroe, & Watson, 2004). Further, teachers who leave urban schools and, more

generally, schools serving disadvantaged student populations tend to be more highly qualified

than teachers who remain in those schools (Boyd, et. al. 2005a; Hanushek, Kain, & Rivkin,

2004).

         Interestingly, however, studies that examine teacher mobility using estimates of teacher

effectiveness along with or instead of pre-service qualifications tend to find that teacher quality

varies more within than between schools (Hanushek, et. al., 2005), and that more effective

teachers are actually more likely to remain in their schools than their less effective colleagues



                                                   5
(Boyd, et. al. 2008; Goldhaber, et. al., 2007; Hanushek, et. al., 2005). More experienced teachers

are also more likely to remain in their schools (Ingersoll & Smith, 2003). Boyd, et. al. (2010)

note that this evidence suggests that while teachers with stronger pre-service qualifications are

more likely to both transfer schools and leave teaching, those with more experience and those

with larger value-added estimates tend to remain in their schools, even if they teach in more

challenging environments (e.g. Goldhaber, et. al., 2007).

       Another factor that appears to strongly influence where teachers choose to teach is

geography (Boyd, Lankford, Loeb, & Wyckoff, 2005a, 2005b). Specifically, the authors find

that teachers prefer to teach close to where they live and close to where they are from. Boyd,

Lankford, Loeb, and Wyckoff (2005b) find teacher labor markets to be very small in terms of

geography, and that teachers tend to teach close to where they grew up, or in areas similar to

where they are from. Reininger (2006) replicates these findings using nationally representative

data. She also finds that teachers are more likely to remain close to their place of origin than the

vast majority of other professionals.



3. Background on CPS Teacher Recruitment and Hiring

       Principals of CPS schools interview and select the teachers for their schools

autonomously. The CPS Department of Human Resources provides extensive support and

resources to principals for the hiring process. The district maintains a large data base of job

applicants for principals who are hiring, as well as a database of open positions for applicants.

Human Resources is also charged with processing new teachers into the system and completing

the hiring process once they have accepted an offer from a school principal.




                                                 6
       Over the past decade, the CPS Department of Human Resources (HR) has implemented a

comprehensive array of events and services aimed at recruiting teachers into the district. Efforts

have been made to go beyond what has traditionally been a highly localized recruitment and

hiring process to search regionally and even nationally for qualified teachers. CPS provides

information sessions, both virtual and in person, to answer potential teaching candidates’

questions about CPS, Chicago, and the hiring process. HR also participates in numerous college

and university job fairs throughout the Midwest and invites qualified candidates to participate in

“bus tours” that provide direct contact with school personnel and the opportunity to see Chicago

neighborhoods first-hand. Job candidates and school principals also have access to an extensive

online database which holds information about current and future teacher vacancies and provides

principals with the opportunity to search for applicants and view their information and resumes.

       The most intensive recruitment effort on the part of CPS has been the development of

large-scale job fairs, exclusively for qualified teachers, hosted by the district. The district

typically holds two smaller fairs during late winter/early spring and then hosts approximately

three large-scale job fairs during late spring and summer. The larger job fairs are held at the

largest venues in Chicago (e.g. Navy Pier, Soldier Field) and typically host over 200 schools and

2000 to 3000 teacher candidates per event. Candidates have the opportunity to drop off resumes

and participate in preliminary interviews with school principals and administrators during the

hiring cycle for a single school year.

       To provide a broad sense of the number and type of individuals applying to the CPS,

Table 1 shows some basic information on teachers who applied to the district during 2006 (i.e.,

for the 2006-2007 school year). In some cases, individuals applied electronically on-line. In

other cases, they submitted an application through the mail and HR personnel entered this



                                                  7
information into the electronic teacher application database. Nearly 20,000 individuals applied

to the district in 2006. Almost three-quarters of applicants were women and the majority was

white (roughly 20 percent of the applicant pool reported to be African American). Of applicants

for whom we were able to obtain degree information (two-thirds of the total sample), over 60

percent majored in education in college. Approximately 40 percent attended undergraduate

institutions that are ranked as very competitive or higher by Barron’s. Approximately 60 percent

of applicants report prior teaching experience.

       Column 2 provides comparable information on teachers who were newly hired by CPS

for the 2006-07 school year. The 1,679 teachers who were hired by CPS are similar to the

applicant pool in terms of gender and race, although they are somewhat more likely to be

Hispanic and less likely to be white. Interestingly, the 2006-07 new hires attended schools with

substantially lower Barron’s ratings, on average, than the applicant pool as a whole. Over half

(57%) of new hires attended schools in the bottom two Barron’s categories, compared with only

about 21 percent of CPS applicants. Similarly, while 40 percent of applicants attended colleges

ranked in the top 3 Barron’s categories, only 15 percent of new hires’ had degrees from schools

ranked ‘very competitive’ or higher.

       CPS new hires were also less experienced, on average, than the applicant pool as a whole.

Fully 70 percent of new hires had no prior teaching experience, compared with 39 percent of

applicants. It is important to recognize that new hires reflect both demand factors (which

applicants were offered positions) and supply factors (which candidates accepted the offers).

The numbers in Table 1 do not help us understand the extent to which differences between CPS

applicants and eventual hires result from decisions on the part of principals or on the part of

applicants themselves.



                                                  8
4. Data

          The data for the analyses presented here are drawn from a number of sources including

electronic teacher applications to the district, school-level information about the number of

vacancies in a particular school and the needs of the school in various subject areas, and

information about the schools to which each candidate applied.

          During the summer of 2006, we collected data at the three large CPS job fairs. The goal

of this data collection effort was to gather information detailing each of the individual schools

that job candidates applied to at the fairs. To obtain this information, prior to each job fair we

acquired the list of schools registered to attend the fair from staff in CPS HR. Each school that

attends a CPS job fair has an individual table at the fair where the school principal and/or

administrators sit, place relevant literature and information, accept resumes and interview

candidates. We used the list provided by CPS HR to generate school-level sign in sheets for

every school that attended each of the three job fairs. With the support of HR staff, we informed

all principals who were attending the fairs about the process, explaining that the sign-in sheets

were being provided so that every job candidate who visited the schools’ table would sign the

sheet and provide the last four digits of her social security number. Sign-in sheets were placed

on each school’s table directly in front of the principal and other administrators who were

available to talk with and interview applicants as they circulated through the fair and approached

individual schools.

          The CPS job fairs are large, chaotic and crowded. To improve our chances of collecting

complete and accurate data, the authors and several research assistants attended each fair and

circulated throughout the room during the event. We reminded principals and school personnel



                                                  9
to ask all applicants to sign the sign-in sheets when they approached the schools’ tables. To

encourage principals to use the sign-in sheets, we provided them with copies and explained that

they could use them to keep track of candidates who had applied for vacancies at their schools.

Throughout each fair, we circulated and answered principals’ questions, provided additional

sign-in sheets, and worked to ensure that sign-in sheets were being used by all schools and

signed by all applicants. As schools finished up and closed down their tables, we collected their

sign-in sheets.

       In this manner, we obtained sign-in data for approximately 87 percent of the 371 schools

that attended job fairs that summer. The sign-in data for the remaining schools was incomplete

or problematic, most often because these schools arrived at the fair very late or left very early.

Many of these schools left their sign-in sheets at the fair even after they left, and teacher

candidates frequently listed their names on these sheets to receive additional information about

the school. While this does indicate some interest on the part of the candidate, we felt it was

different from waiting in line and interviewing with a school’s principal. Thus, we decided to

exclude this information from our analysis. In other cases, we observed some schools that did not

utilize the sign-in sheets and a small number of schools refused to participate in the study. Other

schools with problematic data were repeatedly observed not using the sign-in sheets or, at times,

had so many applicants lined up at their tables or had such a loosely organized means for

interviewing and screening candidates that they failed to use the sign-in sheets consistently.

       Table 2 provides summary statistics on all schools in CPS, separated to allow one to

compare the characteristics of schools that participated in the job fairs with those that did not.

Schools that participated in CPS job fairs were more likely to serve a predominately African

American student population and less likely to be predominately Hispanic. Job fair schools were



                                                  10
larger and lower achieving, on average, than schools that did not participate. Not surprisingly,

schools that participated in job fairs reported more job openings in May of 2006 than those that

did not; nearly six openings on average versus four, respectively. Although charter schools are

allowed to participate in CPS job fairs, they are excluded from descriptive tables and from the

analysis sample because the majority of charter schools attending the job fairs were part of

charter organizations that interviewed candidates centrally for position openings in multiple

schools. Thus, we are unable to disaggregate applications for individual charter schools.

        Columns 5-8 compare the schools attending job fairs that had usable sign-in data (i.e., our

analysis sample, n=321) to schools attending the job fairs with incomplete or problematic data.

Schools with problematic sign in data were more likely to be predominately African American,

and were lower achieving than schools with usable sign in data. Schools that are excluded from

our analyses because of poor sign in data also had an average of two more positions open in May

2006.

        The number of candidates that interviewed at each school (i.e., the count of the sign-ins)

serves as the outcome measure in our analysis. We view this measure of the “number of

applications” to the school as a reasonable proxy for teacher supply, although it has several

important limitations. First, it contains some measurement error, as not every teacher who

interviewed at the school signed the sheet. To the extent that this is classical measurement error

in a dependent variable, however, it will merely make our regression estimates less precise

without introducing any bias. Second, we observed that in some cases candidates were not

willing to wait in very long lines to interview with particular schools. For this reason, our

measure may actually understate teacher interest in the most popular schools. This will tend to




                                                 11
bias our regression estimates toward zero, suggesting that our results may underestimate the

relationship between school characteristics and teacher labor supply.

       While this is a limitation of our data, it is important to note that there is substantial

variation in the number of applications across schools. Figure 1 shows a histogram of the

number of applications per school using the total number of applications to the school across all

three fairs. Table 3 provides participation and vacancy information reported by schools. The

number of applicants per school varies substantially, with an average of 55 applicants per school

per fair, and a standard deviation of 37. Schools at the 10th percentile had 18 applicants per fair,

compared with 102 applicants for schools at the 90th percentile.

       We match the application data to school-level data we obtained from the CPS. This data

includes not only school demographics that might be relevant to job applicants (e.g., racial

composition, poverty and achievement levels in the school), but also information on the number

of open positions in the school as of May 2006 (prior to the first large job fair).

       Finally, we have information about the specific needs of each school taken from online

registration forms that schools completed prior to each job fair. This information includes the

number of current vacancies, the number of anticipated vacancies and the number of new hires

the school was looking to make at the fair. In addition, the school indicated whether it was

looking to make one or more hires in a number of different fields (e.g., pre-kindergarten,

elementary education, special education, bilingual education, math and science).

       Table 3 shows summary statistics for our sample overall and separately for elementary

and secondary schools. High schools were more likely to participate in job fairs than elementary

schools, likely reflecting the fact that they were typically looking to hire more than seven people

(7.3) compared with an average of less than four (3.7) for elementary schools. Despite the fact



                                                  12
that they had more vacancies, high schools typically had fewer applicants than elementary

schools, with an average of 51 applicants per school compared with 56 for elementary schools.

Schools attending job fairs were frequently looking to fill positions in areas that are often

considered harder to staff such as special education and mathematics or science. Over half of

schools reported needing to find candidates to teach special education classes. Fully 70 percent

of schools reported vacancies in math or science compared with 65 percent of schools looking to

hire in English or social studies.

5. Results

       Our primary objective is to examine whether teacher labor supply is correlated with

observable school characteristics. In particular, prior literature suggests that teachers are less

likely to apply to disadvantaged schools as measured by student demographic composition

including race/ethnicity, socioeconomic status, and academic achievement. To explore this

issue, we regress the number of applications in school s at fair f on a variety of school

demographic characteristics controlling for indicators for the number and type of vacancies in

the school. In all cases, we present robust standard errors clustered at the school level. Missing

data dummies are included for independent variables and controls.

       Table 4 provides our main results. In all columns, we show results from OLS regressions

where the dependent variable is number of job fair applicants per school. The various

specifications show changes in the dependent variable as different school characteristics are

added to the model. Column 1 shows coefficients from different regressions that estimate

number of job fair applicants using either single variables or clusters of similar variables. In

other words, the results shown in column 1 reflect many different regression specifications. The

faint dotted lines indicate the different specifications. In terms of school racial/ethnic



                                                 13
composition, we see that schools with a larger proportion of White or Asian students had more

applicants. A ten percentage point increase in White or Asian students is associated, on average,

with nearly four more applicants per school. Free lunch eligibility is correlated with number of

job applicants per fair in the expected direction, with a ten percentage point increase in free

lunch eligible students associated with four fewer applicants per school for each job fair in which

they participated. Academic achievement is positively associated with number of applicants, as

is percent limited English proficient.

       Interestingly, indicators for region suggest that geography may play an important part in

candidates’ school preferences. The omitted region, Region 1, is the region that encompasses

Chicago’s northernmost and northwest neighborhoods. Regions 2 and 3 encompass the areas

closest to and west of the city center. Regions 4 through 6 move progressively southward, with

Region 6 including Chicago’s southernmost neighborhoods. The regressions including only CPS

region show a preference for schools in neighborhoods on Chicago’s north side, with far south

side schools in Region 6 having an average of 29 fewer applicants per fair than schools on the far

north side. The schools in Region 6 have a much higher fraction of African-American students

than the schools in Region 1, suggesting a teacher desire to avoid high minority schools. It is

also possible that these strong regional/geographic preferences reflect teacher preferences in

terms of neighborhood desirability or proximity to the teacher’s own neighborhood, which we

discuss in more detail below.

       As would be expected, schools reporting a larger number of anticipated vacancies and

those looking to fill more positions typically had more applicants. Column 2 shows the

coefficients on school-level racial/ethnic composition controlling for number and type of




                                                 14
vacancies, school enrollment, and grade level. Including controls does not alter the relationship

substantially, with more teachers still applying to schools that serve fewer minority students.

        Columns 3 through 5 show the relationship between school racial/ethnic composition and

number of applicants adding percent eligible for free lunch, school-level academic achievement,

and percent LEP, respectively. When the percentage of free lunch-eligible students is included

with racial composition, both free-lunch eligibility and percentage of White and Asian students

remain statistically significant, although the magnitude of each coefficient is reduced. The

pattern is similar when percent proficient is included in the model, although percent proficient is

no longer statistically significant. When percent LEP is added to the model including indicators

for race/ethnicity, its magnitude drops to near zero, and it becomes statistically insignificant.

Column 6 provides coefficients from a model that includes racial/ethnic composition indicators

as well as percent proficient, percent free lunch-eligible, and percent LEP. Interestingly, when

all of these variables are included, only free lunch eligibility remains statistically significant.

        Column 7 adds the region indicators to the model. Free lunch eligibility, again, remains

statistically significant. Although not all region indicators are statically significant, the pattern of

results indicates that teachers’ preferences for geography remain remarkably unchanged when

included in the same model as school-level student demographic characteristics. Column 8 adds

school neighborhood information by zip code including percent poverty, percent African

American, percent Hispanic, miles to central business district, and prevalence of both property

and violent crimes. While the magnitude of the region indicators drops, these variable remain

statistically significant and substantively large. This suggests that there may be some

unobservable (to the researcher) characteristics associated with certain regions within CPS that




                                                  15
are correlated with desirability on the part of teachers. Such factors could include reputation or

perceived safety of the school or surrounding area.

       Table 5 shows additional specifications of the baseline model (column 8 of Table 4) in

order to assess the robustness of the results discussed above. Interestingly, we see that percent of

students who are free lunch eligible remains a statistically significant predictor of the number of

applicants to a school across a number of different specifications. The region indicators remain

important determinants of teacher applications, although in models with only one observation per

school (as opposed to observations for each school x job fair) the precision of these variables

declines substantially.

       Columns 5-8 in Table 5 show results separately for elementary and high schools. The

first column for each level shows bivariate results or results for groups of similar variables, and

columns 6 and 8 show the results for the preferred model for elementary and high schools

respectively. While we lose considerable precision when we split the sample, several important

findings stand out. First, the region indicators are important determinants of applications for

both elementary and high schools. The fully specified models (columns 6 and 8) indicate that

region appears to play an important role for applicants to elementary schools. The number of

applicants per school varies substantially by region, with far south side schools having an

average of 16 fewer applicants per school than far north side schools. While the region

indicators are statistically insignificant in the fully specified high school models for all regions

except Region 3, coefficients and standard errors suggest that this may be due to reduced

precision and power rather than to a lack of association. Coefficients range from 20 to 33 fewer

applicants per school in high schools not located on the city’s far north side, substantially larger

in magnitude than coefficients in the elementary school model.



                                                  16
       Second, student poverty (conditional on the other variables, including student race and

academic proficiency) appears to be a more important determinant of applications to elementary

schools than high schools. Conversely, student academic proficiency (conditional on other

variables) appears to be a more important determinant of high school applications.

Unfortunately, the very low precision of our estimates precludes us from drawing strong

conclusions from these results.

       In addition to examining the application behavior of candidates in aggregate, we are

interested in exploring whether the preferences of candidates vary by characteristics such as race,

prior academic preparation and experience. To do so, we matched applicants from job fair sign-

in sheet data to their centrally stored CPS applications using first and last names and the last four

digits of applicant social security numbers. Figure 2 shows a histogram describing the fraction

of applicants per school who we were able to match to CPS application files. In the average

school, we matched 80 percent of individuals who signed-in at the school during a job fair to

their application files. Matching rates ranged from 50 to 100 percent, and we were able to match

over two-thirds (68%) of teachers for 90 percent of schools. Since we are only able to conduct

the subgroup analysis below on those applicants who matched to the central CPS application

data, a clear concern is whether the match probability is correlated with any factors that might be

related to the applicant preferences for school type. Fortunately, an analysis of the predictors of

matching (shown in the Appendix) suggests that observable school characteristics are not

systematically associated with the match probability, providing reassurance that our estimates on

the sample of matched applicants will provide reasonable estimates of the full population.

       Table 6 shows results from models that regress the log transformed number of applicants

to a school on school demographics, separately by various applicant groups. We use the log



                                                 17
specification here to allow easier comparison across the groups since group sizes (and thus the

mean number of applications per group) differ substantially The subgroups of interest include

Black, Hispanic, and White/Asian applicants, applicants with undergraduate degrees in

mathematics or science, and applicants from the most competitive undergraduate institutions

(about 13% of the total sample). We show models that include all of the school-composition and

demographic variables of interest as well as controls (similar to specification shown in Table 5,

Column 4). Importantly, column 2 shows that results for matched applicants are virtually

identical to results for the full sample (Column 1), indicating that the 80 percent of job fair

applicants that we were able to match to their centrally stored application files appear to have

similar preferences to the full applicant pool.

       Results indicate that applicant preferences for school characteristics vary substantially by

applicant race/ethnicity. African American applicants are less likely to apply to schools with

larger proportions of White or Asian students and more likely to apply to schools in Regions 3

through 6 than they are to schools in CPS Region 1. For example, the coefficient .936 on the

Region 6 measure indicates that schools in Region 6 receive nearly twice as many (100 percent

more) applications from African American candidates than schools in Region 1. Schools in

regions 4 and 5 receive 42 and 54 percent more applications than Region 1 schools. Regions 3-6

are located on the South side of Chicago, which has a larger percentage of African American

residents than other areas of the city. Yet, the region indicators are still large and significant in

models that control for zip code racial composition. It is possible that African-American teacher

applicants are more likely to be living in South side neighborhoods, or have friends and family in

these neighborhoods, which could make the areas more appealing.




                                                  18
        Not surprisingly, Hispanic applicants are more likely to apply to schools serving larger

percentages of LEP students. They are also less likely to apply to schools with larger

proportions of White or Asian students, and less likely to apply to schools serving more free

lunch eligible students (all else equal).

        In addition, we find that the preferences of applicants with undergraduate degrees in

mathematics or science differ notably from those of other applicants. As Column 6 indicates,

these candidates were statistically significantly more likely to apply to schools with larger

proportions of students meeting basic levels of academic proficiency. Interestingly, controlling

for other school demographic and composition indicators, applicants with mathematics or

science degrees also show no geographic or regional preferences. The pattern of results for

applicants who attended the most selective undergraduate institutions (Column 7) is very similar

to results for the full sample (Column 1).



6. Conclusions

        The distribution of teachers across schools results from a two-sided matching process in

which both teacher and school administrator preferences play a role. This paper uses data on

teacher applications to specific public schools in Chicago to disentangle supply from demand

side factors, and credibly identify the relative importance of various school characteristics to

teachers in the initial hiring process.

        Not surprisingly, we find that teachers are substantially less likely to apply to higher-

poverty schools. More interestingly, we find that there is little aggregate relationship between

the number of teacher applications and school racial composition or achievement level once one

controls for school poverty rate. In addition, there appears to be significant heterogeneity in



                                                 19
teacher preferences in ways that one might expect. For example, African American teachers are

relatively more likely to apply to schools with a predominantly African-American student

population and Latino teachers are relatively more likely to apply to schools with larger limited

English proficient populations. Teachers with undergraduate degrees in mathematics or science

are more likely to apply to schools serving larger proportions of academically proficient students.

       Finally, we find that indicators for the geographic region of the city in which the district

is located are extremely powerful predictors of teacher applications. Schools on the city’s north

and northwest sides, and those closer to the city center, get substantially more applications than

those on the far south or far west sides. This relationship remains robust and significant even

after we control for a variety of school demographic characteristics such as student poverty,

racial composition and achievement as well as the number and type of positions available at the

school. In fact, geography remains an important predictor when we control for several

potentially important neighborhood-level characteristics such as poverty, racial composition and

crime rates. It is likely the geographic region indicators are proxies for a number of hard-to-

observe school and/or neighborhood characteristics, such as perceived safety, community

attitudes toward education and school leadership. It is also possible that the geographic region

indicators are picking up applicant preferences in terms of proximity to their own neighborhoods,

reduced commute time, or ease of access using public transportation.

       It is interesting to consider these findings in light of recent CPS recruitment efforts. Over

the last decade, the CPS office of human resources has substantially increased efforts to recruit

more widely, soliciting applicants from out of state and holding broadly publicized large-scale

job fairs to bring in more candidates. While the 2006 applicant pool contained over 11 potential

candidates for each eventual hire, our analyses indicate that the vast majority of those applicants



                                                20
– including many of the most highly qualified applicants – will not apply to the schools serving

the most disadvantaged students. With job fair applications ranging across schools from the

single digits to nearly 500, it is clear that despite an abundance of applicants to the district as a

whole, many schools – whether because they are situated in less geographically desirable

locations, because they serve the most disadvantaged student populations, or a combination of

these factors – are likely to experience a shortage of applicants who are qualified to fill their

vacancies. This suggests that targeted efforts to direct a larger number of qualified applicants to

hard-to-staff schools could have important benefits.




                                                  21
References

Aaronson, D., Barrow, L., and Sander, W. (2007). Teachers and Student Achievement in the
      Chicago Public High Schools. Journal of Labor Economics, 25:95-135.

Borman, G. D., & Dowling, N. M. (2008). Teacher attrition and retention: A meta-analytic and
      narrative review of the research. Review of Educational Research, 78, 367-409

Boyd, D., Grossman, P., Lankford, H., Loeb, S., & Wyckoff, J. (2008). Who Leaves? Teacher
       Attrition and Student Achievement. NBER Working Paper 14022.

Boyd, D., Lankford, H., Loeb, S., Ronfeldt, M., Wyckoff, J. (2010). The Role of Teacher
       Quality in Retention and Hiring: Using Applications-to-Transfer to Uncover Preferences
       of Teachers and Schools. NBER Working Paper 15966.
Boyd, D., Lankford, L., Loeb, S., & Wyckoff, J. (2005a). Explaining the short careers of high-
       achieving teachers in schools with low-performing students. American Economic
       Review.

Boyd D., Lankford, H., Loeb, S. and Wyckoff, J. (2005b). The Draw of Home: How Teachers’
      Preferences for Proximity Disadvantage Urban Schools, Journal of Policy Analysis and
      Management, 2005, 24(1), pp.1134-132.

Clotfelter, C.T., Ladd, H.F., & Vigdor, J.L. (2005). Who Teaches Whom? Race and the
        Distribution of Novice Teachers. Economics of Education Review. 24(4):377–392.

Clotfelter C. T., H. F. Ladd, and J. L. Vigdor, (2006). Teacher-Student Matching and the
        Assessment of Teacher Effectiveness, Journal of Human Resources. XLI (4): 778-820.

Goldhaber, D., Gross, B., & Player, D. (2007). Are public schools really losing their “best”?
      Assessing the career transitions of teachers and their implications for the quality of the
      teacher workforce. CALDER working paper.
Hanushek, E.A., Kain, J.F., O’Brien, D.M. and Rivkin, S.G. (2005). The Market for Teacher
      Quality. NBER Working Paper #11154.

Hanushek, E.A., Kain, J.F. and Rivkin, S.J. (2004). Why public schools lose teachers. Journal of
      Human Resources, 34:326-354.

Ingersoll, R. (2001). Teacher turnover and teacher shortages: An organizational analysis.
        American Educational Research Journal, 38(3), 499-534.

Ingersoll, R. (2003). Out-of-field teaching and the limits of teacher policy. Seattle, WA: Center
       for the Study of Teacher Policy.

Ingersoll, R., & Smith, T. (2003). The wrong solution to the teacher shortage. Educational
        Leadership, 60(8), 30–33.



                                                22
Lankford, H., Loeb, S., & Wyckoff, J. (2002). Teacher sorting and the plight of urban schools: A
       descriptive analysis. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 24(1), 37-62.

Nye, B., Konstantopoulos, S., & Hedges, L. V. (2004). How large are teacher effects?
       Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 26, 237–257.

Podgursky, M., Monroe, R., & Watson, D. (2004). The academic quality of public school
       teachers: an analysis of entry and exit behavior. Economics of Education Review. 23,
       507-518.

Reininger, M. (2006). Teachers’ Location Preferences and the Implications for Schools with
       Different Student Populations. Unpublished doctoral dissertation. Stanford University.

Rockoff, J.E. (2004) The Impact of Individual Teachers on Student Achievement: Evidence from
       Panel Data, American Economic Review, 94(2004): 247-252.

Scafidi, B. Stinebrickner, T., & Sjoquist, D.L. (2007). Race, Poverty, and Teacher
        Mobility. Economics of Education Review. 26: 145-159.

Stinebrickner, T. (2002). An analysis of occupational change and departures from the labor
        force. Journal of Human Resources, 37(1), 192-216.




                                               23
Table 1 - Characteristics of Teacher Applicants and New Hires in 2006-07


                                                                      CPS New
                                                      Applicants       Hires
                                                         (1)            (2)
Number                                                 19,368          1,679

                    Demographics
Female                                                   0.736             0.724
Race/ethnicity
  White                                                  0.663             0.616
  Black                                                  0.191             0.190
  Hispanic                                               0.093             0.122
  Other ethnicity                                        0.045             0.073
Applicant address
  Chicago                                                0.483              --
  Illinois, outside Chicago                              0.283              --
  Out of state                                           0.234              --

              Educational Background
Has degree information                                   0.666             0.788
  Education major                                        0.611               --
  Math or science major                                  0.054               --
  Humanities or social science major                     0.223               --
  Other major                                            0.138               --
Barron’s rating of undergraduate school
  Most competitive                                       0.034               0
  Highly competitive                                     0.099             0.064
  Very competitive                                       0.279             0.098
  Competitive                                            0.380             0.274
  Less competitive                                       0.049             0.320
  Not competitive                                        0.158             0.245
Has a masters degree                                     0.391             0.214

                  Prior Experience
Certified                                                0.655              --
Has resume in applicant file                             0.898              --
Years of teaching experience
  No prior teaching experience                           0.391             0.699
  1-3 years                                              0.327             0.300
  4-10 years                                             0.196             0.001
  11+ years                                              0.087               0
Missing cells indicate that data was not available.




                                                       24
Table 2 - Demographic characteristics of CPS schools that participated in job fairs, schools that did not, and by quality of sign in data (n=583).

                                                                                                                All schools that participated in the job fairs
                                                          Schools that
                                           Schools that      did not
                                          participated in participate in                                Schools with       Schools with
                                           the job fairs  the job fairs                                 good sign in     sign in problems
                                             (n=371)        (n=212)      Diff: (1) - (2)   P-value      data (n=321)          (n=50)      Diff: (5) - (6)    P-value

                                                (1)              (2)            (3)          (4)              (5)               (6)              (7)              (8)

Predominately Black                            0.51             0.36           0.14         0.001             0.49             0.62             0.13             0.085
Predominately Hispanic                         0.11             0.19           -0.08        0.006             0.11             0.10             -0.01            0.799
Predominately minority                         0.14             0.17           -0.04        0.230             0.15             0.08             -0.07            0.206
Racially mixed                                 0.08             0.11           -0.02        0.319             0.08             0.10              0.02            0.653
Integrated                                     0.16             0.16            0.00        0.966             0.17             0.10             -0.07            0.204
Student Achievement (natn'l % rank)            47.86           55.17           -7.30        0.000            48.99             40.66            -8.32            0.014
Enrollment                                      734             634             1.00        0.015             721               814              0.92            0.249
Percent ESL students                           10.20           14.55           -4.35        0.001            10.34             9.31             -1.03            0.638
Percent low income students                    85.86           84.64            1.22        0.459            85.27             89.63             4.36            0.122
Elementary school                              0.80             0.85           -0.06        0.092             0.81             0.72             -0.09            0.141
Magnet school                                  0.10             0.09            0.00        0.916             0.10             0.08             -0.02            0.663
Number of open positions May 2006              5.61             4.00            1.61        0.000             5.34             7.33              1.99            0.001
Number of vacancies in June 2006               4.10             2.46            1.64        0.000             3.86             5.61              1.75            0.001
Actual sample size varies due to missing data for individual variables.
Table does not include charter schools, special education schools or alternative schools.
The coefficients in columns 3 and 7 are estimates from bivariate regressions predicting the variable from that row using whether schools attended at least one job
fair (3) or whether job fair schools had problematic sign in data (7).
Columns 4 and 8 are the p-values for coefficients in columns 3 and 7, respectively.




                                                                                  25
Table 3 - Summary Statistics for Chicago Public Schools Participating in the Summer 2006 Job Fairs

                                                                                    Elementary
                                                                   All Schools       Schools       High Schools
                 School Participation in Job Fairs
Participated May job fair                                              0.673           0.610           0.878
Participated in June job fair                                          0.655           0.617           0.779
Participated in July job fair                                          0.540           0.504           0.656

Number of applications (per job fair)
   Mean                                                               54.505          55.518          51.237
   Standard Deviation                                                 36.921          38.609          30.752
   10th percentile                                                      18              19              15
   90th percentile                                                     102             104              93

                    Vacancy Information
Number of open positions as of May                                     5.604           4.796           8.215
Number of vacancies as of June 26th                                    4.277           3.335           7.322

        On-Line Registration Information for Job Fairs
Number of anticipated vacancies                                        1.810           1.738           2.029
Number of current vacancies                                            2.458           1.994           3.876
Number of new hires looking to make                                    4.556           3.671           7.324
Missing data from on-line registration                                 0.160           0.166           0.139

       Information on Position Needs by Subject (yes/no)
Kindergarten or Pre-K                                                  0.131           0.131
Grades 1-3                                                             0.383           0.383
Grades 4-8                                                             0.346           0.346
Special education                                                      0.507           0.475           0.610
Bilingual                                                              0.090           0.100           0.059
Gym                                                                    0.174           0.163           0.212
Administration                                                         0.349           0.328           0.415
Foreign language                                                       0.271                           0.271
Fine arts                                                              0.390                           0.390
Math or science                                                        0.695                           0.695
Social studies                                                         0.203                           0.203
English                                                                0.449                           0.449
Vocational class                                                       0.534                           0.534
Other subject                                                          0.008                           0.008

    Predominantly African-American                                       0.515         0.520             0.496
    Predominantly Hispanic                                               0.108         0.138             0.008
    Predominantly African-American and Hispanic                          0.139         0.116             0.213
    Racially mixed                                                       0.097         0.078             0.157
    Racially integrated                                                  0.142         0.147             0.126
Percent proficient                                                      46.644        52.573            21.355
Percent free-lunch eligible                                             86.387        86.414            86.292
Percent limited English proficient                                      10.304        11.988             4.436
Magnet school                                                            0.090         0.087             0.099
Enrollment (in 100s)                                                     7.427         6.480            10.726
This table includes information for the 321 schools that participated in the Summer 2006 job fairs that had good
sign-in data. Schools with problematic sign in data are excluded.

                                                           26
Table 4 - Relationship between school and neighborhood characteristics and number of Summer 2006 job fair applicants applying to
Chicago Public Schools
                                                        (1)       (2)      (3)        (4)        (5)       (6)        (7)        (8)
                           Dependent Variable:                          Number of job fair applicants
School-level independent variables
   Percent White, Asian, Native American            0.350*** 0.473*** 0.258** 0.350*** 0.470*** 0.198               -0.102    -0.0716
                                                     (0.111)   (0.0979) (0.124)    (0.107)     (0.101)  (0.131)    (0.157)    (0.160)
   Percent Hispanic                                   0.0827    0.0312   0.0478 -0.000907 0.0196        -0.0293    -0.0771     0.0271
                                                    (0.0559) (0.0474) (0.0502) (0.0472) (0.0876) (0.0845) (0.0822)            (0.105)
   Percent eligible for free-lunch                 -0.404***            -0.321**                        -0.320* -0.399** -0.352**
                                                     (0.123)             (0.160)                        (0.172)    (0.180)    (0.170)
   Percent proficient                               0.263***                        0.221               0.0734       0.129     0.0787
                                                    (0.0916)                       (0.141)              (0.144)    (0.143)    (0.148)
   Percent limited English proficient                0.322**                                   0.0334    0.189       0.183      0.106
                                                     (0.133)                                   (0.217)  (0.218)    (0.210)    (0.212)
   Region 2                                           -3.825                                                        -3.931     -4.089
                                                     (7.619)                                                       (6.892)    (9.317)
   Region 3                                        -17.03***                                                        -9.096     -7.707
                                                     (6.049)                                                       (6.281)    (8.706)
   Region 4                                        -16.11***                                                      -15.16** -13.85**
                                                     (6.068)                                                       (6.227)    (6.440)
   Region 5                                        -21.55***                                                     -17.36*** -13.53**
                                                     (6.076)                                                       (6.454)    (6.869)
   Region 6                                        -29.11***                                                     -25.54*** -16.14**
                                                     (5.565)                                                       (6.308)    (8.159)
   Number of new hires                              1.906***
                                                     (0.479)
   Anticipated vacancy count                         3.189**
                                                     (1.307)
   June job fair                                    23.27***
                                                     (3.192)
   July job fair                                    22.64***
                                                     (4.041)
Zipcode-level independent variables
   Percent poverty                                    -58.18                                                                   -6.340
                                                     (38.17)                                                                  (33.96)
   Percent Black                                      -19.76                                                                   -0.378
                                                     (13.91)                                                                  (13.42)
   Percent Hispanic                                -33.14***                                                                   -20.41
                                                     (12.02)                                                                  (13.39)
   Miles to central bus. dist. regions 1-3            -1.844                                                                   -1.227
                                                     (1.563)                                                                  (1.918)
   Miles to central bus. dist. regions 4-6         -3.649***                                                                   -1.734
                                                     (0.907)                                                                  (1.238)
   Property crimes per 100,000, avg. 2003-2005 -0.147                                                                          -0.111
                                                     (0.138)                                                                  (0.143)
   Violent crimes per 100,000, avg. 2003-2005         0.760                                                                    0.0874
                                                     (0.858)                                                                  (0.776)
School demographic, vacancy, position, and                         X        X         X           X        X           X          X
job fair controls*
Constant                                                        -2.499    26.26     -6.392     -3.075    26.07    48.14**     52.33**
                                                                (7.056)  (16.09)   (7.090)     (6.687)  (17.89)    (19.74)    (22.23)
Observations                                            554       554      554       554         554      554         554        554
R-squared                                                        0.397    0.401     0.396       0.393    0.402       0.435      0.441
Mean number of job applicants per school per fair was 55, with a standard deviation of 37.
Robust standard errors, clustered by school, in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Column 1 shows coefficients from regressions that estimate number of job fair applicants using either single variables or clusters of
similar variables. Coefficients from separate regressions are denoted by horizontal lines in these columns.
*Controls include school enrollment, number of anticipated vacancies, dummies for elementary school, magnet school, indicators for
specific number of hires school was trying to make at job fairs, indicators for types of positions school had openings in, which job
fairs school attended.
Observations in these analyses are school by job fair, meaning that schools that attended multiple job fairs have separate
observations for each fair they participated in. Observations with poor sign in data (schools that had poor quality sign in data for a
particular job fair or multiple fairs) are excluded for those months.

                                                                         27
Table 5 - Relationship between school characteristics and number of job fair applicants applying to Chicago Public Schools participating in the
Summer 2006 Job Fairs, additional specifications and separately for elementary and high schools
                                                         (1)       (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)           (6)       (7)           (8)
                                                                One observation per
                                                                        school
                                                                            Weighted
                                                                              by May
                                                    Table 4,                 Vacancy      Log #
                                                   Column 8 Unweighted         Count applications Elementary Schools               High Schools
School-level independent variables
  Percent White, Asian, Native American              -0.0716     -0.252       -0.0749      -0.137    0.313***        0.0283   0.718***        -0.140
                                                      (0.160)    (0.344)      (0.365)     (0.288)      (0.119)       (0.176)   (0.261)       (0.518)
  Percent Hispanic                                    0.0271    -0.0542        -0.133     -0.0896     0.132**          0.101 -0.277***      -0.0760
                                                      (0.105)    (0.248)      (0.255)     (0.236)     (0.0614)       (0.134)   (0.104)       (0.253)
  Percent eligible for free-lunch                   -0.352**   -0.958*** -0.765**          -0.493   -0.368*** -0.343*        -0.659***         0.492
                                                      (0.170)    (0.365)      (0.382)     (0.316)      (0.138)       (0.204)   (0.209)       (0.455)
  Percent proficient                                  0.0787     -0.135        -0.222       0.153     0.303**       0.00471    0.544**         0.563
                                                      (0.148)    (0.350)      (0.355)     (0.326)      (0.136)       (0.164)   (0.210)       (0.369)
  Percent limited English proficient                    0.106     0.209         0.627       0.317    -14.77**       -0.0824      3.192        -1.138
                                                      (0.212)    (0.496)      (0.506)     (0.449)      (7.220)       (0.253)   (7.496)       (1.248)
  Region 2                                             -4.089     9.893       31.81**     -0.0800        1.586        -0.749    -16.70        -28.91
                                                      (9.317)    (15.49)      (14.83)     (0.153)      (9.005)       (10.93)   (14.24)       (17.91)
  Region 3                                             -7.707    -9.356        14.35       -0.150    -15.93**         -4.003   -23.16*      -32.57*
                                                      (8.706)    (16.15)      (14.64)     (0.147)      (6.798)       (10.16)   (13.06)       (18.38)
  Region 4                                          -13.85**     -8.282        4.798     -0.202*     -17.30**       -14.62*     -13.10        -26.35
                                                      (6.440)    (13.90)      (13.38)     (0.114)      (7.286)       (7.499)   (11.38)       (18.24)
  Region 5                                          -13.53**    -25.56*        -14.32   -0.303** -20.29*** -12.72*            -25.16**        -20.20
                                                      (6.869)    (13.93)      (13.44)     (0.127)      (7.078)       (7.383)   (11.98)       (22.13)
  Region 6                                          -16.14**     -23.37        -12.51   -0.369** -28.61*** -16.20*            -30.47**        -24.34
                                                      (8.159)    (19.36)      (18.59)     (0.157)      (6.319)       (8.907)   (11.84)       (29.15)
Zipcode-level independent variables
  Percent poverty                                      -6.340     76.98         129.9     -0.0387       -71.54        -18.24    -15.28         46.50
                                                      (33.96)    (82.45)      (82.71)     (0.742)      (46.15)       (40.34)   (62.23)       (59.52)
  Percent Black                                        -0.378     22.63         18.60      0.0969       -18.92        -0.699    -33.70        -36.84
                                                      (13.42)    (31.84)      (30.68)     (0.274)      (16.92)       (15.53)   (24.13)       (34.24)
  Percent Hispanic                                     -20.41    -37.83      -61.75**      -0.248       -22.62        -10.59 -73.04***        -48.69
                                                      (13.39)    (30.80)      (29.33)     (0.244)      (13.93)       (14.97)   (18.66)       (33.28)
  Miles to central bus. dist. regions 1-3              -1.227    -1.430         2.812    0.00187        -1.679      -0.0402     0.0578        -3.446
                                                      (1.918)    (3.285)      (3.195)    (0.0324)      (1.778)       (2.124)   (3.579)       (2.880)
  Miles to central bus. dist. regions 4-6              -1.734    -3.705        -2.662     -0.0358   -4.136***         -1.716    -1.986        -0.811
                                                      (1.238)    (3.096)      (3.170)    (0.0269)      (1.175)       (1.350)   (1.409)       (4.086)
  Property crimes per 100,000, avg. 2003-2005 -0.111             -0.141       -0.0853    0.00145       -0.0745       0.0308     -0.142        -0.291
                                                      (0.143)    (0.275)      (0.248)   (0.00362)      (0.187)       (0.165)   (0.229)       (0.221)
  Violent crimes per 100,000, avg. 2003-2005          0.0874     -2.005       -3.199*     -0.0171        0.836      -0.0678      0.503         1.276
                                                      (0.776)    (1.808)      (1.759)    (0.0181)      (1.087)       (0.892)   (1.313)       (1.503)
School demographic, vacancy, position, and                X         X             X           X                          X                       X
job fair controls*
Constant                                             52.33**    111.8**        68.16    3.424***                     44.49*                   -13.11
                                                      (22.23)    (43.62)      (45.67)     (0.425)                    (25.26)                 (42.12)
Observations                                             554       369           359         554          423           423       131           131
R-squared                                              0.441      0.379        0.489       0.414                      0.446                    0.662
Mean                                                  54.505     100.09        107.19     54.505               55.52                   51.24
Standard Deviation                                    36.921      75.66         73.48      36.921              38.61                   30.75
Robust standard errors, clustered by school, in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
*Controls include school enrollment, number of anticipated vacancies, dummies for elementary school, magnet school, indicators for specific
number of hires school was trying to make at job fairs, indicators for types of positions school had openings in, which job fairs school attended.
Columns 5 and 7 show coefficients from regressions that estimate number of job fair applicants using either single variables or clusters of
similar variables. Coefficients from separate regressions are denoted by horizontal lines in these columns.
Observations in these analyses, unless otherwise noted, are school by job fair, meaning that schools that attended multiple job fairs have
separate observations for each fair they participated in. Observations with poor sign in data (schools that had poor quality sign in data for a
particular job fair or multiple fairs are excluded for those months).


                                                                        28
Table 6 - Relationship between school and neighborhod characteristics and log number of job fair applicants applying to Chicago Public
Schools participating in the Summer 2006 Job Fairs for various applicant subgroups
                                                     (1)         (2)        (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)            (7)
                            Dependent Variable:                              Log Number of job fair applicants
                                                   Total    Matched       Black    Hispanic White/Asian BA Math/Sci. Top 2 Bar.
School-level independent variables
  Percent White, Asian, Native American            -0.137     -0.0516    -0.632*   -0.934**          0.369        0.0802         -0.355
                                                  (0.288)     (0.307)    (0.368)     (0.436)       (0.376)       (0.474)        (0.377)
  Proportion Hispanic                             -0.0896     -0.0478     -0.251     -0.0898      0.00930       -0.00731        0.0450
                                                  (0.236)     (0.252)    (0.274)     (0.344)       (0.276)       (0.383)        (0.287)
  Prop. eligible for free-lunch                    -0.493      -0.451     -0.118     -0.717*        -0.248         0.232         -0.466
                                                  (0.316)     (0.330)    (0.359)     (0.431)       (0.390)       (0.441)        (0.367)
  Prop. proficient                                  0.153       0.148     -0.147       0.154         0.214       0.813*           0.481
                                                  (0.326)     (0.339)    (0.380)     (0.408)       (0.380)       (0.432)        (0.399)
  Prop. limited English proficient                  0.317       0.115     -0.571   2.372***         -0.390        0.0786        0.0995
                                                  (0.449)     (0.487)    (0.493)     (0.650)       (0.585)       (0.853)        (0.579)
  Region 2                                        -0.0800     -0.0425    0.0686        0.217       -0.0259        0.0224       -0.0793
                                                  (0.153)     (0.160)    (0.163)     (0.182)       (0.195)       (0.182)        (0.178)
  Region 3                                         -0.150      -0.143    0.287*        0.201        -0.167       -0.0704         -0.185
                                                  (0.147)     (0.153)    (0.160)     (0.188)       (0.179)       (0.184)        (0.164)
  Region 4                                        -0.202*     -0.218*   0.427***      -0.100    -0.442***        -0.0375     -0.440***
                                                  (0.114)     (0.122)    (0.149)     (0.173)       (0.147)       (0.168)        (0.144)
  Region 5                                      -0.303**    -0.322** 0.542***         -0.140    -0.523***        -0.0697     -0.515***
                                                  (0.127)     (0.131)    (0.159)     (0.184)       (0.153)       (0.184)        (0.150)
  Region 6                                      -0.369**    -0.362** 0.936***         -0.214    -0.675***         -0.230     -0.685***
                                                  (0.157)     (0.167)    (0.187)     (0.246)       (0.189)       (0.247)        (0.208)
Zipcode-level independent variables
  Percent poverty                                 -0.0387      0.0447     0.722       -0.950         0.403         0.608          0.951
                                                  (0.742)     (0.762)    (0.883)     (1.028)       (0.847)       (1.048)        (0.910)
  Percent Black                                    0.0969       0.106     0.202       -0.515      0.00149          0.136         -0.116
                                                  (0.274)     (0.286)    (0.328)     (0.373)       (0.330)       (0.412)        (0.335)
  Percent Hispanic                                 -0.248      -0.212    -0.674*      -0.289        -0.133        0.0189         -0.412
                                                  (0.244)     (0.256)    (0.343)     (0.352)       (0.327)       (0.394)        (0.323)
  Miles to central bus. dist. regions 1-3        0.00187    -5.10e-05 -0.00320        0.0318      0.00117         0.0128       0.00777
                                                 (0.0324)    (0.0338)   (0.0370)    (0.0367)      (0.0400)      (0.0476)       (0.0376)
  Miles to central bus. dist. regions 4-6         -0.0358     -0.0373    -0.0446     -0.0634       -0.0414      -0.00697       -0.0385
                                                 (0.0269)    (0.0281)   (0.0330)    (0.0426)      (0.0322)      (0.0425)       (0.0358)
  Property crimes per 100,000, avg. 2003-2005 0.00145        0.00109     0.00150    -0.00256     -0.000280     -0.000617       0.00190
                                                (0.00362) (0.00336) (0.00434) (0.00289)          (0.00358)     (0.00636)      (0.00339)
  Violent crimes per 100,000, avg. 2003-2005      -0.0171     -0.0166    -0.0290     0.0160        -0.0102      4.62e-05       -0.0220
                                                 (0.0181)    (0.0179)   (0.0215)    (0.0225)      (0.0197)      (0.0307)       (0.0206)
School demographic, vacancy, position, and            X           X          X           X             X             X              X
job fair controls*
Constant                                        3.424*** 3.151***         0.254    1.467***      2.636***          0.170      1.784***
                                                  (0.425)     (0.433)    (0.519)     (0.507)       (0.537)       (0.659)        (0.488)
Observations                                         554         554        515         426           553           382            516
R-squared                                          0.414        0.400     0.459       0.512         0.428         0.412           0.385
Mean                                               54.51        44.68      6.57         4.08        27.29           2.40           6.10
Standard Deviation                                  36.92       31.09      6.16         5.48         22.20          3.55           5.18
Robust standard errors, clustered by school, in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
*Controls include school enrollment, number of anticipated vacancies, dummies for elementary school, magnet school, indicators for
specific number of hires school was trying to make at job fairs, indicators for types of positions school had openings in, which job fairs
school attended.
Observations in these analyses are school by job fair, meaning that schools that attended multiple job fairs have separate observations
for each fair they participated in. Observations with poor sign in data (schools that had poor quality sign in data for a particular job fair or
multiple fairs) are excluded for those months.




                                                                      29
Figure 1. Applicants per school for all Summer 2006 CPS Job Fairs

        100
        80          Frequency Distribution of Applicants by School
    Frequency
   40   20
        0  60




                0         100         200            300            400   500
                                Number of applications to school




                                                  30
Figure 2: Histogram of fraction of applicants matching by school

               60
               40
   Frequency
               20
               0




                    .5    .6             .7            .8          .9   1
                                  Fraction Matching by School




                                                   31
Appendix

        In order to test for possible selective non-matching, the appendix table shows results from

regressions predicting the fraction of applicants whose sign in data was successfully matched to

CPS application files by school by job fair. The dependent variable in the first two columns is

fraction matching, and in the second two is the log transformation of fraction matching.

Columns 1 and 3 show bivariate regressions or regressions for clusters of variables, while

columns 2 and 4 show fully specified models. Overall, relatively few variables of interest are

predictive of fraction matching. For example, fraction matching did not vary significantly by

region. Percent of students identified as LEP is the only statistically significant predictor of

fraction matching in the fully specified models. Descriptive results on fraction matching suggest

that match rates were quite good, and that they did not vary significantly by key variables of

interest.




                                                 32
Appendix Table - Regressions predicting percent of applicants whose sign in data matched to CPS application files by
school
                                          (1)                 (2)                (3)               (4)
                                                       Fraction Matching                    Log Fraction Matching
  Predominately Hispanic                          -0.0209*             0.0151             -0.141**             0.0564
                                                   (0.0110)            (0.0239)           (0.0674)             (0.145)
  Predominately Minority                           -0.0112             0.0171              -0.0650              0.120
                                                   (0.0123)            (0.0141)           (0.0795)            (0.0914)
  Racially mixed                                  -0.0241*             0.0230             -0.199**              0.110
                                                   (0.0142)            (0.0179)           (0.0838)             (0.101)
  Racially integrated                             -0.00863             0.0151              -0.0459              0.143
                                                   (0.0104)            (0.0179)           (0.0712)             (0.111)
  % Eligible for free-lunch                       0.000153            0.000187            0.000678             0.00171
                                                 (0.000177)          (0.000338)           (0.00121)           (0.00214)
  % Proficient                                    0.000246            -0.000104           0.00207*            -0.000116
                                                 (0.000197)          (0.000395)           (0.00122)           (0.00257)
  % Limited English Proficient                  -0.000507**          -0.00128**          -0.00326**          -0.00744**
                                                 (0.000250)          (0.000559)           (0.00153)           (0.00331)
  Region 2                                        -0.00425             0.0108              -0.0289             0.0774
                                                   (0.0155)            (0.0135)           (0.0905)            (0.0814)
  Region 3                                         0.0176              0.0142               0.128               0.109
                                                   (0.0133)            (0.0137)           (0.0811)            (0.0817)
  Region 4                                        -0.00749             0.00122            -0.00537             0.0612
                                                   (0.0118)            (0.0129)           (0.0800)            (0.0839)
  Region 5                                         -0.0140             -0.0210             -0.0941             -0.128
                                                   (0.0126)            (0.0134)           (0.0772)            (0.0785)
  Region 6                                         0.00675            -0.00198             0.0906              0.0617
                                                  (0.0129)             (0.0129)            (0.0844)           (0.0789)
Number of new hires                              -0.00166*                                -0.00952
                                                 (0.000961)                               (0.00611)
Anticipated vacancy count                         -0.000342                               0.000141
                                                  (0.00222)                               (0.0143)
June job fair                                    -0.0627***                              -0.382***
                                                  (0.00743)                               (0.0478)
July job fair                                    -0.0233***                               -0.123**
                                                  (0.00880)                               (0.0615)
School demographic, vacancy, position,                                    X                                       X
and job fair controls*
Constant                                                              0.798***                                1.280***
                                                                       (0.0410)                                (0.259)
Observations                                           554               554                   542               542
R-squared                                                               0.319                                   0.324
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Fraction of applicants whose sign in data matched to applicatn files ranged across schools from .5 to 1, with an average
fraction matching of .803 (median .813) across the 369 schools in the sample.
*Controls include dummies for elementary school, magnet school, school enrollment, number of anticipated vacancies,
indicators for specific number of hires school was trying to make at job fairs, indicators for types of positions school had
openings in, which job fairs school attended.
Columns 1 and 3 show coefficients from regressions that estimate fraction of job fair applicants matching per school
using either single variables or clusters of similar variables. Coefficients from separate regressions are denoted by
horizontal lines in these columns.
Observations in these analyses are school by job fair, meaning that schools that attended multiple job fairs have
separate observations for each fair they participated in. Observations with poor sign in data (schools that had poor
quality sign in data for a particular job fair or multiple fairs are excluded for those months).

                                                                     33
