                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    THE EVOLUTION OF COMPARATIVE ADVANTAGE:
                     MEASUREMENT AND WELFARE IMPLICATIONS

                                         Andrei A. Levchenko
                                             Jing Zhang

                                         Working Paper 16806
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16806


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2011




We are grateful to the editor (Francesco Caselli), two anonymous referees, Costas Arkolakis, Alan
Deardor, Chris House, Francesc Ortega, Dmitriy Stolyarov, Linda Tesar, Michael Waugh, Kei-Mu
Yi, and participants at numerous seminars and conferences for helpful suggestions, and to Andrew
McCallum, Lin Ma, and Nitya Pandalai Nayar for excellent research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Andrei A. Levchenko and Jing Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Evolution of Comparative Advantage: Measurement and Welfare Implications
Andrei A. Levchenko and Jing Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 16806
February 2011, Revised October 2014
JEL No. F11,F43,O33,O47

                                             ABSTRACT

We estimate productivities at the sector level for 72 countries and 5 decades, and examine how they
evolve over time in both developed and developing countries. In both country groups, comparative
advantage has become weaker: productivity grew systematically faster in sectors that were initially
at greater comparative disadvantage. These changes have had a significant impact on trade volumes
and patterns, and a non-negligible welfare impact. In the counterfactual scenario in which each country's
comparative advantage remained the same as in the 1960s, and technology in all sectors grew at the
same country-specific average rate, trade volumes would be higher, cross-country export patterns more
dissimilar, and intra-industry trade lower than in the data. In this counterfactual scenario, welfare is
also 1.6% higher for the median country compared to the baseline. The welfare impact varies greatly
across countries, ranging from –1.1% to +4.3% among OECD countries, and from –4.6% to +41.9%
among non-OECD countries.


Andrei A. Levchenko
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
611 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
alev@umich.edu

Jing Zhang
Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
230 S LaSalle Street
Chicago, IL 60604
Jing.Zhang@chi.frb.org
1        Introduction

How does technology evolve over time? This question is important in many contexts, most
notably in economic growth and international trade. Much of the economic growth literature
focuses on absolute technological differences between countries. In the context of the one-sector
model common in this literature, technological progress is unambiguously beneficial. Indeed, one
reading of the growth literature is that most of the cross-country income differences are accounted
for by technology, broadly construed (Klenow and Rodrı́guez-Clare 1997, Hall and Jones 1999).
        By contrast, the Ricardian tradition in international trade emphasizes relative technological
differences as the reason for international exchange and gains from trade. In the presence of multi-
ple industries and comparative advantage, the welfare consequences of technological improvements
depend crucially on which sectors experience productivity growth. For instance, it is well known
that when productivity growth is biased towards sectors in which a country has a comparative
disadvantage, the country and its trading partners may experience a welfare loss, relative to the
alternative under which growth is balanced across sectors. Greater relative technological differ-
ences lead to larger gains from trade, and thus welfare could be reduced when countries become
more similar to each other. This result goes back to at least Hicks (1953), and has been reiterated
recently by Samuelson (2004) in the context of productivity growth in developing countries.1
        To fully account for the impact of technological progress on economic outcomes, we must
thus understand not only the evolution of average country-level TFP, but also the evolution of
relative technology across sectors. Or, in the vocabulary of international trade, it is important
to know what happens to both absolute and comparative advantage. Until now the literature
has focused almost exclusively on estimating differences in technology at the country level. This
paper examines the evolution of comparative advantage over time and its implications. Using
a large-scale industry-level dataset on production and bilateral trade, spanning 72 countries, 19
manufacturing sectors, and 5 decades, we estimate productivity in each country, sector, and
decade, and document the changes in comparative advantage between the 1960s and today. We
then use these estimates in a multi-sector Ricardian model of production and trade to quantify
the implications of changing comparative advantage on global trade patterns and welfare.2
        Our main results can be summarized as follows. First, we find strong evidence that compar-
ative advantage has become weaker over time. Controlling for the average productivity growth
of all sectors in a country, sectors that had a larger initial comparative disadvantage grew sys-
    1
     Other papers that explore technological change in Ricardian models are, among many others, Jones (1979),
Krugman (1979), Brezis, Krugman and Tsiddon (1993), and Hymans and Stafford (1995).
   2
     Technically, the term “comparative advantage” refers to the comparison of autarky prices (Deardorff 1980),
and thus encompasses all determinants of relative production cost differences. To streamline exposition, this paper
uses “comparative advantage” as a short-hand for “relative sectoral productivity differences,” i.e., the Ricardian
component of comparative advantage.



                                                        1
tematically faster. This effect is present in all time periods, and is similar in magnitude in both
developed and developing countries. The speed of convergence in sectoral productivities implied
by the estimates is about 18% per decade.
   Second, weakening comparative advantage is important for understanding the evolution of
trade volumes and trade patterns. Our quantitative exercise begins by solving the full model under
the actually observed pattern of comparative advantage, and computing all the relevant model
outcomes under this baseline case. We then compare the baseline to a counterfactual scenario in
which each country’s sectoral productivities grow at the same average rate observed between the
1960s and the 2000s, but its comparative advantage remains as it was in the 1960s. Because we
allow average productivity to grow, this exercise isolates the role of changes in comparative – as
opposed to absolute – advantage.
   The baseline matches the average trade/GDP ratios observed in the data well. In the coun-
terfactual of unchanged comparative advantage, however, trade volumes as a share of GDP are
15% higher in the 2000s, implying that the rise in trade volumes over the past 5 decades would
have been even higher had comparative advantage not weakened.
   Changes in comparative advantage have had an impact on trade patterns as well. We document
that in the data, trade patterns became substantially more similar across countries. In the
majority of sectors, the standard deviation of (log) world export shares across countries has
fallen significantly between the 1960s and the 2000s. In addition, over the same period there has
been a substantial increase in intra-industry trade (measured here by the Grubel-Lloyd index).
As our baseline model is implemented on observed trade flows, it matches these two patterns very
well. By contrast, the counterfactual experiment in which comparative advantage is fixed implies
a much smaller reduction in the dispersion in world export shares, and a much smaller increase
in intra-industry trade than observed in the data.
   Finally, these changes in comparative advantage had an appreciable welfare impact. In the
counterfactual scenario of unchanging comparative advantage, in the 2000s the median country’s
welfare would be 1.6% higher than in the baseline. This median welfare impact amounts to nearly
25% of the median gains from trade relative to autarky implied by the model, which are 6.6%.
Moreover, there is a great deal of variation around this average: the percentage difference between
welfare under this counterfactual and the baseline ranges from −1.1% to +4.3% among OECD
countries, and from −4.6% to +41.9% among non-OECD countries. The cross-country dispersion
in the welfare impact of changing comparative advantage is similar to the dispersion in the implied
gains from trade. Lower average welfare is exactly what theory would predict, given the empirical
result that a typical country’s comparative advantage has become weaker over this period.
   To estimate productivity, the paper extends the methodology developed by Eaton and Kortum
(2002) to a multi-sector framework. It is important to emphasize the advantages of our approach

                                                2
relative to the standard neoclassical methodology of computing measured TFP. The basic difficulty
in directly measuring sectoral TFP in a large sample of countries and over time is the lack of
comparable data on real sectoral output and inputs.3 By contrast, our procedure uses information
on bilateral trade, and thus dramatically expands the set of countries, sectors, and time periods
for which productivity can be estimated. We follow the insight of Eaton and Kortum (2002) that
trade flows contain information on productivity. Intuitively, if controlling for the typical gravity
determinants of trade, a country spends relatively more on domestically produced goods in a
particular sector, it is revealed to have either a high relative productivity or a low relative unit
cost in that sector. We then use data on factor and intermediate input prices to net out the role
of factor costs, yielding an estimate of relative productivity.
       In addition, our approach extends the basic multi-sector Eaton-Kortum framework to incor-
porate many features that are important for reliably estimating underlying technology: multiple
factors of production (labor and capital), differences in factor and intermediate input intensities
across sectors, a realistic input-output matrix between the sectors, both inter- and intra-sectoral
trade, and a non-traded sector. Finally, because our framework allows for international trade
driven by both Ricardian and Heckscher-Ohlin forces, it takes explicit account of each country’s
participation in exports and imports, both of the final output, and of intermediate inputs used in
production.
       We are not the first to use international trade data to estimate technology parameters. Eaton
and Kortum (2002) and Waugh (2010) perform this analysis in a one-sector model at a point in
time, an exercise informative of the cross-section of countries’ overall TFP but not their compar-
ative advantage.4 Shikher (2011, 2012) and Costinot, Donaldson and Komunjer (2012) estimate
sectoral technology for OECD countries, while Caliendo and Parro (2014) analyze the impact
of NAFTA in a multi-sector Eaton-Kortum model. Hsieh and Ossa (2011) examine the global
welfare impact of sector-level productivity growth in China between 1993 and 2005, focusing on
the uneven growth across sectors. Chor (2010) relates Ricardian productivity differences to ob-
servable characteristics of countries, such as institutions and financial development. Relative to
existing contributions, we extend the multi-sector approach to a much greater set of countries,
and, most importantly, over time. This allows us, for the first time, to examine not only the
global cross-section of productivities, but also their evolution over the past 5 decades and the
   3
      To our knowledge, the most comprehensive database that can be used to measure sectoral TFP on a consistent
basis across countries and time is the OECD Structural Analysis (STAN) database. It contains the required
information on only 12 developed countries for the period 1970-2008 in the best of cases, but upon closer inspection
it turns out that the time and sectoral coverage is poor even in that small set of countries. Appendix A builds
measured TFPs using the STAN database, and compares them to our estimates. There is a high positive correlation
between the two, providing additional support for the validity of the estimates in this paper.
    4
      Finicelli, Pagano and Sbracia (2009) estimate the evolution of overall manufacturing TFP between 1985 and
2002 using a one-sector Eaton and Kortum model.



                                                         3
implications of those changes. While existing papers in this literature employ static models, our
quantitative framework features endogenous capital accumulation, and thus permits modeling the
joint evolution of comparative advantage and the capital stock. We show that the response of the
capital stock to changes in comparative advantage has an appreciable welfare impact.
        Changes in productivity at the sector level have received comparatively less attention in the lit-
erature. Bernard and Jones (1996a, 1996b) use production data to study convergence of measured
TFP in a sample of 15 OECD countries and 8 sectors, while Rodrik (2013) investigates conver-
gence in value added per worker in an expanded sample of countries. Proudman and Redding
(2000) and Hausmann and Klinger (2007) examine changes in countries’ revealed comparative
advantage and how these are related to initial export patterns. Our paper is the first to use a
fully specified model of production and trade to estimate changes in underlying TFP. In addition,
we greatly expand the sample of countries and years relative to these studies, and use our quan-
titative framework to compute the impact of the estimated changes in comparative advantage on
trade volumes, trade patterns, and welfare.
        Our paper is also related to the literature that documents the time evolution of diversification
indices, be it of production (e.g. Imbs and Wacziarg 2003), or trade (e.g. Carrère, Cadot and
Strauss-Kahn 2011). These studies typically find that countries have a tendency to diversify their
production and exports as they grow, at least until they become quite developed. Our findings of
weakening comparative advantage are consistent with greater diversification, and hence provide
a structural interpretation for the evolution of these indices.5
        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 lays out the theoretical framework.
Section 3 presents the estimation procedure and the data. Section 4 describes the patterns of the
evolution of comparative advantage over time, and presents the main econometric results of the
paper on relative convergence. Section 5 examines the quantitative implications of the observed
evolution of comparative advantage. Section 6 concludes.


2        Theoretical Framework

The world is comprised of N countries and J + 1 sectors. Each sector produces a continuum of
goods. The first J sectors are tradeable subject to trade costs, and sector (J + 1) is nontradeable.
There are two factors of production, labor and capital. Both are mobile across sectors and
immobile across countries. Trade is balanced each period, and thus we abstract from international
asset markets. All agents have perfect foresight and all markets are competitive.
    5
    Our paper is also related to the literature on international technology diffusion, surveyed by Keller (2004).
While we document large and systematic changes in technology over time, our approach is, for now, silent on
the mechanisms behind these changes. Section 4.3 relates our empirical results to the theoretical literature on
technology adoption and diffusion.



                                                       4
2.1      Households

In period t = 0, the representative household in country n is endowed with capital Kn0 and
labor Ln0 . Each period, the household saves an exogenous fraction snt of its current income (as
in Solow 1956, Swan 1956), investing it into next period’s capital, and consumes the remaining
fraction 1 − snt . The saving rates are country-specific and time-varying.6
       Period utility of the representative consumer in country n is given by U (Cnt ), where Cnt
denotes aggregate consumption in country n and period t. The function U (·) satisfies all the
usual regularity conditions. The flow budget constraint of the household in period t is given by

                               Pnt (Cnt + Int ) = Pnt Ynt = wnt Lnt + rnt Knt ,                                  (1)

where Pnt is the price of aggregate consumption, Int is flow saving/investment, Ynt is aggregate
final output, Knt is the capital stock, Lnt is the effective labor endowment, and wnt and rnt are
the wage rate and the rental return to capital, respectively. The budget constraint implicitly
imposes that international trade is balanced in each period. Since investment Int is simply snt Ynt ,
the law of motion for capital is given by

                                       Knt+1 = (1 − δnt )Knt + snt Ynt ,                                         (2)

where δnt is the country-specific and time-varying depreciation rate.
       The aggregate final output Ynt is an aggregate of sectoral composite goods:
                                                                           η
                                                                           ξ
                                                                          η−1 nt
                                         J      1             η−1                          1−ξnt
                                                         j
                                         X                      η
                                                η                                       J+1
                              Ynt =           ωj       Ynt                           Ynt             ,         (3)
                                         j=1

       j                                                    J+1
where Ynt is the composite good in tradeable sector j, and Ynt  is the nontradeable-sector
composite good. The parameter ξnt is thus the Cobb-Douglas weight on the tradeable sector
composite good, η is the elasticity of substitution between the tradeable sectors, and ωj is the taste
parameter for tradeable sector j. The expenditure share on tradeables ξnt varies over time as well
as across countries, to capture in a reduced-form way the positive relationship between income
and the non-tradeable consumption share observed in the data. The aggregate (consumption)
   6
     The variation in snt is meant to capture the influence of demographics, economic growth rates, market frictions,
and distortions or subsidies to savings and/or investment due to government policy, or other underlying fundamental
differences across countries and over time.




                                                                 5
price index in country n and period t is thus:
                                                                             1
                                                                             ξ
                                                                            1−η nt
                                            J
                                                   ωj (pjnt )1−η 
                                            X
                            Pnt = Bn                                                (pJ+1
                                                                                       nt )
                                                                                           1−ξnt
                                                                                                 ,
                                            j=1

            −ξnt
where Bn = ξnt   (1 − ξnt )−(1−ξnt ) and pjnt is the price of the sector j composite.

2.2    Firms

Output in each sector j and country n and period t is produced using a CES production function
that aggregates a continuum of varieties q ∈ [0, 1] unique to each sector:
                                                                                     ε
                                                   Z       1           ε−1
                                                                                   ε−1
                                     Qjnt      =                Qjnt (q) ε dq                  ,
                                                     0


where ε denotes the elasticity of substitution across varieties q, Qjnt is the total sector j output
in country n, and Qjnt (q) is the amount of variety q that is used in production. It is well known
that the price of sector j’s output is given by:
                                                                                     1
                                                   Z       1                      1−ε
                                        pjnt   =                pjnt (q)1−ε dq             ,
                                                        0


where pjnt (q) is the price of variety q in sector j and country n.
   The production function of each sectoral variety q is:
                                                                                                        1−βj
                                                                       β j        J+1
                                                                                                   j0j
                                    
                    j         j       j           j
                                                                                   Y
                   ynt (q) = znt (q) knt (q)1−αj lnt (q)αj                                mnt (q)γj 0 j        ,
                                                                                  j 0 =1

       j                                              j           j
where znt (q) denotes variety-specific productivity, knt (q) and lnt (q) denote inputs of capital and
            jj 0
labor, and mnt denotes the intermediate input from sector j 0 used in producing sector-j goods.
The value-added based labor intensity is given by αj , while the share of value added in total
output is given by βj . Both of these vary by sector. The weights on inputs from other sectors,
γj 0 j , vary by output industry j as well as input industry j 0 .
                 j
   Productivity znt (q) for each q ∈ [0, 1] in each sector j and period t is equally available to all
agents in country n, and product and factor markets are perfectly competitive. Following Eaton
                                                         j
and Kortum (2002, henceforth EK), the productivity draw znt (q) is random and comes from the
Fréchet distribution with the cumulative distribution function

                                                                        j    −θ
                                                j
                                               Fnt (z) = e−Tnt z .



                                                                   6
                                                   j
In this distribution, the absolute advantage term Tnt varies by country, sector, and time, with
                  j
higher values of Tnt implying higher average productivity draws in sector j in country n and
period t. The parameter θ captures dispersion, with larger values of θ implying smaller dispersion
in draws.
   It will be convenient to define the cost of an “input bundle” faced by sector j producers in
country n:
                                                                                             1−βj
                                                     β j       J+1                 γj 0 j
                                                                              j0
                                                                        
                                        α     1−αj
                             cjnt = wntj rnt
                                                                Y
                                                                            pnt                     .
                                                                j 0 =1

                                                                                                             1
Then, producing one unit of good q in sector j in country n requires                                       j        input bundles, and
                                                                                                          znt (q)
thus the cost of producing one unit of good q is cjnt /znt
                                                        j
                                                           (q).
   International trade is subject to iceberg costs: in order for one unit of good q produced in
sector j to arrive in country n from country i in period t, djnit > 1 units of the good must be
shipped. We normalize djnnt = 1 for each country n and period t in each tradeable sector j.
Note that the trade costs will vary by destination pair, by sector, and time, and need not be
directionally symmetric: djnit need not equal djint . Under perfect competition, the price at which
country i can supply tradeable good q in sector j to country n is equal to:
                                                                         !
                                                                cjit
                                        pjnit (q) =          j
                                                                              djnit .
                                                            zit (q)

Buyers of each good q in tradeable sector j in country n and period t will select to buy from the
cheapest source country. Thus, the price actually paid for this good in country n will be:
                                                                   n         o
                                       pjnt (q) = min               pjnit (q) .
                                                     i=1,...,N

Following the standard EK approach, define the “multilateral resistance” term

                                                  N                    −θ
                                       Φjnt             Titj cjit djnit
                                                  X
                                              =                             .
                                                  i=1

This value summarizes, for country n and time t, the access to production technologies in sector
j. Its value will be higher if in sector j, country n’s trading partners have high productivity (Titj )
or low costs (cjit ). It will also be higher if the trade costs that country n faces in this sector are
low. Standard steps lead to the familiar result that the probability of importing good q in sector
                               j
j from country i in period t, πnit , is equal to the share of total spending on goods coming from




                                                            7
            j     j
country i, Xnit /Xnt , and is given by:
                                                                         −θ
                                        j
                                       Xnit               Titj cjit djnit
                                                 j
                                        j
                                              = πnit =                          .
                                       Xnt                            Φjnt

In addition, the price of good j in country n and period t is simply
                                                                    − 1
                                              pjnt            Φjnt
                                                                        θ
                                                     =Γ                     ,                       (4)

                            1
                θ+1−ε
                        1−ε
where Γ = Γ       θ              , and Γ is the Gamma function.

2.3   Equilibrium

The competitive equilibrium of this model world economy consists of sequences of prices,
allocation rules, and trade shares such that (i) given the prices, all firms’ inputs satisfy the
first-order conditions, and their output is given by the production function; (ii) the households’
aggregate consumption and investment decisions are consistent with the exogenous saving rates,
and their sectoral demands satisfy the first order conditions given the prices; (iii) the prices ensure
the market clearing conditions for labor, capital, tradeable goods and nontradeable goods; (iv)
trade shares ensure balanced trade for each country.

   The set of prices includes the wage rate wnt , the rental rate rnt , the sectoral prices {pjnt }J+1
                                                                                                   j=1 ,
and the aggregate price Pnt in each country n and period t. The allocation rules include aggregate
consumption Cnt , investment Int , capital Knt , the capital and labor allocation across sectors
  j
{Knt , Ljnt }J+1                  j J+1                        j J+1
             j=1 , final demand {Ynt }j=1 , and total demand {Qnt }j=1 (both final and intermediate
                                                                         j
goods) for each sector. The trade shares include the expenditure shares πnit in country n on goods
coming from country i in sector j.

Characterization of Equilibrium

Given the set of prices {wnt , rnt , Pnt , {pjnt }J+1  N
                                                  j=1 }n=1 , we first characterize the optimal sectoral
allocations from final demand. Consumers maximize utility subject to the budget constraint (1),
(2), and (3). The first order conditions associated with this optimization problem imply the
following final demand across sectors:

                                                     ωj (pjnt )1−η
               pjnt Ynt
                     j
                        = ξnt (wnt Lnt + rnt Knt ) PJ                  , for all j = {1, .., J}     (5)
                                                         ω   (p k )1−η
                                                    k=1    k    nt

and
                                  pJ+1 J+1
                                   nt Ynt  = (1 − ξnt )(wnt Lnt + rnt Knt ).

                                                          8
We next characterize the production and factor allocations across the world. Let Qjnt denote the
total sectoral demand in country n and sector j in period t. Qjnt is used for both final demand
and intermediate inputs in domestic production of all sectors. That is,

                                 J                           N
                                                                                        !
                                                                       j0    j0    j0
        pjnt Qjnt = pjnt Ynt
                          j
                                 X                           X
                             +            (1 − βj 0 )γjj 0         πint pit Qit             + (1 − βJ+1 )γj,J+1 pJ+1 J+1
                                                                                                                 nt Qnt .
                                 j 0 =1                      i=1


Total expenditure in sector j = 1, ..., J + 1 of country n, pjnt Qjnt , is the sum of (i) domestic final
consumption expenditure pjnt Yntj
                                  ; (ii) expenditure on sector j goods as intermediate inputs in all
                                                    j0 j0 j0
                   PJ                        P              
                                               N
the traded sectors  j 0 =1 (1 − β j 0 )γjj 0
                                               i=1 int it it , and (iii) expenditure on intermediate
                                                  π   p  Q
inputs from sector j in the domestic non-traded sector (1 − βJ+1 )γj,J+1 pJ+1 J+1
                                                                          nt Qnt . These market
clearing conditions summarize the two important features of the world economy captured by
our model: complex international production linkages, as much of world trade is in intermediate
inputs, and a good crosses borders multiple times before being consumed (Hummels, Ishii and
Yi 2001); and two-way input linkages between the tradeable and the nontradeable sectors.
    In each tradeable sector j, some goods q are imported from abroad and some goods q are
                                                                                                            j
exported to the rest of the world. Country n’s exports in sector j and period t are given by EXnt             =
PN              j    j j                                                 j    PN           j    j   j
    i=1 1Ii6=n πint pit Qit , and its imports in sector j are given by IMnt =  i=1 1Ii6=n πnit pnt Qnt , where
                                                                                                        j
1Ii6=n is the indicator function. The total exports of country n are then EXnt = Jj=1 EXnt
                                                                                           P
                                                                                                          , and
                                   PJ       j
total imports are IMnt = j=1 IMnt . Trade balance requires that for every country n and time
t, EXnt − IMnt = 0.
   We now characterize the factor allocations across sectors. The total production revenue in
                                                                j    j j
tradeable sector j in country n and period t is given by N
                                                         P
                                                           i=1 πint pit Qit . The optimal sectoral
factor allocations in country n and tradeable sector j in period t must thus satisfy

                                      N
                                               j                 wnt Ljnt          j
                                                                              rnt Knt
                                                   pjit Qjit =
                                      X
                                              πint                        =             .
                                                                  αj β j    (1 − αj )βj
                                      i=1

For the nontradeable sector J + 1, the optimal factor allocations in country n are simply given by

                                                       wnt LJ+1             J+1
                                                                       rnt Knt
                                  pJ+1 J+1
                                   nt Qnt =
                                                             nt
                                                                 =                 .
                                                       αJ+1 βJ+1   (1 − αJ+1 )βJ+1

Finally, the feasibility conditions for factors are given by, for any n,

                                           J+1                              J+1
                                                  Ljnt = Lnt and                   j
                                           X                                X
                                                                                  Knt = Knt .
                                            j=1                             j=1


Given all of the model parameters, factor endowments, trade costs, and productivities, the model
is solved using the algorithm described in Appendix B.

                                                                   9
3     Estimating Model Parameters
                                                               j
This section estimates the sector-level technology parameters Tnt for a large set of countries and
5 decades in three steps. First, we estimate the technology parameters in the tradeable sectors
relative to the U.S. using data on sectoral output and bilateral trade. The procedure relies on
fitting a structural gravity equation implied by the model. This step also produces estimates of
bilateral trade costs at the sector level over time. Second, we estimate the technology parameters
in the tradeable sectors for the U.S.. This procedure requires directly measuring sectoral TFP
using data on real output and inputs, and then correcting measured TFP for selection due to
trade. The taste parameters for all tradeable sectors ωj are also calibrated in this step. Third,
the nontradeable technology is calibrated to match the PPP income per capita in the data.
    The calibration of the remaining parameters is more straightforward. Some parameters –
αj , βj , γj 0 j , snt , ξnt , Lnt , and Knt – come directly from the data. For a small number of parameters
– θ, η, and ε – we take values estimated elsewhere in the literature. Sections 3.1 and 3.2 describe
the estimation of sectoral technology, and Section 3.3 discusses the data sources used in the
estimation as well as the choice of the other parameters.

3.1    Tradeable Sector Relative Technology

Following the standard EK approach, first divide trade shares by their domestic counterpart:
                                                                           −θ
                                         j
                                        πnit        j
                                                   Xnit     Titj cjit djnit
                                         j
                                               =    j
                                                          =        −θ ,
                                        πnnt       Xnnt      Tnt cjnt
                                                                j



which in logs becomes:
                                   !
                             j
                            Xnit                                          
                      ln     j
                                       = ln Titj (cjit )−θ − ln Tnt
                                                                 j
                                                                    (cjnt )−θ − θ ln djnit .
                            Xnnt

Let the (log) iceberg costs be given by the following expression:

                           ln djnit = djk,t + bjnit + CUjnit + RTAjnit + exjit + νnit
                                                                                  j
                                                                                      ,

where djk,t is the contribution to trade costs of the distance between n and i being in a certain
interval (indexed by k). Following EK, we set the distance intervals, in miles, to [0, 350], [350,
750], [750, 1500], [1500, 3000], [3000, 6000], [6000, maximum). Additional variables are whether
the two countries share a common border (which changes the trade costs by bjnit ), belong to a
currency union (CUjnit ), or to a regional trade agreement (RTAjnit ). We include an exporter fixed
effect exjit following Waugh (2010), who shows that the exporter fixed effect specification does a

                                                           10
better job at matching the patterns in both country incomes and observed price levels. Finally,
                        j
there is an error term νnit . Section 4.4 assesses the robustness of the estimates to both the set
of geographic controls and the assumption of the exporter fixed effect in djnit . Note that all the
variables have a time subscript and a sector superscript j: all the trade cost proxy variables affect
true iceberg trade costs djnit differentially across both time periods and sectors. There is a range
of evidence that trade volumes at sector level vary in their sensitivity to distance or common
border (see, among many others, Do and Levchenko 2007, Berthelon and Freund 2008).
   This leads to the following final estimating equation:
                                !
                          j                                                                                    −θ 
                         Xnit                                                                      
                   ln     j
                                    = ln       Titj (cjit )−θ       −    θexjit − ln            j
                                                                                               Tnt       cjnt             (6)
                         Xnnt         |                  {z                     }|               {z                 }
                                           Exporter Fixed Effect                     Importer Fixed Effect

                                      −θdjk,t − θbjnit − θCUjnit − θRTAjnit −θνnit
                                                                                j
                                                                                   .
                                      |                 {z                } | {z }
                                                        Bilateral Observables                              Error Term


This specification is estimated for each sector and decade separately, allowing for complete flexi-
bility in how the coefficients vary both across sectors and over time. Estimating this relationship
will thus yield, for each country and time period, an estimate of its technology-cum-unit-cost term
                   j
in each sector j, Tnt (cjnt )−θ , which is obtained by exponentiating the importer fixed effect. The
                                                                               j
available degrees of freedom imply that these estimates are of each country’s Tnt (cjnt )−θ relative
to a reference country, which in our estimation is the United States. We denote this estimated
          j
value by Snt :
                                                                                 !−θ
                                                           j
                                                j         Tnt            cjnt
                                               Snt =       j
                                                                                       ,
                                                          Tust           cjust
where the subscript us denotes the United States. It is immediate from this expression that
                                                            j
estimation delivers a convolution of technology parameters Tnt and cost parameters cjnt . Both will
                                                                         j
of course affect trade volumes, but we would like to extract technology Tnt from these estimates.
In order to do that, we follow the approach of Shikher (2012). In particular, for each country n,
the share of total spending going to home-produced goods is given by
                                                                                 !−θ
                                                j
                                               Xnnt          j           Γcjnt
                                                 j
                                                        =   Tnt                            .
                                                Xnt                       pjnt

Dividing by its U.S. counterpart yields:
                                                                            !−θ                                 !−θ
                          j     j                  j
                         Xnnt /Xnt                Tnt         cjnt pjust                 j            pjust
                         j         j
                                           =      j
                                                                                      = Snt                           ,
                        Xus,us,t /Xust           Tust       cjust pjnt                                   pjnt




                                                                    11
and thus the ratio of price levels in sector j relative to the U.S. becomes:
                                                                                               !1
                                                 pjnt              j
                                                                  Xnnt   j
                                                                       /Xnt            1        θ

                                                         =                                          .                                (7)
                                                 pjust           j
                                                                Xus,us,t   j
                                                                         /Xust  j
                                                                               Snt

The entire right-hand side of this expression is either observable or estimated. Thus, we can
impute the price levels relative to the U.S. in each country and each tradeable sector.
       The cost of the input bundles relative to the U.S. can be written as:
                                                                  
                                                                      J           0
                                                                                      !γj 0 j 1−βj            !γJ+1,j (1−βj )
            cjnt                                                              pjnt
                                   αj βj           (1−αj )βj
                                                                                                        pJ+1
                        
                            wnt               rnt                     Y
                                                                                                         nt
                    =                                                           0
                                                                                                                                .
            cjust           wust              rust
                                                                    j 0 =1    pjust                     pJ+1
                                                                                                         ust


Using information on relative wages, returns to capital, price in each tradeable sector from (7),
and the nontradeable sector price relative to the U.S., we can thus impute the costs of the input
bundles relative to the U.S. in each country and each sector. Armed with those values, it is
straightforward to back out the relative technology parameters:
                                                                                     !θ
                                                          j
                                                         Tnt         j       cjnt
                                                          j
                                                                =   Snt                    .
                                                         Tust                cjust

       This approach bears a close affinity to development accounting (see, e.g. Caselli 2005). Devel-
opment accounting starts with an observable variable to be accounted for (real per capita income),
and employs other observables – physical capital, human capital, health endowments, etc. – to
absorb as much cross-country variation in the variable of interest as possible. The unexplained
                                                                                               j
remainder is called TFP. In our procedure, the outcome variable of interest is not income but Snt .
Intuitively, if, controlling for the typical gravity determinants of trade, a country spends relatively
                                                              j
more on domestically produced goods in a particular sector – Snt is high – it is revealed to have
either a high relative productivity or a low relative factor and input cost in that sector. Just
as in development accounting, we then use measured factor and intermediate input prices to net
out the role of factor and input costs, yielding an estimate of relative productivity as a residual.7
As in development accounting, to reach reliable estimates it is important to net out the impact
of as many observables as possible. Thus, our model features human and physical capital and
sophisticated input linkages, including explicit nontradeable inputs. To accurately reflect sectoral
factor and input cost differences, production function parameters are sector-specific.
   7
    Since our approach uses factor prices rather than factor endowments, it is closer in spirit to the “dual” approach
to growth accounting (e.g. Hsieh 2002).




                                                                      12
3.2    Complete Estimation

So far we have estimated the levels of technology of the tradeable sectors relative to the United
States. To complete our estimation, we still need to find (i) the levels of T for the tradeable
sectors in the United States; (ii) the taste parameters ωj , and (iii) the nontradeable technology
levels for all countries.
   To obtain (i), we use the NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry Database for the U.S. (Bartelsman
and Gray 1996). We start by measuring the observed TFP levels for the tradeable sectors in the
U.S.. The form of the production function gives

                                                                                                      J+1
              j                                                                                                             0
                  = ln Λjust + βj αj ln Ljust + βj (1 − αj ) ln Kust
                                                                 j                                                        jj
                                                                                                      X
          ln Zust                                                    + (1 − βj )                               γj 0 j ln Must ,   (8)
                                                                                                      j 0 =1


where Λj denotes the measured TFP in sector j, Z j denotes the output, Lj denotes the labor
                                                       0
input, K j denotes the capital input, and M j j denotes the intermediate input from sector j 0 . The
NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry Database offers information on output, and inputs of labor,
capital, and intermediates, along with deflators for each. Thus, we can estimate the observed
TFP level for each manufacturing tradeable sector using the above equation.
   If the United States were a closed economy, the observed TFP level for sector j would be given
                  1
by Λjust = (Tust
             j
                 ) θ . In the open economies, the goods with inefficient domestic productivity draws
will not be produced and will be imported instead. Thus, international trade and competition
introduce selection in the observed TFP level, as demonstrated by Finicelli, Pagano and Sbracia
                                                             j
(2013). We thus use the model to back out the true level of Tust of each tradeable sector in the
United States. Here we follow Finicelli et al. (2013) and use the following relationship:
                                                                                        !−θ
                                                                          cjit djusit
                                (Λjust )θ        j
                                                                   Titj
                                                           X
                                            =   Tust   +                                      .
                                                           i6=us            cjust

Thus, we have
                                                               !−θ                                                      
                                 X Tj             cjit djusit                                                       −θ
           (Λjust )θ = Tust
                        j                                                 j 
                                                                                                      Sitj djusit
                                                                                              X
                                    it
                            1+          j
                                                                       = Tust 1+                                          .     (9)
                                 i6=us Tust          cjust                                    i6=us

                                                                  j
This equation can be solved for underlying technology parameters Tust in the U.S., given estimated
observed TFP Λjust , and all the Sitj ’s and djusit ’s estimated in the previous subsection.
   To estimate the taste parameters {ωj }Jj=1 , we use information on final consumption shares in
the tradeable sectors in the U.S.. We start with a guess of {ωj }Jj=1 and find sectoral prices pj0
                                                                                                nt as
follows. For an initial guess of sectoral prices, we compute the tradeable sector aggregate price and



                                                            13
the nontradeable sector price using the data on the relative prices of nontradeables to tradeables.
Using these prices, we calculate sectoral unit costs and Φjnt ’s, and update prices according to
equation (4), iterating until the prices converge. We then update the taste parameters according
to equation (5), using the data on final sectoral expenditure shares in the U.S.. We normalize the
vector of ωj ’s to have a sum of one, and repeat the above procedure until the values for the taste
parameters converge. This procedure is carried out on the 2000s, and the resulting values applied
to the entire period.
   Finally, we calibrate the nontradeable sector TFP in each country to match the observed
PPP-adjusted income per capita. This step involves solving the model with an initial guess of
  J+1 N
{Tnt }n=1 and iteratively updating it until the model-implied income per capita adjusted for the
aggregate price converges to that in the data for each country and each decade. This calibration
approach guarantees that the model produces a cross-country income distribution identical to the
data for each decade.

3.3   Data Description and Implementation

We assemble data on production and trade for a sample of up to 72 countries, 19 manufacturing
sectors, and spanning 5 decades, from the 1960s to the 2000s. Production data come from the
2009 UNIDO Industrial Statistics Database, which reports output, value added, employment, and
wage bills at roughly 2-digit ISIC Revision 3 level of disaggregation for the period 1962-2007 in
the best of cases. The corresponding trade data come from the COMTRADE database compiled
by the United Nations. The trade data are collected at the 4-digit SITC level, and aggregated
up to the 2-digit ISIC level using a concordance developed by the authors. Production and trade
data were extensively checked for quality, and a number of countries were discarded due to poor
data quality. In addition, in less than 5% of country-year-sector observations, the reported total
output was below total exports, and thus had to be imputed based on earlier values and the
evolution of exports.
   The distance and common border variables are obtained from the comprehensive geography
database compiled by CEPII. Information on regional trade agreements comes from the RTA
database maintained by the WTO. The currency union indicator comes from Rose (2004), and
was updated for the post-2000 period using publicly available information (such as the membership
in the Euro area, and the dollarization of Ecuador and El Salvador).
   In addition to providing data on output for gravity estimation, the UNIDO data are used to
estimate production function parameters αj and βj . To compute αj for each sector, we calculate
the share of the total wage bill in value added, and take a simple median across countries (taking
the mean yields essentially the same results). To compute βj , we take the median of value added



                                                14
divided by total output.
    The intermediate input coefficients γj 0 j are obtained from the Direct Requirements Table
for the United States. We use the 1997 Benchmark Detailed Make and Use Tables (covering
approximately 500 distinct sectors), as well as a concordance to the ISIC Revision 3 classification
to build a Direct Requirements Table at the 2-digit ISIC level. The Direct Requirements Table
gives the value of the intermediate input in row j0 required to produce one dollar of final output
in column j. Thus, it is the direct counterpart of the input coefficients γj 0 j . In addition, we use
the U.S. I-O matrix to obtain the shares of total final consumption expenditure going to each
sector, which we use to pin down taste parameters ωj in traded sectors 1, ..., J; as well as αJ+1 and
βJ+1 in the nontradeable sector, which cannot be obtained from UNIDO.8 The baseline analysis
assumes αj , βj , and γj 0 j to be the same in all countries. Section 4.4 assesses the robustness of the
productivity estimates to allowing these parameters to vary by country.
    The total labor force in each country, Lnt , and the total capital stock, Knt , are obtained from
the Penn World Tables 8.0 (PWT8.0). The labor endowment Lnt is corrected for human capital
(schooling) differences using the human capital variable available in PWT8.0. Thus, the wage wnt
captures the relative price of an efficiency unit of labor. The capital series Knt is available directly
in PWT8.0. The saving/investment rate snt is calculated based on the Penn World Tables as the
implied decadal snt that matches the evolution of capital from t to t+1, given real income and the
country-time specific depreciation rate. This approach, together with the fact that our calibration
procedure matched perfectly the relative real per capita incomes for each country, ensures that
the model matches the observed capital stock from period to period.
    The computation of relative costs of the input bundle requires information on wages and the
returns to capital. To compute wnt , we take the gross non-PPP adjusted labor income in PWT8.0,
and divide it by the effective endowment of labor, namely the product of the total employment
and the per capita human capital. This yields the payment to one efficiency unit of labor in each
country and decade.
    Obtaining information on the return to capital, rnt , is less straightforward, since it is not
observable directly. In the baseline analysis, we impute rnt from the information on the total
income, endowment of capital, and the labor share: rnt = (1 − αnt )Ynt /Knt , where the labor share
αnt , total income Ynt , and total capital Knt come directly from the PWT8.0. Since the return to
capital is notoriously difficult to measure, Section 4.4 evaluates the robustness of the estimates
to four alternative ways of inferring rnt .
    The price of nontradeables relative to the U.S., pJ+1  J+1
                                                      nt /pust , are computed using the detailed
   8
     The U.S. I-O matrix provides an alternative way of computing αj and βj . These parameters calculated based
on the U.S. I-O table are very similar to those obtained from UNIDO, with the correlation coefficients between
them above 0.85 in each case. The U.S. I-O table implies greater variability in αj ’s and βj ’s across sectors than
does UNIDO.


                                                        15
price data collected by the International Comparison of Prices Program (ICP). For a few countries
and decades, these relative prices are extrapolated using a simple linear fit to log PPP-adjusted
per capita GDP from the Penn World Tables.
   In order to estimate the relative TFP’s in the tradeable sectors in the U.S., we use the 2009
version of the NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry Database, which reports the total output,
total input usage, employment, and capital stock, along with deflators for each of these in each
sector. The data are available in the 6-digit NAICS classification for the period 1958 to 2005,
and are converted into ISIC 2-digit sectors using a concordance developed by the authors. The
procedure yields sectoral measured TFP’s for the U.S. in each tradeable sector j = 1, ..., J and
each decade.
   The share of expenditure on traded goods, ξnt in each country and decade is sourced from Uy,
Yi and Zhang (2013), who compile this information for 30 developed and developing countries.
For countries unavailable in the Uy, Yi and Zhang data, values of ξnt are imputed based on fitting
a simple linear relationship to log PPP-adjusted per capita GDP from the Penn World Tables.
In each decade, the fit of this simple bivariate regression is typically quite good, with R2 ’s of 0.30
to 0.80 across decades.
   The baseline analysis assumes that the dispersion parameter θ does not vary across sectors
and sets θ = 8.28, which is the preferred estimate of EK. Section 4.4 shows that the productivity
estimates are quite similar under two alternative sets of assumptions on θ: (i) a lower value of
θ = 4, and (ii) sector-specific values of θj .
   We choose the elasticity of substitution between broad sectors within the tradeable bundle, η,
to be equal to 2. Since these are very large product categories, it is sensible that this elasticity
would be relatively low. It is higher, however, than the elasticity of substitution between tradeable
and nontradeable goods, which is set to 1 by the Cobb-Douglas assumption. The elasticity of
substitution between varieties within each tradeable sector, ε, is set to 4 (as is well known, in the
EK model this elasticity plays no role, entering only the constant Γ).
   Appendix Table A1 lists the countries used in the analysis along with the time periods for
which data are available for each country, and Appendix Table A2 lists the sectors along with
the key parameter values for each sector: αj , βj , the share of nontradeable inputs in total inputs
γJ+1,j , and the taste parameter ωj . All of the variables that vary over time are averaged for
each decade, from the 1960s to the 2000s, and these decennial averages are used in the analysis
throughout. Thus, our unit of time is a decade.




                                                  16
4     Evolution of Comparative Advantage

This section describes the basic patterns in how estimated sector-level technology varies across
countries and over time, focusing especially on whether comparative advantage has become
stronger or weaker. Going through the steps described in Section 3.1 yields, for each country
                                                                                    j    j
n, tradeable sector j, and decade t, the state of technology relative to the U.S., Tnt /Tust . Since
                                               j 1/θ
mean productivity in each sector is equal to (Tnt ) , we carry out the analysis on this exponen-
                           j
tiated value, rather than Tnt .

4.1   Basic Patterns

Table 1 presents summary statistics for the OECD and non-OECD countries in each decade. The
first column reports the mean productivity relative to the U.S. across all sectors in a country, a
measure that can be thought of as absolute advantage. The OECD countries as a group catch
up to the U.S. between the 1960s and the 2000s, with productivities going up from 0.91 to in
excess of 1 over the period. The non-OECD countries’ productivity is lower throughout, but
the catch-up is also evident. The second column in each panel summarizes the magnitude of
within-country differences in productivity across sectors, i.e., the coefficient of variation of sectoral
productivities within a country, averaged by country group and decade. This measure can be
thought of as comparative advantage across sectors. The average coefficient of variation is about
50% lower in the OECD countries compared to the non-OECD, reflecting higher dispersion of
sectoral productivities in poorer countries, or “stronger comparative advantage.” In both country
groups, there is a clear downward trend in the coefficient of variation, which is first evidence
that comparative advantage is getting weaker over time – sectoral relative productivity dispersion
within a country is falling.
    The bottom panel presents the same statistics but balancing the country sample across
decades. There are virtually no changes for the OECD, since the OECD sample is more or less
balanced to begin with. For the non-OECD, balancing the sample implies dropping 19 countries
in later decades, but the basic patterns are unchanged.
    The evolution of these averages over time masks a great deal of heterogeneity among countries.
To visualize this heterogeneity, Figures 1(a) and 1(b) plot the changes in the average T 1/θ against
their initial average values. The left panel does this from the 1960s to the 2000s, the right panel
from the 1990s. These plots can be thought of as capturing the traditional (cross-country) notion
of absolute convergence. There is quite a bit of dispersion in the extent to which countries caught
up on average to U.S. productivity, including a few countries that fell behind on average relative
to the U.S.. There is an apparent negative relationship between the extent of catch-up and the
initial average level, stronger from the 1990s.


                                                   17
      Figures 1(c) and 1(d) plot the within-country dispersions of productivities (the coefficients
of variation) in the 2000s against their values in the 1960s and the 1990s, respectively. For
convenience, 45-degree lines are added to these plots. There is a fair amount of cross-country
variation in productivity dispersion, and this variation appears to be persistent over time. Since
the 1960s, sectoral productivity dispersion fell in the majority of countries (in all but 13). Between
the 1990s and the 2000s, there is no systematic fall in dispersion: Table 1 shows that the coefficient
of variation actually rises on average between those two decades in both groups of countries.

4.2      Relative Convergence

To shed further light on whether comparative advantage has gotten stronger or weaker over time,
we estimate a convergence specification in the spirit of Barro (1991) and Barro and Sala-i-Martin
(1992):
                                        1/θ                        1/θ
                            ∆ log Tnj          = βInitial log Tnj          + δn + δj + nj .                 (10)

Unlike the classic cross-country convergence regression, our specification pools countries and sec-
tors. On the left-hand side is the log change in the productivity of sector j in country n. The
right-hand side regressor of interest is its beginning-of-period value. All of the specifications in-
clude country and sector fixed effects, which affects the interpretation of the coefficient. The
country effect absorbs the average change in productivity across all sectors in each country – the
absolute advantage. Thus, β picks up the impact of the initial relative productivity on the relative
growth of a sector within a country – the evolution of comparative advantage. In particular, a
negative value of β implies that relative to the country-specific average, the most backward sectors
grew fastest.
      Table 2 presents the results. The first column reports the coefficients for the longest differences:
the 1960s to the 2000s, while the second column estimates the specification starting in the 1980s.
The following 4 columns carry out the estimation decade-by-decade, 1960s to 1970s, 1970s to
1980s, and so on. Since the length of the time period differs across columns, the coefficients
are not directly comparable. To help interpret the coefficients, underneath each one we report
the speed of convergence, calculated according to the standard Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1992)
formula: β = e−λT − 1, where β is the regression coefficient on the initial value of productivity, T
is the number of decades between the initial and final period, and λ is the convergence speed. This
number gives how much of the initial difference between productivities is expected to disappear
in a decade. All of the standard errors are clustered by country, to account for unspecified
heteroscedasticity at the country level. All of the results are robust to clustering instead at the
sector level, and we do not report those standard errors to conserve space.9
  9
      If the initial T ’s tend to be measured with error, it has been noted that the convergence regression of the



                                                          18
    Column 1 of the top panel reports the estimates for the long-run convergence in the pooled
sample of all countries. The coefficient is negative, implying that there is convergence: within a
country, the weakest sectors tend to grow faster. It is highly statistically significant: even with
clustered standard errors the t-statistic is nearly 12. The speed of convergence implied by this
coefficient is 18% per decade. As a benchmark, the classic Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1992) rate of
convergence is 2% per year, or 22% per decade, close to what we find in a very different setting.
The second column estimates the long-difference specification from the 1980s to the 2000s. Once
again, the coefficient is negative and highly significant, but it implies a considerably slower rate
of convergence, 11.7% per decade. The rest of the columns report the results decade-by-decade.
Though there is statistically significant convergence in each decade, the speed of convergence
trends downward, from 26% from the 1960 to the 1970s, to 11.4% in the most recent period.
    In order to assess how the results differ across country groups, Panels B and C report the
results for the OECD and the non-OECD subsamples separately. Breaking it down produces
slightly faster convergence rates than in the full sample. In the decade-to-decade specifications,
the non-OECD countries are catching up somewhat faster, which is not surprising.
    Figures 2 and 3 present the results graphically. Figure 2 plots the unconditional bivariate
relationship between the log change in productivity and the log initial level in each sector. Within
most sectors, the negative relationship is evident. In every sector, the estimated coefficient is
negative, and in 14 of the 19 sectors, it is significant at the 5% level. Figure 3 plots the partial
correlation between the initial level and subsequent growth, after netting out country and sector
fixed effects. This is the partial correlation plot underlying the first coefficient reported in Table
2. Once again, the negative relationship is evident in the pooled sample.
    Appendix Tables A3 reports the results of estimating the convergence equation (10) country
by country from the 1960s to today. These results should be treated with more caution, as the
sample size is at most 19. The columns report the coefficient, the standard error, the number
of observations, the R2 , as well as the implied speed of convergence for each country. There
is considerable evidence of convergence in these country-specific estimates. In all countries, the
type estimated here will produce bias in favor of finding convergence (Quah 1993). We ran a number of checks to
assess the relevance of this effect in our setting. First, we estimated a number of panel specifications with a variety
of interacted fixed effects: country×sector, country×decade, and sector×decade included together in estimation.
These additional fixed effects will help control for measurement error that varies mainly at country-sector, country-
time, or sector-time level, respectively. We also implemented the Arellano-Bond and Blundell-Bond dynamic panel
estimators, that difference the data and use lagged values of T to instrument for current changes in T . All of
these alternative estimates actually imply a faster speed of convergence than the estimates in Table 2. Second,
to check how much measurement error is needed to generate our results, we ran a simulation in which we started
with artificial data exhibiting zero convergence across sectors within a country, and added measurement error to
the right-hand side variable until the OLS coefficient was equal to the coefficient found in our estimates. It turns
out that in order for measurement error to produce coefficient magnitudes found in the data when the truth is zero
convergence, it must be the case that 62% of the cross-sectoral variation in the right-hand side variable is due to
measurement error.



                                                          19
convergence coefficient is negative, and significant at the 10% level or below in 38 out of 50
available countries (76%).
   All in all, these results provide robust evidence of relative convergence: in all time periods
and broad sets of countries we consider, relatively weak sectors grow faster, with sensible rates of
convergence. This implies that Ricardian comparative advantage is getting weaker, at least when
measured at the level of broad manufacturing sectors.

4.3   Discussion

A large literature in growth, synthesized by Acemoglu (2008, Ch. 18), studies aggregate country-
level technology differences using multi-country models of technology adoption. This literature
has pursued two broad directions. The first postulates that aggregate productivity differences
persist because there are frictions in technology adoption. In order to ensure a stable world
income distribution, a central assumption in this type of framework is that countries farther
behind the world productivity frontier find it easier to increase productivity. This hypothesis
dates back to Gerschenkron (1962), and is typically introduced as a reduced-form relationship
in these models. The second approach postulates that all technologies are freely available to all
countries at all times, but due to capital and/or skill endowment or institutional differences, poorer
countries cannot make the best use of the available technologies (Atkinson and Stiglitz 1969, Basu
and Weil 1998, Acemoglu and Zilibotti 2001, Caselli and Coleman 2006, Acemoglu, Antrás and
Helpman 2007).
   Since these models are framed in terms of aggregate technology differences, they are challenging
to evaluate empirically. This is because at the country level, it is difficult to distinguish between
the role of distance to the world frontier and other country-specific factors, especially when these
factors themselves condition the speed of productivity convergence. By opening up a sectoral
dimension, our results can provide some empirical evidence on these theories. Our convergence
regressions include country fixed effects, and thus control for country-specific determinants of
productivity growth affecting all the sectors equally. Though our convergence coefficients capture
the notion of within-country convergence, they nonetheless lend support to the key assumption
in models of slow technology diffusion: it is easier to catch up starting from a more backward
position.
   The second approach rationalizes persistent technology gaps by appealing to the appropri-
ateness of world frontier technologies for local country conditions, such as the capital-labor ratio
(Atkinson and Stiglitz 1969, Basu and Weil 1998), skill endowment (Acemoglu and Zilibotti 2001,
Caselli and Coleman 2006), or institutional quality (Acemoglu et al. 2007). While our results are
not geared to informing or testing these theories, we can use the variation in the country-specific



                                                 20
convergence coefficients in Appendix Table A3 to look for some supporting evidence. Once again,
the mapping to existing theories is inexact: our results capture within-country, cross-sectoral speed
of convergence, whereas the theoretical literature is about cross-country differences. In addition,
variation across sectors in some relevant attributes, such as capital or skill intensity, may play a
role as well. Nonetheless, there are some modest but suggestive patterns. The country-specific
speed of convergence reported in Appendix Table A3 is positively correlated with the country’s
capital-labor ratio (correlation 0.54), skill endowment (correlation 0.29), and institutional quality
(correlation 0.47).10 Of course, these three country characteristics are highly positively correlated,
and thus distinguishing between the alternative theories using our data is impractical. However,
the positive correlations are suggestive that country characteristics do matter for the speed of
technology adoption in ways predicted by theory.
       In contrast to the aggregate productivity literature, theories of the dynamics of sectoral tech-
nology and Ricardian comparative advantage are quite scarce. Krugman (1987) and Young (1991)
develop learning-by-doing models of comparative advantage. A strong implication of these models
is that relative productivity differences increase over time – comparative advantage strengthens.
This is because learning is faster in sectors that produce more, and comparative advantage sectors
are the ones that produce more. Our results are clearly inconsistent with the main prediction of
the learning-by-doing models, at least not at the level of broad sectors. Similarly, Grossman and
Helpman (1991, Ch. 8) develop a model with a traditional and a knowledge-based sector, and
show that one country’s initial advantage in the stock of R&D leads to an increasingly stronger
comparative advantage in the knowledge-based sector. Once again, our findings of pervasive
convergence in productivity do not support this type of theoretical prediction.
       A theoretical and quantitative framework with endogenous sectoral productivity that can be
used for understanding the empirical patterns we identify is yet to be developed, and remains a
potentially fruitful direction for future research. One promising possibility is the framework of
“defensive innovation” in response to import competition recently developed by Bloom, Romer,
Terry and Van Reenen (2012) (see also Bloom, Draca and Van Reenen 2011).

4.4      Robustness of T Estimates

This section presents a battery of robustness checks on our productivity estimation procedure.
The outcomes are summarized in Appendix Table A4. The table reports the mean productivity
T 1/θ relative to the U.S., its standard deviation across countries and sectors, the correlation with
the baseline productivity estimates across countries and sectors, and the convergence coefficient
  10
    These correlations are computed after dropping the 3 outlier countries with the highest speed of convergence
point estimates. Without dropping outliers, the correlations are 0.40, 0.31, and 0.42, respectively. The institutional
quality index is “Rule of Law” sourced from the World Bank’s Governance Matters Database.



                                                         21
and standard error from the main regression specification (10), estimated on the alternative sets
of productivity estimates. To ease comparison, the top row reports the values for the baseline
T 1/θ estimates.
       The first set of checks concerns the specification of the gravity equation (6). To assess whether
the estimates are sensitive to the set of distance and gravity variables included in estimation, we
repeat the analysis while doubling the set of distance intervals (from 6 to 12), and including
standard additional controls for common language and colonial ties, which are absent from the
baseline specification. As the row labeled “Additional gravity” reveals, the resulting productivity
estimates and convergence results are virtually indistinguishable from the baseline.
       Next, we estimate the gravity equation in levels using the Poisson Pseudo Maximum Likelihood
approach suggested by Santos Silva and Tenreyro (2006). This has the convenient property of
not dropping zero trade observations from the estimation sample. The results are once again very
similar to the baseline across the board.11
       The next robustness check concerns whether the trade cost specification includes an exporter
or an importer effect. Waugh (2010) appeals to tradeable prices to argue that the specification
with an exporter fixed effect fits the data better. In particular, he documents that in the data,
tradeable prices are weakly increasing in income. The model with the exporter fixed effect in
djnit can match this pattern. However, the model with the importer fixed cost in djnit delivers
the sharply counterfactual prediction that tradeable prices fall in income. In addition, Waugh
(2010) shows that the importer fixed effect specification does less well in other dimensions, such
as matching observed income differences between countries.
       Though we employ a very different model than Waugh (2010) – most importantly, we have
multiple tradeable sectors, an explicit non-tradeable sector, and input linkages between those –
his argument applies in our setting as well, albeit in a milder form. Just as in Waugh (2010), our
baseline model with exporter effects in djnit delivers a flat tradeable prices-income relationship,
  11
     A standard feature of the baseline procedure is that the trade shares are logged, so that the zero bilateral import
flows are dropped from the estimation sample. Unfortunately, our large-scale model cannot be tractably enriched to
explicitly account for zeros in trade while at the same time retaining the structural interpretation linking the fixed
effects to underlying productivity. However, we can check the ex-post performance of the estimated model with
                                                                                                  j
respect to zeros by solving the full model, and computing within the model the sum of the πnit       ’s in the importer-
exporter-sector observations that are zeros in the actual data. We can then examine whether these observations
account for large shares of absorption inside the model. If the resulting numbers are large, then the quantitative
model predicts substantial trade flows where in reality they are zero. However, if these numbers are small, the model
predicts very small flows where the actual flows are zero, providing a good approximation to the data even though
baseline productivities are estimated dropping zero trade. The results of this exercise are reported in Appendix
Table A5. The exercise takes the most expansive view of the zeros, by assuming that all trade flows missing in
the data are actually zeros as well. Observations for which the data exhibit zero/missing trade flows account for a
tiny share of overall absorption in our quantitative model: in each decade, these observations add up to on average
less than 0.9% of the total absorption. Breaking down across sectors and decades, we see that nearly all individual
sectors or decades, these shares are small. We conclude from this exercise that in spite of ignoring the zero trade
observations in estimation, our quantitative model is quite close to the data when it comes to small/zero trade
flows.


                                                          22
matching the data. By contrast, when we re-estimate the model with importer effects in djnit , it
implies a negative relationship between tradeable prices and income.
   Nonetheless, we present the results of re-estimating sectoral productivities based on the im-
porter effects in djnit assumption. The results, presented in row “imjnt in djnit ” reveal that the
average productivities implied by this alternative approach are lower (0.53 at the mean compared
to 0.74 for the baseline). However, the dispersion in those productivities is very similar to the
baseline, and the two sets of estimates have a correlation of 0.89. Most importantly, the rela-
tive convergence result is clearly evident in these estimates, though the speed of convergence is
somewhat slower than in the baseline.
   The second set of robustness checks concerns the measurement of the return to capital rnt ,
that enters the unit cost terms cjnt , and thus the productivity estimates. The baseline computes
rnt using data on Knt , the total income Ynt , and the (country- and time-specific) labor share.
However, the return to capital is notoriously difficult to measure, and thus we perform a battery
of robustness checks on rnt . First, we use the Caselli and Feyrer (2007) correction for natural
wealth. The data for natural wealth are for 1995-2005, and come from the World Bank. Even for
this later period, not all countries in our baseline sample are covered. In addition, these data are
not available before 1995, which forces us to apply the 1995 values to all preceding decades.
   Second, we use a measure of the return to capital computed instead from consumption growth.
Namely, we exploit the Euler equation in consumption to back out the rate of return on capital:
                 U 0 (Cnt+1 )
1+rnt+1 −δnt =   ρU 0 (Cnt ) ,   with ρ the discount factor. We use Penn World Tables data on consump-
tion and the country-specific depreciation rate δnt , and the standard functional form/parameter
                                                   C 1−σ
assumptions, namely CRRA utility U (C) =           1−σ ,   with σ = 2 and annual ρ = 0.96. The results
are reported in row labeled “Euler.”
   Third, we use data on lending interest rates from the World Development Indicators. This
approach yields a 20% smaller sample of countries and decades. The results are in the row
labeled “Direct.” And finally, we adopt the simple assumption that rnt is the same everywhere
in the world at a point in time (rnt = rust ∀n, t). This assumption can correspond to financial
integration, for instance. Caselli and Feyrer (2007) show that at least as of the 1990s, this is not
a bad assumption. The results are in the row “Fin. Integration.”
   The means and standard deviations of estimated productivities under these four alternative
approaches do not differ much from the baseline. The correlations to the baseline are also quite
high, from 0.91 under the direct measurement to 0.99 under the Caselli-Feyrer correction. The
convergence results are also equally strong under these alternative approaches of measuring rnt .
   Next, we check the sensitivity of the results to the assumption that the production functions
(IO matrices and factor shares) are the same across countries. The row “Country-Specific IO”
presents the results of estimating productivities using country-specific IO matrices sourced from

                                                     23
GTAP. GTAP’s coverage of sectors and countries is not the same as in our analysis, requiring some
imputation, and thus we do not use these in the baseline analysis. The row “Country-Specific IO,
α, β” in addition assumes that the labor share in value added (α) and the share of value added
in output (β) are vary by country and decade (and of course, as always, by sector). We compute
these directly for each sector, country, and decade using UNIDO data on the wage bill, value
added, and output. We do not use these values in the baseline analysis, because the UNIDO data
do not have complete coverage, requiring some imputation. In addition, it can be noisy, and thus
variation in these empirical factor shares across countries and over time may not provide a reliable
indication of true differences in factor intensity. These two alternative approaches yield slightly
higher average productivities, but the variation is similar to the baseline and the correlations are
very high. The convergence results are also equally strong.
   The final set of checks is on the θ parameters. First, one may be concerned about how the
results change under lower values of θ. Lower θ implies greater within-sector heterogeneity in
the random productivity draws. Thus, trade flows become less sensitive to the costs of the input
bundles (cjnt ), and the gains from intra-sectoral trade become larger relative to the gains from
inter-sectoral trade. We repeated the estimation assuming instead a value of θ = 4, which has
been advocated by Simonovska and Waugh (2014) and is at or near the bottom of the range
that has been used in the literature. Overall, the results are remarkably similar. The mean
                                                                                              j
productivities are virtually the same, and there is actually somewhat greater variability in Tnt ’s
                                                j
under θ = 4. The correlation between estimated Tnt ’s under θ = 4 and the baseline is above 0.94.
The convergence results are equally strong.
   Second, a number of studies have suggested that θ varies across sectors (see, e.g., Chen and
Novy 2011, Caliendo and Parro 2014, Imbs and Méjean 2014). We repeat the estimation allowing
θj to be sector-specific, with sectoral values of θj sourced from Caliendo and Parro (2014). The
average productivities are once again quite similar, and have an 0.87 correlation with the baseline.
The convergence results are if anything stronger than in the baseline.
   Another important question is whether our estimates can be cross-validated using direct es-
timates of measured TFP. Appendix A estimates measured TFP using data on real output and
inputs from the OECD Structural Analysis database. It is the most comprehensive database that
contains the information required to estimate measured TFP on a consistent basis across countries
and over time. Using both simple correlations and regression estimates with fixed effects, we con-
firm that our baseline estimates indeed exhibit a close positive association with TFP calculated
based on STAN data.




                                                24
4.5   Simple Heuristics: What is Driving the Convergence Finding?

What kinds of basic patterns in the data are driving these results? Though our estimation
procedure is based on a theoretically-founded gravity equation and a variety of data sources,
and thus is fully internally consistent with the underlying conceptual framework, it would be
reassuring if we could show some simple heuristic relationships in the data that are consistent
with weakening comparative advantage. We can build intuition as follows: in a simpler model
with 2 tradeable and 1 nontradeable sectors, Uy et al. (2013) show analytically that all else
equal, a comparative advantage sector has a smaller share of imports in total domestic absorption
   j
1−πnn than a comparative disadvantage sector. As a country’s comparative advantage in sector j
weakens, the import share rises in that sector. This is intuitive: when a country becomes relatively
less productive in a sector, it starts importing more.
   Thus, weakening comparative advantage should manifest itself in a negative relationship be-
tween the initial period import share and the subsequent change in the import share. Sectors
                                                            j
within a country with the lowest initial import share (1 − πnn ) should see that import share rise.
These are the sectors with the strongest comparative advantage at the beginning of the period.
Correspondingly, sectors with the highest initial import share should see their import share drop
as they catch up in productivity faster.
   Figure 4(a) presents this scatterplot, pooling sectors and countries. The negative relationship
is remarkably pronounced: the slope coefficient in the simple bivariate regression is −0.397 with
a t-statistic of 16.5 and an R2 of 18.4%. Note that a significant share of the observations – those
below zero on the y-axis – have seen their import share actually fall between the 1960s and today.
These declines in import shares would be highly puzzling over the period during which trade
costs fell and global trade volumes rose dramatically. A strengthening of comparative advantage
in those sectors provides a plausible explanation: countries are getting relatively better in those
industries, and thus they need to import less.
   This negative relationship would not necessarily be evidence of relative convergence in the
T ’s if, for instance, trade costs djnit fell disproportionately more in sectors in which countries had
higher initial import shares. To check for this possibility, Figure 4(b) plots the change in the
average trade costs in sector j and country n against the initial import share – the same x-axis
variable as in the previous figure. There is virtually no relationship between initial import share
and subsequent changes in import costs: the slope coefficient is essentially zero, and the R2 is
correspondingly 0.00. Thus, it does not appear that systematically larger reductions in djnit in
the initial comparative disadvantage sectors were primarily responsible for the pattern in Figure
4(a). Note that our estimation procedure is designed precisely to take into account any changes
in djnit (as well as unit factor costs) by importer-exporter pair and sector that may have occurred


                                                  25
over this period, isolating the underlying productivity changes.


5     Quantitative Implications

This section computes the global impact of changes in comparative advantage documented in the
previous section. In order to do this, we solve the full model laid out in Section 2 for a variety
of values of technology parameters. The main goal of the exercise is to compare outcomes in the
world as we see it today to a counterfactual world in which average productivities remain as they
are in the data, but relative sectoral productivities are fixed to their initial values. The outcomes
we are interested in are trade volumes and patterns, and welfare/real incomes.
    Our framework features endogenous capital accumulation. Thus, to model the counterfactual
world in which comparative advantage is fixed, we must track what happens to capital in each
decade in this case. Our results thus also reflect the impact of changing comparative advantage
on capital accumulation over the past 5 decades.

5.1   Benchmark Results and Model Fit
                                                  j
The baseline corresponds to the actual values of Tnt estimated for the past five decades. Before
running the counterfactual experiments, we assess the fit of the baseline model in a number of
dimensions. By construction, the model matches perfectly the real PPP-adjusted per capita
income in each country. Table 3 compares w’s and r’s in the model and in the data for 2000s.
(The results for the previous decades are similar.) The baseline model performs well: the means
and the medians match up fairly well, and the correlation between model and data wages is 0.95.
The correlation in r’s is somewhat lower at 0.59.
    The next panel assesses the model’s ability to match the sectoral trade flows. It reports the
                                                     j
means and medians, across countries and sectors, of πnnt . The model reproduces the overall
magnitudes well, and the correlation between the model and the data is 0.92. The same can be
                                 j
said for the cross-border flows πnit , i 6= n, reported in the bottom panel.

5.2   Counterfactual Comparative Advantage

In the counterfactual experiments, we solve the model while keeping comparative advantage fixed
to the 1960s. Thus, the counterfactual exercise assumes that for each decade t after the 1960s, each
country’s sectoral productivities relative to the world frontier grew at their geometric average rate,
but comparative advantage remained the same as it was in the 1960s. Precisely, the counterfactual




                                                 26
Te’s are calculated as:
                                                             Q         k
                                                                            1
                                                                  J   Tnt    J
                                  j           j
                                Tent        Tn1960s               k=1 T k
                                                                       Ft
                                        =               ×                   1 ,
                                TFj t       TFj 1960s      QJ       k
                                                                  Tn1960s        J
                                                              k=1 T k
                                                                   F 1960s


where TFj t is the world frontier in sector j at decade t. In each sector and decade, we select the
                     j    j
2 highest values of Tnt /Tust , take their geometric mean, and label that the global frontier. We
then compute each country’s technology parameters in the counterfactual with reference to this
frontier productivity.
   The use of geometric averages has two appealing features. The first is that even though the
counterfactual T ’s are calculated to keep their distance to the frontier, the geometric average
of counterfactual T ’s is equal to the geometric average of the country’s actual T ’s at every t.
This ensures that the normalization to the frontier does not induce movements up or down of
the average productivity in the country, which would confound the meaning of our counterfactual
exercise. The second appealing feature is that this formulation produces identical counterfactual
T ’s whether the experiment is carried out on absolute T ’s or T 1/θ ’s, which are the mean pro-
ductivities. We keep productivity in the nontradeable sector at the benchmark value in all the
counterfactual experiments, since our focus is on the welfare impact of changes in comparative
advantage. Thus, an additional feature of the counterfactual design is that the productivity of
tradeables relative to nontradeables is also fixed throughout.
   We perform two variants of this counterfactual experiment. The first, labeled “global,” keeps
relative productivities at their 1960s values for all countries in the world simultaneously. This
counterfactual is best suited for evaluating the worldwide consequences of the observed global
productivity convergence. The second, “single-country,” keeps relative productivities at their
initial values for one country at a time, while the rest of the world has their baseline estimated
productivities. This counterfactual is ideal for evaluating the consequences for each country of
changes in its own comparative advantage.
   Countries that join the sample later than the 1960s in the counterfactuals keep their relative
productivities fixed to the first decade they are in the data. We think of those initial productivities
as our best guess for their pattern of comparative advantage as of the 1960s.

5.3   Trade Volumes and Trade Patterns

We begin with the discussion of the impact of changing comparative advantage on observable
outcomes, namely international trade volumes and patterns. Table 4 presents the results. The
first column reports the value of each moment in the data, the second in the benchmark model, and
the third and fourth in the global and single-country counterfactuals, respectively. The numbers



                                                        27
in italics under the averages are the correlations across countries in each moment between the
model and the data.
       The first row assesses the impact of changes in comparative advantage on trade volumes.
It reports the average manufacturing imports/GDP ratio in the 2000s across the countries in
the sample. The mean in the benchmark model matches that in the data almost perfectly, and
the correlation between the two is also high at nearly 0.6. The next two columns report the
manufacturing import/GDP ratio for the two counterfactuals. It is clear that in the absence of
changes in relative productivities, world trade volumes would be even higher than they are today.
The difference is sizable: imports to GDP would be 3.7 percentage points higher if all countries
kept their initial relative productivities, a 15% difference.
       Next, we look at trade patterns rather than trade volumes, and examine whether the model
can match the long-run changes observed in the data. One sharp pattern in the data is that within
a sector, export volumes are becoming more similar across countries over time. This is captured in
the table by the change in the standard deviation of log shares of world exports within a particular
sector across countries. The first column shows that in the data it has decreased systematically
between the 1960s and today. While the table reports the cross-sectoral average, this pattern
is also pervasive: in 17 out of 19 sectors, the dispersion of log country shares of world exports
has fallen. The next column reports the same statistic in the benchmark model, as well as the
correlation across sectors between the model and the data. The model matches quite well both the
overall decrease, and the cross-sectoral pattern in changes in dispersion. This is not surprising,
since the benchmark model parameters are estimated on observed trade flows in each decade, but
nonetheless reassuring.
       The next column reports the same statistic in the global counterfactual. It is clear that
productivity changes are largely responsible for this pattern: when comparative advantage is held
fixed, the cross-country dispersion in world export shares is predicted to fall by nearly two-thirds
less than in the baseline.12
       Since world export shares are affected by many other factors, namely trade costs, they do not
have a clear model interpretation. It could be, for instance, that world export shares are becoming
more similar purely due to changes in trade costs. Thus, we next examine the dispersion in the
                           j            j 1/θ    j 1/θ j
estimated unit cost terms Snt . Since (Snt ) = (Tnt ) cnt , it represents the average unit cost of
                                                          j 1/θ
producing a sector j variety in country n, time t. Data (Snt )  are estimated in Section 3.1. It is
                                                                                        j 1/θ
clear that in the data, there has also been a fall in the cross-country dispersion of (Snt )  within
a sector. While the table reports the sectoral average, the pattern is also pervasive, with 17 out of
  12
     As this exercise concerns the global dispersion in sectoral export shares, it is not well-defined in the single-
country counterfactual. the same applies to the next exercise, and thus in both cases those entries in the table are
left blank.



                                                         28
19 sectors exhibiting falls in dispersion. The next column reports the benchmark model outcome,
which matches the data quite well. On the other hand, in the counterfactual, the dispersion
     j 1/θ
in (Snt )  would have decreased somewhat less on average. In addition, while the benchmark
                                                                                j
matches the cross-sectoral pattern in the changes in the standard deviation of Snt very well, the
counterfactual does much less so.
       Finally, we examine the patterns of intra-industry trade. To that end, we construct the change
in the Grubel-Lloyd (GL) index for each country and sector, and report the simple average change
in the GL index across countries and sectors.13 There has been a considerable increase in the
extent of intra-industry trade over time, with an average increase in the data of 0.16 (the GL index
has a range of 0 to 1). The baseline model matches roughly two-thirds of this magnitude. By
contrast, the counterfactuals reveal no increase in the GL index had comparative advantage not
changed. Indeed, the single-country counterfactual actually predicts a decrease in intra-industry
trade across countries and sectors.
       To summarize, observed changes in relative sectoral productivities had an appreciable impact
on world trade. Had comparative advantage not changed as it did in the data, trade volumes
would be even higher than they are today. In addition, the weakening of comparative advantage
accounts well for the increased similarity in export flows between 1960s and today, and for the
observed increase in intra-industry trade.

5.4      Welfare

Finally, we evaluate the welfare impact of this phenomenon. Our measure of welfare is real per
capita income:
                                                 wnt + rnt knt
                                                               ,                                             (11)
                                                     Pnt
where knt = Knt /Lnt is capital per worker. We compare this measure of welfare in the baseline for
the 2000s to welfare for the same decade in the counterfactuals. Our model solution assumes that
the world is in steady state from the 2000s onwards, and thus analyzing the present discounted
value of utility in the 2000s is equivalent to focusing on the period utility in the 2000s.
       Table 5 summarizes the results, separating the OECD and the non-OECD countries. The
table reports the percentage changes in welfare for the counterfactual relative to the benchmark.
Thus, the positive median values in the first column indicate that on average, welfare would have
been higher had comparative advantage not changed since the 1960s. This accords well with what
is predicted by theory, given the pronounced weakening of comparative advantage we found in the
data in Section 4. However, now we can quantify these effects: for the median OECD country,
  13
    The results are unchanged if instead we used trade-weighed averages, or first computed averages by country, or
by sector.



                                                       29
welfare would have been 1.26% higher had its comparative advantage not weakened. For the
non-OECD, the impact would be somewhat larger, 1.80% at the median.14
       The second notable aspect of the results is the large dispersion. Among the OECD countries,
the standard deviation of welfare changes is 1.34%, while for the non-OECD, it is 3 times higher,
6.62%. Correspondingly, the range of changes is from −1.14% to 4.27% in the OECD, and
from −4.60% to 41.93% in the non-OECD. Importantly, among the non-OECD countries, welfare
changes range from substantially negative to substantially positive, indicating that heterogeneity
across countries is first-order.
       The second panel of Table 5 presents the results from the single-country counterfactual. Here,
the impact is larger compared to the global counterfactual, at 2.16% for the OECD and 2.86%
for the non-OECD at the median. The dispersion is slightly higher, and it is more likely that
a country is strictly better off keeping its original comparative advantage in the single-country
compared to the global counterfactual. The welfare impacts of the two counterfactuals are very
similar, with a correlation of 97%.
       To cross-check these results and compare magnitudes, the bottom panel of Table 5 reports the
same summary statistics for the overall gains from trade compared to autarky for the 2000s in the
baseline model. The welfare impact of the evolution of comparative advantage is on average of the
same order of magnitude as the total gains from trade. The median gains from trade are 5.64% for
the median OECD country, and 7.22% for the median non-OECD country. We can also compare
the extent of variation in the welfare impact of technological changes to that in the welfare gains
from trade. In the OECD, the gains from trade have a standard deviation of about 3.27% and
a range of about 12%: from a minimum of 1.5 to a maximum of 13.09%. Thus, for the OECD
countries the variation in welfare changes due to technology is somewhat smaller, with a range
of about 5 percentage points. However, for the non-OECD countries, technology changes have
a similar dispersion of welfare impact as trade opening. The gains from trade have a standard
deviation of 6.79%, and a range of about 33%. The welfare impact of technology changes has a
standard deviation of 6.62%, and a range of nearly 50 percentage points. In addition, while gains
from trade are – of course – always positive, the welfare impact of technological changes takes on
both positive and negative values.
       From the perspective of the trade literature, the preceding welfare assessment is non-standard
in one respect. The standard practice in international trade is to keep the factor supply inelastic
and fixed. Our model, however, features endogenous capital accumulation. Thus, as comparative
advantage remains fixed from the 1960s to today, each country has different income in each decade
  14
    A related but distinct question is what is the population-weighted average welfare change, since averaging
with population weights in effect assigns equal weights to individuals, rather than countries. It turns out that the
population-weighted welfare change in the counterfactual relative to benchmark is about 0.72% for the OECD and
2.24% for the non-OECD.


                                                        30
in the counterfactual compared to the baseline. While the baseline analysis – by construction –
matches perfectly the evolution of the capital stock in each country and decade, the counterfactual
capital stocks will differ from their observed values. If a country that keeps its comparative
advantage fixed has higher income in each decade and accumulates more capital, that will have
an independent effect on welfare in addition to the static impact of relative productivity. Similarly,
to compute the gains from trade relative to autarky, the analysis above assumes that each country
is in autarky in each decade starting in the 1960s. Lower income in each decade implies lower
capital stock in the future decades, and that will impact the welfare at the end of the period.
    To check the importance of this mechanism, we repeat the welfare counterfactuals, but this
time assuming that capital is the same as in the baseline. This corresponds to the traditional
thought experiment in the trade literature. The results are reported in the bottom panel of Table
5. Without endogenous adjustment of capital, the welfare impact of changes in comparative
advantage is smaller throughout. Now, the OECD welfare is only 0.8% higher in the global
counterfactual compared to the baseline, and the non-OECD welfare is 0.5% higher. The welfare
impact is similarly closer to zero in the single-country counterfactual.
    As a side note, it is interesting to compare the gains from trade figures. The gains from trade
to the OECD are now 3.95% at the median, or 30% lower than with capital adjustment. The
non-OECD median gains are 23% lower. Thus, as frequently suggested, trade opening can have
a dynamic impact on factor accumulation that will add to the gains from trade. In our case, the
dynamic impact is on the accumulation of capital.


6    Conclusion

How does technology evolve over time, and what are the consequences of technological change?
In the growth literature, it is widely recognized that economic growth is driven in large part by
productivity growth, making it the key force for improvements in welfare. However, when relative
technology differences are a source of international trade as in the Ricardian world, the welfare
impact of technological progress depends on which sectors grow in which countries.
    This paper starts by estimating sectoral productivity in a sample of some 72 countries, 19
sectors, and 5 decades, 1960s to today. We document a striking pattern in the data: in the
world as a whole, comparative advantage is getting weaker over time. This effect is present in all
time periods and major country groups: within a country, sectors with the lowest initial relative
productivity experience systematically faster productivity growth than sectors with highest initial
productivity. Using counterfactual experiments, we show that had comparative advantage not
changed in this way, global trade volumes would be higher, trade shares more dissimilar across
countries, and intra-industry trade lower.


                                                 31
   This empirical finding opens the door to the theoretical possibility that this type of uneven
technological progress can actually reduce welfare in the trading countries. We indeed find that
welfare was reduced by weakening comparative advantage. The average impact is on the same
order of magnitude as the total gains from trade for these countries in the 2000s.
   The focus of this paper is on measuring how comparative advantage has evolved, and quanti-
fying the impact of this evolution. This exercise leaves open the question of what are the forces
driving technological progress and diffusion across countries at the sectoral level. One direction
of future research will explore the theoretical mechanisms that could endogenize the patterns
uncovered here. The other direction will identify empirically the factors that can account for the
evolution of comparative advantage, such as import or export competition, the nature of trad-
ing partners, industrial policy, and so on. These two directions are complementary and fruitful
avenues for future research.




                                               32
Appendix A                 Comparison of Estimated T ’s with Measured TFP

This Appendix compares the productivity estimates obtained by our procedure and used through-
out the paper with estimates of measured TFP that can be obtained directly. Computing sectoral
measured TFP requires data on total output, employment, capital stocks, and intermediate input
usage, all in real terms, by sector. This information is only available at sector level and on a con-
sistent basis for many countries through the OECD Structural Analysis (STAN) database. We
first compute sectoral capital stocks using data on real investment and the perpetual inventory
method.15 We then proceed to compute sector-level measured TFP from data on total output,
employment, capital, and inputs following equation (8), for all the countries for which the required
data are available. The set of countries and sectors for which this measured TFP can be com-
puted is not large. There are only 12 countries with all the required data in at least some sectors:
Austria, Belgium, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Greece, Italy, Norway, Slovenia,
Sweden, and United States.16 The data are in principle available for the period 1970-2008, though
in practice earlier years are often not available in individual countries.
      It is now well understood that differences in trade openness across sectors will affect measured
TFP systematically (see Finicelli et al. 2013, and Section 3.2). To go from measured TFP to true
underlying TFP, we apply the Finicelli et al. (2013) correction specified for the U.S. in equation
(9) to all countries and sectors.
      We then correlate the TFP values estimated based on STAN with the T ’s from our baseline
procedure. We present the comparison for the 2000s, as the latest time period has the largest
number of observations, and the measures of capital stocks are also more reliable. Panel A of
Table A6 reports, for each sector, the Spearman rank correlation between the two measures.
These tend to be high: the mean correlation correlations across sectors is 0.71, and the median
0.80. The last column reports the number of countries for which STAN-based TFP is available in
each sector. We can see that we have have information for less than 10 countries per sector. To
make more efficient use of the data, we next pool the sectors and examine the correlation between
the two productivity measures in a regression framework:

                                                                1/θ
                               log TFP-STANjn = β log Tnj              + δn + δj + nj ,

where TFP-STANjn is the TFP as implied by the STAN data, and Tnj is as defined in the rest
of the paper. The specification includes both country and sector effects, and thus the average
productivity levels in individual countries and sectors are netted out. Panel B of Table A6 reports
the results. The first column reports the simple bivariate regression of the two measures. The
 15
      Though the STAN database contains a variable for sectoral capital stock, it is only available for 6 countries.
 16
      In practice, the main bottleneck appears to be data on investment, and therefore capital stocks.



                                                          33
coefficient is highly statistically significant. The correlation between the two variables is 0.37.
The second column adds sector effects. The coefficient remains statistically significant at the 1%
level, and the partial correlation, obtained after netting the sector effects from both measures of
productivity, is much higher at 0.583. Finally, column (3) includes both sector and country effects.
The coefficient of interest is significant at the 5% level. With country and sector fixed effects,
the overall R2 is about 0.89. Given that, it is remarkable that the partial correlation between
the two measures, after controlling for both country and sector effects is 0.08. Thus, even after
netting out all the sector and country effects, the association between these two variables is close
and statistically significant.
       We conclude from these exercises that our estimation procedure that relies on bilateral trade
to measure productivity delivers results that are in line with the more conventional approaches.17


Appendix B                Solution Algorithm

A model period is one decade. The calibration and estimation yields the following series: (i)
                                                 j
country-specific and time-varying series {Lnt , Tnt , ξnt , δnt , snt , djnit } for 5 decades; and (ii) time-
invariant parameters common across countries and decades {ε, η, θ, ωj , αj , βj , γj 0 j }. The capital
stocks in the initial decade are Kn0 . We assume that the model economy is in steady state from
fifth period (the last period of the data) onward by setting the time-varying series at their fifth
decade values for all t > 5 in each country n. We compute the competitive equilibrium of the
model for each period as follows:

   1. Guess {wnt , rnt }N
                        n=1 .


           • Compute prices from the following equations:
                                                                                            1−βj
                                                       βj       J+1               γj 0 j
                                                                                0
                                                                         
                                            α   1−αj
                              cjnt = wntj rnt                                 pjnt
                                                                 Y
                                                                                                   for all n and j,
                                                                 j 0 =1


                                            N                    −θ
                                 Φjnt             Titj cjit djnit
                                            X
                                        =                             for all n and j ∈ {1, ..., J},
                                            i=1
                                                                   −θ
                                                ΦJ+1
                                                 nt  = T J+1
                                                        nt     cJ+1
                                                                nt      for all n,
  17
     An alternative source of sector-level productivity estimates is the Groningen Growth and Development Centre
Productivity Level Database (http://www.ggdc.net/databases/levels.htm). These data are available only at a single
point in time, 1997. The database reports levels of multifactor productivity relative to the U.S. for 12 manufacturing
sectors and 19 developed countries. We repeated the analysis above using the Groningen data instead. Though
the sector-level correlations were somewhat lower than what is reported for STAN, the coefficients from the fixed
effects regression were more significant, and the Partial R2 comparable to that for STAN.



                                                             34
                                                        − 1
                                           pjnt = Γ Φjnt
                                                            θ
                                                              for all n and j,
                                                                        1
                                                                        ξ
                                                                       1−η nt
                                             J
                                                   ωj (pjnt )1−η 
                                             X
                            Pnt = Bn                                           (pJ+1
                                                                                  nt )
                                                                                      1−ξnt
                                                                                            for all n.
                                             j=1

     • Compute final demand as follows: for any country n,

                         j           wnt Lnt + rnt Knt             ωj (pjnt )1−η
                        Ynt = ξnt                                                         , for j = {1, .., J},
                                               pjnt
                                                               PJ          k 1−η
                                                                  k=1 ωk (pnt )


                                           J+1                       wnt Lnt + rnt Knt
                                          Ynt  = (1 − ξnt )                            .
                                                                           pJ+1
                                                                            nt

     • Compute consumption, investment and next-period capital: for any country n,

                   Cnt = (1 − snt )Ynt ;              Int = snt Ynt ;      Knt+1 = (1 − δnt )Knt + Int .


     • Compute the trade shares as follows: for any country pair (n, i) and j ∈ {1, ..., J}
                                                                               −θ
                                                                Titj cjit djnit
                                                       j
                                                      πnit =                          .
                                                                       Φjnt

     • Compute total demand as follows: for any country n and any sector j

                        J X N
                                 0    0 j0
           pjnt Ynt
                 j
                              Qjit pjit πint                                                  j   j
                        X
                    +     (                  )(1 − βj 0 )γjj 0 + QJ+1 J+1
                                                                  nt pnt (1 − βJ+1 )γj,J+1 = pnt Qnt .
                        j 0 =1 i=1


     • Compute the factor allocations across sectors as follows: for any country n,

                         N
                                                  wnt Ljnt          j
                                                               rnt Knt
                               pjit Qjit πint
                                          j
                         X
                                              =            =             , for all j = {1, .., J},
                                                   αj βj     (1 − αj )βj
                         i=1


                                                        wnt LJ+1             J+1
                                                                        rnt Knt
                                     pJ+1 J+1
                                      nt Qnt =
                                                              nt
                                                                  =                 .
                                                        αJ+1 βJ+1   (1 − αJ+1 )βJ+1
            0 , r 0 }N
2. Update {wnt   nt n=1 with the feasibility conditions for factors: for any n,

                                        J+1                        J+1
                                               Ljnt                       j
                                        X                          X
                                                      = Lnt ,            Knt = Knt .
                                         j=1                       j=1


                                       0 , r 0 }N
3. Repeat the above procedures until {wnt                                         N
                                            nt n=1 is close enough to {wnt , rnt }n=1 .




                                                          35
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Introduction to Modern Economic Growth, Princeton, NJ: Princeton Uni-
   versity Press, 2008.
     and Fabrizio Zilibotti, “Productivity Differences,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May
    2001, 116 (2), 563–606.
    , Pol Antrás, and Elhanan Helpman, “Contracts and Technology Adoption,” American
    Economic Review, June 2007, 97 (3), 916–943.
Atkinson, Anthony B. and Joseph E. Stiglitz, “A New View of Technological Change,”
    Economic Journal, Royal Economic Society, September 1969, 79 (315), 573–78.
Barro, Robert J., “Economic Growth in a Cross Section of Countries,” Quarterly Journal of
    Economics, May 1991, 106 (2), 407–443.
     and Xavier Sala-i-Martin, “Convergence,” Journal of Political Economy, April 1992, 100
    (2), 223–251.
Bartelsman, Eric J. and Wayne Gray, “The NBER Manufacturing Productivity Database,”
    October 1996. NBER Technical Working Paper 205.
Basu, Susanto and David N. Weil, “Appropriate Technology And Growth,” Quarterly Journal
   of Economics, November 1998, 113 (4), 1025–1054.
Bernard, Andrew B. and Charles I. Jones, “Technology and Convergence,” Economic Jour-
   nal, July 1996a, 106, 1037–1044.
     and      , “Comparing Apples to Oranges: Productivity Convergence and Measurement
    Across Industries and Countries,” American Economic Review, December 1996b, 86, 1216–
    1238.
Berthelon, Matias and Caroline Freund, “On the Conservation of Distance in International
    Trade,” Journal of International Economics, July 2008, 75 (2), 310–320.
Bloom, Nicholas, Mirko Draca, and John Van Reenen, “Trade Induced Technical Change:
    The Impact of Chinese Imports on Innovation, Diffusion and Productivity,” January 2011.
    NBER WP 16717.
    , Paul Romer, Stephen J. Terry, and John Van Reenen, “A Trapped Factors Model
    of Innovation,” July 2012. Mimeo, Stanford University, NYU Stern, and LSE.
Brezis, Elise S., Paul R. Krugman, and Daniel Tsiddon, “Leapfrogging in International
    Competition: A Theory of Cycles in National Technological Leadership,” American Eco-
    nomic Review, December 1993, 83 (5), 1211019.
Caliendo, Lorenzo and Fernando Parro, “Estimates of the Trade and Welfare Effects of
    NAFTA,” May 2014. Forthcoming Review of Economic Studies.
Carrère, Céline, Olivier Cadot, and Vanessa Strauss-Kahn, “Export Diversification:
    What’s behind the Hump?,” Review of Economics and Statistics, May 2011, 93 (2), 590–605.
Caselli, Francesco, “Accounting for Cross-Country Income Differences,” in Steven Durlauf
    Philippe Aghion, ed., Handbook of Economic Growth, Vol. 1, Elsevier-North Holland, 2005,
    chapter 9, pp. 679–741.
    and James Feyrer, “The Marginal Product of Capital,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
    May 2007, 122 (2), 535–568.
     and Wilbur John Coleman, “The World Technology Frontier,” American Economic
    Review, June 2006, 96 (3), 499–522.

                                            36
Chen, Natalie and Dennis Novy, “Gravity, Trade Integration, and Heterogeneity across
   Industries,” Journal of International Economics, November 2011, 85 (2), 206–221.
Chor, Davin, “Unpacking Sources of Comparative Advantage: A Quantitative Approach,” Jour-
   nal of International Economics, November 2010, 82 (2), 152–167.
Costinot, Arnaud, Dave Donaldson, and Ivana Komunjer, “What Goods Do Countries
    Trade? A Quantitative Exploration of Ricardo’s Ideas,” Review of Economic Studies, April
    2012, 79 (2), 581–608.
Deardorff, Alan V., “The General Validity of the Law of Comparative Advantage,” Journal of
   Political Economy, October 1980, 88 (5), 941–57.
Do, Quy-Toan and Andrei A. Levchenko, “Comparative Advantage, Demand for External
    Finance, and Financial Development,” Journal of Financial Economics, December 2007, 86
    (3).
Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum, “Technology, Geography, and Trade,” Econometrica,
    September 2002, 70 (5), 1741–1779.
Finicelli, Andrea, Patrizio Pagano, and Massimo Sbracia, “Trade-revealed TFP,” October
    2009. Bank of Italy Temi di Discussione (Working Paper) No. 729.
    ,     , and      , “Ricardian Selection,” Journal of International Economics, 2013, 89 (1),
    96–109.
Gerschenkron, Alexander, Economic backwardness in historical perspective, a book of essays,
   Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 1962.
Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman, Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy,
   Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1991.
Hall, Robert and Charles I. Jones, “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output
    per Worker then Others,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1999, 114, 83–116.
Hausmann, Ricardo and Bailey Klinger, “The Structure of the Product Space and the
   Evolution of Comparative Advantage,” April 2007. CID Working Paper No. 146.
Hicks, John, “An Inaugural Lecture,” Oxford Economic Papers, 1953, 5 (2), 117–135.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai, “What Explains the Industrial Revolution in East Asia? Evidence From the
    Factor Markets,” American Economic Review, June 2002, 92 (3), 502–526.
    and Ralph Ossa, “A global view of productivity growth in China,” February 2011. NBER
    Working Paper No. 16778.
Hummels, David, Jun Ishii, and Kei-Mu Yi, “The Nature and Growth of Vertical Special-
   ization in World Trade,” Journal of International Economics, June 2001, 54, 75–96.
Hymans, Saul H. and Frank P. Stafford, “Divergence, Convergence, and the Gains from
   Trade,” Review of International Economics, 1995, 3 (1), 118–123.
Imbs, Jean and Isabelle Méjean, “Elasticity Optimism,” April 2014. Forthcoming American
   Economic Journal: Marcoeconomics.
     and Romain Wacziarg, “Stages of Diversification,” American Economic Review, March
    2003, 93 (1), 63–86.
Jones, Ronald, “Technical Progress and Real Income in a Ricardian Trade Model,” in Ronald
    Jones, ed., Internarional Trade: Essays in Theory, Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1979.
Keller, Wolfgang, “International Technology Diffusion,” Journal of Economic Literature,
    September 2004, 42 (3), 752–782.

                                             37
Klenow, Peter J. and Andrés Rodrı́guez-Clare, “The Neoclassical Revival in Growth Eco-
    nomics: Has It Gone Too Far?,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 1997, 12, 73–103.
Krugman, Paul, “A Model of Innovation, Technology Transfer, and the World Distribution of
   Income,” Journal of Political Economy, April 1979, 87 (2), 253–66.
    , “The narrow moving band, the Dutch disease, and the competitive consequences of Mrs.
    Thatcher: Notes on trade in the presence of dynamic scale economies,” Journal of Develop-
    ment Economics, 1987, 27 (1-2), 41–55.
Proudman, James and Stephen Redding, “Evolving Patterns of International Trade,” Re-
   view of International Economics, 2000, 8 (3), 373–396.
Quah, Danny, “Galton’s Fallacy and Tests of the Convergence Hypothesis,” Scandinavian Jour-
   nal of Economics, December 1993, 95 (4), 427–443.
Rodrik, Dani, “Unconditional Convergence in Manufacturing,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
   2013, 128 (1), 165–204.
Rose, Andrew K., “Do We Really Know That the WTO Increases Trade?,” American Economic
   Review, March 2004, 94 (1), 98–114.
Samuelson, Paul A., “Where Ricardo and Mill Rebut and Confirm Arguments of Mainstream
   Economists Supporting Globalization,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2004, 18 (3), 135–
   146.
Santos Silva, João M.C. and Silvana Tenreyro, “The Log of Gravity,” Review of Economics
    and Statistics, 2006, 88 (4), 641–658.
Shikher, Serge, “Capital, technology, and specialization in the neoclassical model,” Journal of
    International Economics, March 2011, 83 (2), 229–242.
    , “Putting industries into the Eaton-Kortum model,” Journal of International Trade and
    Economic Development, 2012, 21 (6), 807–837.
Simonovska, Ina and Michael E. Waugh, “The Elasticity of Trade: Estimates and Evidence,”
   Journal of International Economics, January 2014, 92 (1), 34–50.
Solow, Robert M., “A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth,” Quarterly Journal
    of Economics, 1956, 70 (1), 65–94.
Swan, Trevor W., “Economic Growth and Capital Accumulation,” Economic Record, 1956, 32
   (2), 334–361.
Uy, Tim, Kei-Mu Yi, and Jing Zhang, “Structural Change in an Open Economy,” Journal
    of Monetary Economics, September 2013, 60 (6), 667–682.
Waugh, Michael E., “International Trade and Income Differences,” American Economic Re-
   view, December 2010, 100 (5), 2093–2124.
Young, Alwyn, “Learning by Doing and the Dynamic Effects of International Trade,” Quarterly
   Journal of Economics, May 1991, 106 (2), 369–405.




                                              38
                                    Table 1. Summary Statistics

                                    OECD                                   Non-OECD
                     Mean           CV           Countries         Mean      CV Countries
                     T 1/θ          T 1/θ                          T 1/θ    T 1/θ

           1960s     0.911         0.128             21            0.474     0.241        31
           1970s     1.048         0.110             21            0.571     0.216        35
           1980s     0.986         0.110             22            0.586     0.222        39
           1990s     1.041         0.103             22            0.553     0.209        50
           2000s     1.028         0.108             22            0.585     0.212        50

           Balanced Panel of Countries
           1960s 0.911       0.128                   21            0.474     0.241        31
           1970s 1.048       0.110                   21            0.591     0.214        31
           1980s 0.973       0.110                   21            0.586     0.219        31
           1990s 1.031       0.102                   21            0.560     0.215        31
           2000s 1.026       0.109                   21            0.553     0.224        31

Notes: This table reports the summary statistics for the average productivity relative to the US (mean
T 1/θ ), the coefficient of variation among tradeable sector productivities (CV T 1/θ ), as well as the number
of countries for which data are available. The samples are split by decade and into OECD and non-OECD
groups.




                                                     39
                                                         Table 2. Pooled Regression Results

                                                (1)               (2)                (3)                (4)               (5)                (6)
                                           1960s to 2000s    1980s to 2000s     1960s to 1970s     1970s to 1980s    1980s to 1990s     1990s to 2000s
     Dep. Var: Log Change in T 1/θ
                                                                                    Panel A: All Countries
     Log Initial   T 1/θ                     -0.517***          -0.208***          -0.228***       -0.142***            -0.173***          -0.108***
                                              (0.044)            (0.034)            (0.027)         (0.023)              (0.029)            (0.032)
     NB:
     Speed of convergence, per decade          0.182              0.117              0.259             0.153              0.190              0.114

     Observations                                893              1,068               955               1,038             1,129              1,282
     R2                                         0.677             0.636              0.722              0.659             0.667              0.684

                                                                                       Panel B: OECD
     Log Initial T 1/θ                       -0.676***          -0.369***          -0.250***      -0.176***             -0.220***           -0.146*
                                              (0.072)            (0.087)            (0.035)        (0.037)               (0.046)            (0.082)
     NB:




40
     Speed of convergence, per decade          0.282              0.230              0.288             0.194              0.248              0.158

     Observations                                393               405                396                394               407                410
     R2                                         0.757             0.637              0.742              0.734             0.654              0.548

                                                                                     Panel C: non-OECD
     Log Initial T 1/θ                       -0.659***          -0.302***          -0.344***       -0.191***            -0.256***          -0.148***
                                              (0.067)            (0.059)            (0.046)         (0.035)              (0.048)            (0.047)
     NB:
     Speed of convergence, per decade          0.269              0.180              0.422             0.212              0.296              0.160

     Observations                                500               663                559                644               722                872
     R2                                         0.737             0.635              0.759              0.662             0.621              0.707


     Country FE                                  yes               yes                yes                yes               yes                yes
     Sector FE                                   yes               yes                yes                yes               yes                yes

     Notes: Standard errors clustered at the country level in parentheses; ***: significant at 1%; *: significant at 10%. This table reports the results
                                                                      1/θ
     of regressing the growth of estimated technology parameter Tnj        on its initial value over different time periods and subsamples. The speed
     of convergence, per decade, is reported (in italics) underneath each coefficient estimate.
                     Table 3. The Fit of the Baseline Model with the Data

                                                               model       data
                          Wages:
                                     mean                       0.464   0.400
                                     median                     0.277   0.172
                                     corr(model, data)              0.952
                          Return to capital:
                                     mean                       0.173   0.172
                                     median                     0.160   0.154
                                     corr(model, data)              0.588
                           j
                          πnn  :
                                     mean                       0.638   0.570
                                     median                     0.710   0.614
                                     corr(model, data)              0.922
                           j
                          πni , i 6= j:
                                     mean                      0.0051 0.0060
                                     median                    0.0002 0.0002
                                     corr(model, data)              0.904

Notes: This table reports the means and medians of wages relative to the U.S. (top panel); return to capital
relative to the U.S. (second panel), share of domestically produced goods in overall spending (third panel),
and share of goods from country i in overall spending (bottom panel) in the model and in the data. Wages
and return to capital in the data are calculated as described in Section 3.3.




                                                    41
        Table 4. Trade Volumes and Trade Patterns in the Data and in the Model

                                                                       Model
                                           Data         Benchmark         CF:            CF:
                                                                        Global         Single-
                                                                                       Country
                                          Mean            Mean            Mean          Mean

       Imports/GDP                         0.241          0.242           0.279         0.270
         ρ(M odel, Data)                                  0.593           0.552         0.523

       ∆σ(ln World Export Shares)         -0.322          -0.283          -0.138           ..
        ρ(M odel, Data)                                   0.600           0.373            ..

       ∆σ(ln S)                           -0.063          -0.058          -0.052           ..
        ρ(M odel, Data)                                   0.825           0.474            ..

       ∆ GL Index                          0.162          0.111           0.021         -0.076
        ρ(M odel, Data)                                   0.423           0.185         0.184


Notes: This table compares the 2000s trade volumes and trade patterns in the data, the benchmark
model, and the counterfactuals. The columns labeled “CF” refer to the counterfactuals. The row
“∆σ(ln World Export Shares)” presents the change in the standard deviation of log world export shares
between the 1960s and the 2000s, averaged across sectors. The row “∆σ(ln S)” presents the change in the
                                     j
standard deviation of log estimated Snt ’s between the 1960s and the 2000s, averaged across sectors. The
row “∆ GL Index” reports the change in the Grubel-Lloyd index, averaged across countries and sectors.




                                                   42
             Table 5. Welfare Gains in the Counterfactuals Relative to Baseline

                                   Median       St. Dev.     Min      Max      Countries

                  Main Results

                  Global counterfactual
                  OECD            1.26            1.34       -1.14     4.27         22
                  Non-OECD        1.80            6.62       -4.60    41.93         50

                  Single-country counterfactual
                  OECD            2.16      1.45             -0.40     5.45
                  Non-OECD        2.68      7.51             -4.93    45.84

                  NB : Overall gains from trade
                  OECD            5.64      3.27             1.50     13.09
                  Non-OECD        7.22      6.79             1.41     34.46

                  Fixed Capital

                  Global counterfactual
                  OECD            0.80            0.92       -1.03     2.80         22
                  Non-OECD        0.49            4.68       -5.80    27.56         50

                  Single-country counterfactual
                  OECD            1.39      1.04             -0.31     3.65
                  Non-OECD        1.77      5.34             -3.68    30.50

                  NB : Overall gains from trade
                  OECD            3.95      2.23             1.16      8.48
                  Non-OECD        5.61      4.62             1.00     23.98

Notes: Units are in percentage points. This table reports the percent change in welfare under the coun-
terfactual scenarios with respect to the baseline. The top panel reports the main results, in which capital
accumulation responds endogenously to comparative advantage. The bottom panel reports the results when
capital is fixed at its observed values. The counterfactuals labeled “Global counterfactual ” assume that all
countries’ comparative advantage remained fixed to the 1960s values. The counterfactuals labeled “Single-
country counterfactual ” assume for each individual country, comparative advantage remained as it was in
the 1960s. All other countries’ comparative advantage is taken from the data. In the baseline comparative
advantage is as it is in the data for the 2000s. The table also reports the total gains from trade relative to
autarky in the baseline for the 2000s.




                                                     43
                                                                                   Figure 1. Absolute and Relative Convergence




              .6
                                                                                                                                       .3
                                                                                                                                                                               KAZ


                                                                     FJI                                                                                                                        ROM
                                                                                                                                                                                              MUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                      SVK      TTO
                                                                                                                                                                                                         HUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                           POL




                                                                                                                                       .2
                                                                                                                                                                                 SEN




              .4
                                                                                                                     IRL                                                                         RUS
                                                                                                             FIN
                                                                                                                     NOR                                                                          BGR       CZE
                                                       LKA                                                                                                                       LKA
                                                                                                                                                                                 GHA KEN




       1/
                                                                                                                                1/
                                                        GHA                                           KOR                                                                       UKR BGD
                                                                                                       AUS




                                                                                                                                          .1
                                                                                                                                                                                                      FJI                                  IRL
                                                                   KEN ECU MYS                          ISL                                                         ETH                                                     ISL
                                                                                                       PRT        ITA
                                                                                                                 DNK                                                                               CHN                       GRC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SVN TUR     FIN
                                                                                                          ISR     JPNGBR
                                                                                                                      SWE                                                                                                           GBR




            .2
                                                                                                               NLD
                                                                                                             GRC                                                                VNM                                                 NOR
                                                                               IND                         TTO NZL                                                                                              CHL  PRT     ITA
                                                                                                                                                                                                 HND
                                                                                HND                                                                                                                                      CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     KOR NZL DNK




                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                              TUR                                                                                 SLV
                                                                                                                                                                                                    JOR                          SWE
                                                                                               CRI                                                                                                                        NLD




       Ln(Average T )
                                                                                                                                Ln(Average T )
                                                                                  SLV                 CHL
                                                                                                                      AUTFRA                                                                           PER CRI MEX      AUS
                                                                                                                       BLX                                                                          IND
                                                                                                                                                                                                   ECU                     BLX
                                                                      BOL                                            ESP                                                                                    URY VEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                          COL                 AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                FRA
                                                                                             COL                          DEU                                                                                    BRA       ESP
                                                                                           EGY           ZAF                                                                                   PHL                       ISR
                                                                                                  URY




              0
                                                                                                                          CAN                                                                                                  DEUCHE
                                                                                  PHL                                                                                                                  IDN ARG                    JPN




                                                                                                                                       −.1
                                                                                              JOR                                                                                                          MYS
                                                                                                               VEN                                                                            BOL                       TWN
                                                                                                                                                                                                          EGY




              −.2
                                                                                                                                       −.2
                        −1.5                                        −1                          −.5                         0                     −1.5                               −1                   −.5                       0            .5
                                                                                             1/                                                                                                                    1/
                                                                         Ln(Initial Average T )                                                                                                Ln(Initial Average T )

     (a) 1960s to 2000s: Absolute Convergence and Initial Aver- (b) 1990s to 2000s: Absolute Convergence and Initial Aver-
     age                                                        age




44
                                                                                                      LKA                                                                                                                          LKA




                                          .35
                                                                                                                                                     .35
                                                                                                               BOL                                                                                                            BOL

                                                                                               GHA                                                                                                              GHA
                                                                                                      SLV                                                                                                         SLV
                                                                                                      EGY
                                                                                                       KEN
                                                                                                         HND                                                                                                EGY KEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                              HND
                                                                                              JOR      PHL                                                                                           PHL     JOR




                                                 .25
                                                                                                                                                            .25

                                                                                        TTO                  ECU                                                                                   TTO            ECU
                                                                                      IRL                                                                                                    IRL




                               1/
                                                                                                                                        1/




                                                                                         CHL COL                                                                                                  COL
                                                                                                                                                                                                   CHL
                                                                                          IND MYS
                                                                                            VEN
                                                                                            URY                                                                                                IND
                                                                                                                                                                                             MYS
                                                                                                                                                                                             VEN URY
                                                                                                FJI                                                                                                               FJI
                                                                            ZAF
                                                                                            CRI
                                                                                              TUR                                                                                          TUR           CRI

                                                                                  PRT                                                                                              PRT
                                                                                     ISL                                                                                                    ISL




                                .15
                                                                                                                                           .15




                                                                   AUT




                               Coeff. Var. T , 2000s
                                                                                                                                          Coeff. Var. T , 2000s




                                                                                  NZL
                                                                                GRC
                                                                                                                                                                                   AUTNZL
                                                                                                                                                                                         GRC
                                                                              ISR                                                                                                   ISR
                                                                        NLD                                                                                                      NLD
                                                             CAN            BLXNOR                                                                                        NOR
                                                                                                                                                                        CAN  BLX
                                                                      DNK AUS
                                                                            FIN    KOR                                                                                    DNK KOR
                                                                                                                                                                             AUS
                                                                                                                                                                           FINESP
                                                                   GBRITA ESP                                                                                            GBR ITA
                                                                      DEU
                                                                     SWE                                                                                                 DEU
                                                                                                                                                                        SWE
                                                               FRAJPN                                                                                              FRAJPN




                                          .05
                                                                                                                                                     .05




                                                       .05                    .15              .25                    .35                                         .05                      .15              .25                          .35
                                                                                          1/                                                                                                           1/
                                                                             Coeff. Var. T , 1960s                                                                                        Coeff. Var. T , 1990s


                               (c) 1960s and 2000s: Coefficient of Variation                                                          (d) 1990s and 2000s: Coefficient of Variation



                        Notes: The top panel of this figure presents the bivariate plots of absolute convergence from the 1960s (left
                        panel) and the 1990s (right panel) against log initial average T 1/θ relative to the US. The bottom panel
                        plots the coefficient of variation in T 1/θ relative to the US in the 2000s against this value in the 1960s (left
                        panel) and the 1990s (right panel). In the bottom 2 panels, the line through the data is the 45-degree line.
                                               Figure 2. Convergence by Sector, 1960s to 2000s

                          15                         16                             17                         18                           19




             1
             .5
             0
             −.5
                          20                         21                             22                         23                           24




             1
             .5
             0
             −.5
                          25                         26                             27                         28                           29C




             1

     Log T




45
             .5
             0
             −.5
                                                                                                                               −2                 0

                          31A                        33                             34A                        36




             1
             .5
             0
             −.5
                   −2              0      −2                 0      −2                       0      −2                  0

                                                                     Log Initial T
             Graphs by isiccode


                                                                            1/θ
                        Notes: This figure displays the log change in Tnj          against the initial log level, and the OLS fit through
                        the data, for each sector.
                 Figure 3. Convergence in the Pooled Sample, 1960s to 2000s
          .5
          .25
            0
       Log T
          −.25
          −.5
          −.75




                  −.5             −.25              0             .25               .5              .75
                                                    Log Initial T


                                                                      1/θ
Notes: This figure displays partial correlation the log change in Tnj      against the initial log level, after
netting out country and sector effects, pooling across sectors and countries.




                                                      46
Figure 4. Heuristic Evidence: Initial Import Shares, Changes in Import Shares, and Changes in
Trade Costs




                                        1
                                                                                                                          Coeff = −.397
                                                                                                                          Std.Err
                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                  = .027
                                                                                                                          R = .184
                                        .5
                   )        nn
                  j

                     0
                   (1−
                                        −.5
                                        −1




                                                               0             .2           .4                         .6   .8               1
                                                                                                            j
                                                                                               Initial 1−       nn




                                                                   (a) Initial Import Shares and Changes in Import Shares
                                        .2




                                                                                                                          Coeff = .009
                                                                                                                          Std.Err
                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                  = .009
                                                                                                                          R = .001
                   % (Average d ni for sector j, importer n)
                             −.1           0          .1
                  j

                    −.2                 −.3




                                                               0             .2           .4                         .6   .8               1
                                                                                                            j
                                                                                               Initial 1−       nn




                                                                    (b) Initial Import Shares and Changes in Trade Costs

                                                                                             j
  Notes: This figure plots the change in the import share between the 1960s and 2000s ∆(1 − πnn ) (top panel),
                                                                         j
  and the percentage change in import-weighted average import costs dni between the 1960 and the 2000s
  (bottom panel), against the import share of sector j in country n in the 1960s on the x-axis. The figure
  pools country-sectors.




                                                                                               47
                                   Table A1. Country Coverage
              Country                  Period        Country                       Period
              OECD                                   Non-OECD
              Australia             1960s−2000s      Argentina                  1980s−2000s
              Austria               1960s−2000s      Bangladesh                 1970s−2000s
              Belgium-Luxembourg    1960s−2000s      Bolivia                    1960s−2000s
              Canada                1960s−2000s      Brazil                     1980s−2000s
              Denmark               1960s−2000s      Bulgaria                   1990s−2000s
              Finland               1960s−2000s      Chile                      1960s−2000s
              France                1960s−2000s      China                      1970s−2000s
              Germany               1960s−2000s      Colombia                   1960s−2000s
              Greece                1960s−2000s      Costa Rica                 1960s−2000s
              Iceland               1960s−2000s      Czech Republic             1990s−2000s
              Ireland               1960s−2000s      Ecuador                    1960s−2000s
              Italy                 1960s−2000s      Egypt, Arab Rep.           1960s−2000s
              Japan                 1960s−2000s      El Salvador                1960s−2000s
              Netherlands           1960s−2000s      Ethiopia                   1980s−2000s
              New Zealand           1960s−2000s      Fiji                       1960s−2000s
              Norway                1960s−2000s      Ghana                      1960s−2000s
              Portugal              1960s−2000s      Guatemala                  1960s−2000s
              Spain                 1960s−2000s      Honduras                   1960s−2000s
              Sweden                1960s−2000s      Hungary                    1990s−2000s
              Switzerland           1980s−2000s      India                      1960s−2000s
              United Kingdom        1960s−2000s      Indonesia                  1960s−2000s
              United States         1960s−2000s      Israel                     1960s−2000s
                                                     Jordan                     1960s−2000s
                                                     Kazakhstan                 1990s−2000s
                                                     Kenya                      1960s−2000s
                                                     Korea, Rep.                1960s−2000s
                                                     Malaysia                   1960s−2000s
                                                     Mauritius                  1960s−2000s
                                                     Mexico                     1960s−2000s
                                                     Nigeria                    1960s−2000s
                                                     Pakistan                   1960s−2000s
                                                     Peru                       1980s−2000s
                                                     Philippines                1960s−2000s
                                                     Poland                     1990s−2000s
                                                     Romania                    1990s−2000s
                                                     Russian Federation         1990s−2000s
                                                     Senegal                    1970s−2000s
                                                     Slovak Republic            1990s−2000s
                                                     Slovenia                   1990s−2000s
                                                     South Africa               1960s−2000s
                                                     Sri Lanka                  1960s−2000s
                                                     Taiwan Province of China   1970s−2000s
                                                     Tanzania                   1960s−2000s
                                                     Thailand                   1960s−2000s
                                                     Trinidad and Tobago        1960s−2000s
                                                     Turkey                     1960s−2000s
                                                     Ukraine                    1990s−2000s
                                                     Uruguay                    1960s−2000s
                                                     Venezuela, RB              1960s−2000s
                                                     Vietnam                    1990s−2000s

Notes: This table reports the countries in the sample and the decades for which data are available for each
country.




                                                    48
                                            Table A2. Sectors

ISIC code     Sector Name                                                      αj        βj      γJ+1,j     ωj
    15        Food and Beverages                                              0.315    0.281     0.300     0.155
    16        Tobacco Products                                                0.264    0.520     0.527     0.026
    17        Textiles                                                        0.467    0.371     0.295     0.016
    18        Wearing Apparel, Fur                                            0.493    0.377     0.319     0.124
    19        Leather, Leather Products, Footwear                             0.485    0.359     0.329     0.025
    20        Wood Products (Excl. Furniture)                                 0.452    0.372     0.288     0.007
    21        Paper and Paper Products                                        0.366    0.344     0.386     0.010
    22        Printing and Publishing                                         0.484    0.469     0.407     0.005
    23        Coke, Refined Petroleum Products, Nuclear Fuel                  0.244    0.243     0.245     0.087
    24        Chemical and Chemical Products                                  0.308    0.373     0.459     0.006
    25        Rubber and Plastics Products                                    0.385    0.387     0.345     0.011
    26        Non-Metallic Mineral Products                                   0.365    0.459     0.479     0.076
    27        Basic Metals                                                    0.381    0.299     0.443     0.002
    28        Fabricated Metal Products                                       0.448    0.398     0.363     0.014
   29C        Office, Accounting, Computing, and Other Mach.                  0.473    0.390     0.388     0.070
   31A        Electrical Machinery, Communication Equipment                   0.405    0.380     0.416     0.041
    33        Medical, Precision, and Optical Instruments                     0.456    0.428     0.441     0.059
   34A        Transport Equipment                                             0.464    0.343     0.286     0.188
    36        Furniture and Other Manufacturing                               0.460    0.407     0.395     0.080
   4A         Nontradeables                                                   0.561    0.651     0.772

              Mean                                                            0.414    0.393     0.394     0.053
              Min                                                             0.244    0.243     0.245     0.002
              Max                                                             0.561    0.651     0.772     0.188

 Notes: This table reports the sectors used in the analysis. The classification corresponds to the ISIC Revision
 3 2-digit, aggregated further due to data availability. αj is the value-added based labor intensity; βj is the
 share of value added in total output; γJ+1,j is the share of nontradeable inputs in total intermediate inputs;
 ωj is the taste parameter for tradeable sector j, estimated using the procedure described in Section 3.2.
 Variable definitions and sources are described in detail in the text.




                                                       49
   Table A3. Country-by-Country Estimates of Relative Convergence, 1960s to 2000s
                Country                     β        s.e.   Obs.    R2     Speed of Convergence,
                                                                                by decade
                United Kingdom           -0.412**   0.186    19    0.258           0.133
                Austria                    -0.551   0.381    19    0.144           0.200
                Belgium-Luxembourg      -0.760***   0.136    19    0.608            0.356
                Denmark                 -0.695***   0.194    19    0.443            0.297
                France                  -0.817***   0.198    19    0.603            0.424
                Germany                 -0.644***   0.116    19    0.558            0.258
                Italy                   -0.532***   0.145    19    0.442            0.190
                Netherlands              -0.583**   0.219    19    0.295           0.219
                Norway                  -0.985***   0.137    19    0.725            1.047
                Sweden                  -0.668***   0.165    18    0.482            0.276
                Canada                     -0.147   0.230    19    0.016           0.040
                Japan                   -0.885***   0.164    18    0.698            0.540
                Finland                 -0.720***   0.166    19    0.641            0.318
                Greece                  -0.299***   0.086    19    0.318            0.089
                Iceland                   -0.425*   0.229    15    0.295            0.138
                Ireland                   -0.706*   0.335    19    0.274            0.306
                Portugal                -0.490***   0.146    19    0.352            0.168
                Spain                   -0.493***   0.102    19    0.558            0.170
                Turkey                  -0.445***   0.104    18    0.591           0.147
                Australia               -0.567***   0.150    19    0.499            0.209
                New Zealand              -0.247**   0.106    19    0.301            0.071
                South Africa               -0.014   0.229    18    0.000            0.004
                Bolivia                  -0.266**   0.102    17    0.260            0.077
                Chile                      -0.143   0.104    19    0.065            0.039
                Colombia                   -0.237   0.139    19    0.180           0.067
                Costa Rica              -0.511***   0.165    17    0.394            0.179
                Ecuador                 -0.245***   0.072    19    0.323            0.070
                El Salvador                -0.247   0.145    18    0.103           0.071
                Honduras                 -0.415**   0.167    17    0.288            0.134
                Mexico                   -0.462**   0.161    13    0.331            0.155
                Uruguay                  -0.319**   0.116    19    0.252            0.096
                Venezuela, RB           -0.401***   0.133    19    0.463            0.128
                Trinidad and Tobago        -0.191   0.376    17    0.034           0.053
                Israel                  -0.457***   0.147    18    0.302           0.153
                Jordan                   -0.476**   0.188    18    0.252            0.161
                Egypt, Arab Rep.         -0.299**   0.113    19    0.140            0.089
                Sri Lanka                   0.039   0.171    19    0.003           -0.009
                India                     -0.249*   0.126    19    0.153            0.072
                Indonesia               -0.590***   0.099    16    0.706            0.223
                Korea, Rep.             -0.688***   0.110    19    0.780            0.291
                Malaysia                -0.584***   0.121    19    0.421            0.219
                Pakistan                 -0.389**   0.147     8    0.343            0.123
                Philippines             -0.558***   0.185    19    0.382            0.204
                Thailand                -0.898***   0.268    14    0.541            0.571
                Ghana                       0.016   0.200    18    0.000           -0.004
                Kenya                      -0.047   0.144    17    0.005            0.012
                Mauritius                  -0.275   0.201    15    0.120            0.080
                Tanzania                -0.533***   0.162    12    0.410           0.190
                Fiji                      -0.299*   0.148    15    0.156            0.089

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered in parentheses; ***: significant at 1%; **: significant at 5%; *:
significant at 10%. This table reports the results of regressing the growth of estimated technology parameter
     1/θ
 Tnj      over the period from the 1960s to the 2000s on its initial value, by country. The speed of convergence,
per decade, is reported in the last column. Missing values are due to the convergence coefficient being larger
than 1.


                                                       50
                            Table A4. Comparison of Estimates of Tnj

   Method                             Mean      St. Dev.     Corr w/baseline             β        s.e.(β)

   Baseline                           0.737      0.275                ..            -0.517***     (0.044)

   Additional gravity                 0.728      0.270              0.999           -0.518***     (0.045)
   Poisson                            0.720      0.271              0.969           -0.534***     (0.046)
   imjnt in djnit                     0.527      0.240              0.890           -0.339***     (0.051)

   r:   Caselli-Feyrer                0.702      0.295              0.989           -0.487***     (0.046)
   r:   Euler                         0.694      0.265              0.954           -0.539***     (0.047)
   r:   Direct                        0.744      0.273              0.910           -0.541***     (0.145)
   r:   Fin. Integration              0.682      0.264              0.960           -0.519***     (0.046)

   Country-Specific IO                0.766      0.267              0.987           -0.480***     (0.042)
   Country-Specific IO, α, β          0.805      0.272              0.903           -0.646***     (0.043)

   θ=4                                0.726      0.352              0.942           -0.600***     (0.045)
   θ Sector-Specific                  0.749      0.350              0.870           -0.691***     (0.047)

Notes: This table the results of comparing the baseline estimates of Tnj to alternative estimation approaches.
                                                                                       1/θ
The first and second columns report the mean and the standard deviation of Tnj              relative to the US.
                                                                  j 1/θ
                                                                   
The third column reports the correlation between the baseline Tn         relative to the US and the alternative
estimate. The fourth and fifth columns report the coefficient and standard errors from estimating the
                                                  1/θ
convergence regression (10) using each set of Tnj      estimates.




                                                      51
                     Table A5. Zero Trade Observations: Model vs. Data

Sector Name                                                ISIC code      1960s    1970s     1980s    1990s   2000s

All Sectors Combined                                                      0.007    0.006     0.006    0.001   0.009

Food and Beverages                                              15        0.000    0.000     0.000    0.000   0.000
Tobacco Products                                                16        0.075    0.100     0.015    0.015   0.026
Textiles                                                        17        0.000    0.000     0.000    0.002   0.005
Wearing Apparel, Fur                                            18        0.011    0.015     0.000    0.000   0.004
Leather, Leather Products, Footwear                             19        0.011    0.016     0.028    0.001   0.031
Wood Products (Excl. Furniture)                                 20        0.001    0.000     0.000    0.000   0.013
Paper and Paper Products                                        21        0.000    0.000     0.000    0.000   0.005
Printing and Publishing                                         22        0.017    0.021     0.000    0.000   0.009
Coke, Refined Petroleum Products, Nuclear Fuel                  23        0.003    0.003     0.023    0.008   0.011
Chemical and Chemical Products                                  24        0.000    0.000     0.000    0.000   0.004
Rubber and Plastics Products                                    25        0.000    0.001     0.000    0.000   0.010
Non-Metallic Mineral Products                                   26        0.000    0.000     0.000    0.000   0.001
Basic Metals                                                    27        0.003    0.001     0.000    0.000   0.011
Fabricated Metal Products                                       28        0.000    0.000     0.036    0.000   0.020
Office, Accounting, Computing, and Other Mach.                 29C        0.001    0.000     0.000    0.000   0.013
Electrical Machinery, Communication Equipment                  31A        0.000    0.000     0.000    0.000   0.011
Medical, Precision, and Optical Instruments                     33        0.022    0.020     0.003    0.006   0.023
Transport Equipment                                            34A        0.012    0.000     0.005    0.000   0.011
Furniture and Other Manufacturing                               36        0.012    0.015     0.005    0.002   0.012

 Notes: This table reports the share of global absorption taken up by importer-exporter-sector observations
 for which actual imports are zero in the data.




                                                    52
                   Table A6. Comparison to Measured TFP from STAN Database


                                 Panel A: Sector-by-Sector Rank Correlations

 ISIC code          Sector Name                                                          Correlation      Countries
 15                 Food and Beverages                                                     0.8000            4
 16                 Tobacco Products                                                       1.0000            4
 17                 Textiles                                                               0.9000            5
 18                 Wearing Apparel, Fur                                                   0.1000            5
 19                 Leather, Leather Products, Footwear                                   -0.2000            5
 20                 Wood Products (Excl. Furniture)                                        0.4524            8
 21                 Paper and Paper Products                                               0.9429            6
 22                 Printing and Publishing                                                1.0000            6
 23                 Coke, Refined Petroleum Products, Nuclear Fuel                         0.6000            6
 24                 Chemical and Chemical Products                                         0.7500            7
 25                 Rubber and Plastics Products                                           0.8095            8
 26                 Non-Metallic Mineral Products                                          0.6833            9
 27                 Basic Metals                                                           0.6571            6
 28                 Fabricated Metal Products                                              0.9429            6
 29C                Office, Accounting, Computing, and Other Machinery                     0.8095            8
 31A                Electrical Machinery, Communication Equipment                          1.0000            5
 33                 Medical, Precision, and Optical Instruments                            0.7714            6
 34A                Transport Equipment                                                    0.4857            6
 36                 Furniture and Other Manufacturing                                      0.9000            5

                             Panel B: Fixed Effects Regression
                    (1)          (2)       (3)
 Dep. Var: Log Sectoral Productivity Implied by Sectoral Measured TFP
     1/θ
 log Tnj              0.656***         1.030***     0.532**
                       (0.126)          (0.126)      (0.228)

 Observations             115             115          115
 R-squared               0.137           0.556        0.885
 Partial ρ               0.370           0.349        0.084
 Sector FE                no              yes          yes
 Country FE               no              no           yes

Notes: This table reports the results of comparing the productivity estimates using the main procedure adopted in
                1/θ
the paper ( Tnj      ) with TFP estimated directly using production data from the OECD STAN database. Panel A
reports the Spearman rank correlations of the two alternative productivity measures by sector. Panel B reports the
                                                                                     1/θ
results of a fixed effects regression of directly measured TFP from STAN on Tnj           . In Panel B, robust standard
errors in parentheses; **: significant at 5%; ***: significant at 1%. “Partial ρ” is the partial correlation between the
right-hand side and the left-hand side variables, after netting out the fixed effects included in the column.




                                                         53
