                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        CREAM SKIMMING IN FINANCIAL MARKETS

                                            Patrick Bolton
                                             Tano Santos
                                         Jose A. Scheinkman

                                         Working Paper 16804
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16804


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2011




This article was previously circulated under the title "Is the Financial Sector too Big?" We thank seminar
participants at the London Business School, London School of Economics, Rutgers Business School,
MIT-Sloan, Bank of Spain, CEMFI, University of Virginia-McIntire, Washington University-Olin
Business School, and the 6th Banco de Portugal Conference on Monetary Economics for their feedback
and suggestions. We also thank Guido Lorenzoni for detailed comments. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Patrick Bolton, Tano Santos, and Jose A. Scheinkman. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Cream Skimming in Financial Markets
Patrick Bolton, Tano Santos, and Jose A. Scheinkman
NBER Working Paper No. 16804
February 2011
JEL No. G1,G14,G18,G2,G24,G28

                                             ABSTRACT

We propose an equilibrium occupational choice model, where agents can choose to work in the real
sector (become entrepreneurs) or to become informed dealers in financial markets. Agents incur costs
to become informed dealers and develop skills for valuing assets up for trade. The financial sector
comprises a transparent competitive exchange, where uninformed agents trade and an opaque over-the-counter
(OTC) market, where informed dealers offer attractive terms for the most valuable assets entrepreneurs
put up for sale. Thanks to their information advantage and valuation skills, dealers are able to provide
incentives to entrepreneurs to originate good assets. However, the opaqueness of the OTC market
allows dealers to extract informational rents from entrepreneurs. Trade in the OTC market imposes
a negative externality on the organized exchange, where only the less valuable assets end up for trade.
We show that in equilibrium the dealers' informational rents in the OTC market are too large and attract
too much talent to the financial industry.


Patrick Bolton                                      Jose A. Scheinkman
Columbia Business School                            Department of Economics
804 Uris Hall                                       Princeton University
New York, NY 10027                                  Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
and NBER                                            and NBER
pb2208@columbia.edu                                 joses@princeton.edu

Tano Santos
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 414
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
js1786@columbia.edu
1        Introduction

What does the ﬁnancial industry add to the real economy? What is the optimal organization
of ﬁnancial markets, and how much talent is required in the ﬁnancial industry? We revisit
these fundamental questions in light of recent events and criticisms of the ﬁnancial industry.
Most notably, the former chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, Paul Volcker, recently asked:

              How do I respond to a congressman who asks if the ﬁnancial sector in the United
          States is so important that it generates 40% of all the proﬁts in the country, 40%,
          after all of the bonuses and pay? Is it really a true reﬂection of the ﬁnancial sector
          that it rose from 2 12 % of value added according to GNP numbers to 6 21 % in the
          last decade all of a sudden? Is that a reﬂection of all your ﬁnancial innovation, or
          is it just a reﬂection of how much you pay? What about the eﬀect of incentives on
          all our best young talent, particularly of a numerical kind, in the United States?1
          [Wall Street Journal, December 14, 2009]

           The core issue underlying these questions is whether the ﬁnancial industry extracts
excessively high rents from the provision of ﬁnancial services, and whether these rents attract
too much young talent.2 In this paper we propose a new model of the ﬁnancial sector which is
segmented into two broad types of markets: on the one hand, there are organized, regulated,
standardized, and transparent markets, where most retail (‘plain vanilla’) transactions take
place, and on the other, there are informal, opaque, markets where informed (talented) dealers
provide ‘bespoke’ services to their clients. The opaqueness of prices and conditions of trade
characterize many, though certainly not all, over-the counter (OTC) markets and for brevity we
will refer to the set of opaque markets as OTC markets and to the transparent, standardized,
markets as organized exchanges. We argue that, while OTC markets provide indispensable
    1
        As Philippon (2008) points out this growth of the US ﬁnancial industry is not just a result of globalization of
ﬁnancial services as it starts before globalization. Moreover, the US is not a signiﬁcant net exporter of ﬁnancial
services.
   2
     Goldin and Katz (2008) document that the percentage of male Harvard graduates with positions in Finance
15 years after graduation tripled from the 1970 cohort to the 1990 cohort, largely at the expense of occupations
in law and medicine. We elaborate on this observation in Section 6 below.



                                                            1
valuation services to their clients, their opacity also allows informed dealers to extract too
high rents. What is more, OTC markets tend to undermine organized exchanges by “cream-
skimming” the juiciest deals away from them.
      Our model also allows for an endogenous occupational choice between a ﬁnancial and
a real sector. We show that the excessively high informational rents obtained by informed
dealers in the OTC markets tend to attract too much talent to the ﬁnancial industry.
      In our model, secondary market trading requires information about underlying asset
quality and valuation skills. When an entrepreneur is looking to sell assets or his ﬁrm in the
secondary market, the buyer must be able to determine the value of the assets that are up for
sale. This is where the talent employed in the ﬁnancial industry manifests itself. Informed
dealers in the OTC market are better able to determine the value of assets for sale and can
cream-skim the most valuable assets. Importantly, by identifying the most valuable assets and
by oﬀering more attractive terms for those assets than are available in the organized market,
informed dealers in the OTC market also provide incentives to entrepreneurs to originate good
assets. However, the central eﬃciency question for agents’ occupational choices between the
ﬁnancial and real sectors is what share of the incremental value of these good assets dealers
get to appropriate. Valuation skills in reality and in our model are costly to acquire and
generally scarce. This is why not all asset sales can take place in the OTC market. Those
assets that cannot be absorbed by the OTC market end up on the organized exchange. The
relative scarcity of informed capital in the OTC market is a key determinant of the size of the
information rents that are extracted by the ﬁnancial sector in equilibrium.
      The OTC market is an informal market where sellers of assets match with informed
dealers and negotiate terms bilaterally. In this market price oﬀers of dealers and negotiated
transactions are not disclosed. This is in contrast to organized markets, where all quotes and
transactions are posted. As a result of the scarcity of informed dealers and the opacity of the
OTC market, informed dealers are able to extract an informational rent from the entrepreneurs
selling the most valuable assets to them. Entrepreneurs with good assets can either sell their
asset in the organized market, where it gets pooled with all other assets and therefore will be
undervalued, or they can negotiate a better price with an informed dealer in the OTC market.



                                               2
         The cream-skimming activity of informed dealers imposes a negative price externality
on the organized market, as uninformed investors operating in this market understand that
they only get to buy an adversely selected pool of assets. This negative price externality in
turn weakens the bargaining position of entrepreneurs selling good assets in the OTC market,
as their threat-point of selling the asset in the organized market becomes less attractive.3
         This negative externality on organized markets is why our model generates a key counter-
intuitive comparative statics result: rent-extraction by informed dealers actually increases as
the OTC market expands. This is also the key reason why: i) there is excessive information
rent-extraction in the OTC market; and consequently, ii) the ﬁnancial OTC market attracts
too much talent.
         In our model human capital invested to become an informed dealer serves as much
to extract informational rents as to create social surplus (by incentivizing entrepreneurs to
originate good assets). We show that in any equilibrium in which there is a suﬃcient number
of informed dealers to provide incentives to entrepreneurs to originate good assets, there are in
fact too many informed dealers relatively to the social optimum. Our model thus helps explain
how excessive rent extraction and entry into the ﬁnancial industry can be an equilibrium
outcome, and why competition for rents doesn’t eliminate excessive rent extraction.
         The structure of the ﬁnancial industry, combining an opaque OTC market and an or-
ganized exchange is a key feature of our theory. Unlike models of informed trading in the
tradition of Grossman and Stiglitz (1980), in our model dealer information in the OTC market
is asset speciﬁc and cannot be reﬂected in a market price, as each transaction is an undis-
closed bilateral deal between the dealer and the seller of the asset. Therefore, when more
dealers compete in the OTC market, this does not result in more information being trans-
mitted through prices. On the contrary, more competition by informed dealers simply results
in more cream-skimming and more information rent extraction. As a result information is
   3
       Note that this form of cream-skimming is diﬀerent from the cream-skimming considered by Rothschild and
Stiglitz (1976) in insurance markets with adverse selection. In the insurance setting, insurers are uninformed
about risk types, but oﬀer insurance contracts that induce informed agents (in particular, low risk types) to self-
select into insurance contracts. For an application of the Rothschild-Stiglitz framework to competition among
organized exchanges see Santos and Scheinkman (2001).



                                                        3
overproduced instead of underproduced. Our highly stylized model can be seen as an allegory
of a general phenomenon in the ﬁnancial industry: informed parties have an incentive to trade
and remove themselves from organized markets.
         Indeed, this phenomenon is not just present in corporate equity and bond markets. It
is also a feature of derivatives, futures, and swaps markets.4 An interesting illustration in this
respect, is the coexistence of OTC forwards and futures contracts traded on exchanges. Why
don’t all future transactions take place on an organized futures market? The reason is as in our
model: transactions in forward markets are primarily between informed dealers and producers
who seek to hedge against spot-price movements. These producers typically represent a low
‘counterparty risk’ and therefore may be required to post lower initial margins by informed
OTC dealers than in the futures market. Moreover, by trading in the forwards market these
producers are also typically subject to lower margin calls when the spot price moves away from
the forward price. The reason is that informed dealers understand that (as long as they are not
over-hedged) producers actually beneﬁt from movements in spot price away from the forward
price and therefore do not give rise to higher counterparty risk. As a result, a substantial
portion of commodities production is hedged outside exchanges, via forward contracts with
banks and trading companies. These contracts give producers less favorable prices, but require
smaller margins. After doing due diligence to verify that a producer is not over-hedged, a bank
can feel conﬁdent that it will actually be better oﬀ if spot prices increase. This same bank
would most likely also engage in an opposite forward with a counterparty for whom buying
forwards would actually lower risk, and only hedge the net amount with futures contracts.
Thus, by demanding a uniform mark-to-market margin of all parties, be they speculators or
producers, exchanges induce a lower mix of producer-hedgers, and hence a riskier set of buyers
and sellers.
         Figure 1, which we take from Philippon and Resheﬀ (2008), plots the evolution of US
wages (relative to average non-farm wages) for three subsegments of the ﬁnance services in-
dustry: credit, insurance and ‘other ﬁnance.’ Credit refers to banks, savings and loans and
other similar institutions, insurance to life and P & C, and ‘other ﬁnance’ refers to the ﬁnan-
  4
      We provide an overview of these markets in relation to our ﬁndings in Section 6.




                                                        4
cial investment industry and investment banks. As the plot shows the bulk of the growth in
remuneration in the ﬁnancial industry took place in ‘other ﬁnance.’ An increasing fraction
of activities in ‘other ﬁnance’ takes place in opaque markets where information is particularly
valuable and the model in this paper argues that this opacity allows informed dealers to extract
excessively high rents.
      The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 outlines the model. Section 3 analyzes
entrepreneurs’ moral hazard in origination problem and describes some basic attributes of
equilibrium outcomes. The analysis of welfare and equilibrium allocation of talent in ﬁnancial
markets is undertaken in section 4. Section 5, in turn, considers the robustness of our main
results to the situation where informed dealers compete with each other. Finally, Section 6
oﬀers further discussion on the model as well as examples and applications. Section 7 concludes.
All proofs are in the Appendix.

Related Literature. In his survey of the literature on ﬁnancial development and growth,
Levine (2005) synthesizes existing theories of the role of the ﬁnancial industry into ﬁve broad
functions: 1) information production about investment opportunities and allocation of capital;
2) mobilization and pooling of household savings; 3) monitoring of investments and perfor-
mance; 4) ﬁnancing of trade and consumption; 5) provision of liquidity, facilitation of sec-
ondary market trading, diversiﬁcation, and risk management. As he highlights, most of the
models of the ﬁnancial industry focus on the ﬁrst three functions, and if anything, conclude
that from a social eﬃciency standpoint the ﬁnancial sector is too small: due to asymmetries
of information, and incentive or contract enforceability constraints, there is underinvestment
in equilibrium and ﬁnancial underdevelopment.
      In contrast to this literature, our model mainly emphasizes the ﬁfth function of the ﬁnan-
cial industry in Levine’s list: secondary market trading and liquidity provision. In addition,
where the ﬁnance and growth literature only distinguishes between bank-based and market-
based systems (e.g. Allen and Gale, 2000), a key departure of our model is the distinction we
draw between markets in which trading occurs at prices and conditions that are not observable
by other participants, and markets in which trading occurs under prices and conditions that




                                               5
are observed by all potential participants.5
          Our paper contributes to a small literature on the optimal allocation of talent to the
ﬁnancial industry. An early theory by Murphy, Shleifer and Vishny (1991) (see also Baumol,
1990) builds on the idea of increasing returns to ability and rent seeking in a two-sector model
to show that there may be ineﬃcient equilibrium occupational outcomes, where too much
talent enters one market since the marginal private returns from talent could exceed the social
returns. More recently, Philippon (2008) has proposed an occupational choice model where
agents can choose to become workers, ﬁnanciers or entrepreneurs. The latter originate projects
which have a higher social than private value, and need to obtain funding from ﬁnanciers.
In general, as social and private returns from investment diverge it is optimal in his model
to subsidize entrepreneurship. Neither the Murphy et al. (1991) nor the Philippon (2008)
models distinguish between organized exchanges and OTC markets in the ﬁnancial sector,
nor do they allow for excessive informational rent extraction through cream-skimming. In
independent work Glode, Green and Lowery (2010) also model the idea of excessive investment
in information as a way of strengthening a party’s bargaining power. However, Glode et al.
(2010) do not consider the occupational choice question of whether too much young talent is
attracted towards the ﬁnancial industry. Finally, our paper relates to the small but burgeoning
literature on OTC markets, which, to a large extent, has focused on the issue of ﬁnancial
intermediation in the context of search models.6 These papers have some common elements to
ours, in particular the emphasis on bilateral bargaining when thinking about OTC markets,
but their focus is on the liquidity of these markets and they do not address issues of cream-
skimming or occupational choice.
   5
       The literature comparing bank-based and market-based ﬁnancial systems focuses on the relative risk-sharing
eﬃciency of the two systems. It argues that bank-based systems can oﬀer superior forms of risk sharing, but
that they are undermined by competition from securities markets (see Jacklin, 1987, Diamond, 1997, and Fecht,
2004). This literature does not explore the issue of misallocation of talent to the ﬁnancial sector, whether
bank-based or market-based.
   6
     See Duﬃe, Garleanu and Pedersen (2005), Vayanos and Wang (2007), Vayanos and Weill (2008), Lagos and
Rocheteau (2009), Lagos, Rocheteau and Weill (2010) and Afonso (2010).




                                                         6
2        The model

We consider a competitive economy divided into two sectors–a real, productive, sector and a
ﬁnancial sector–and three periods t = 0, 1, 2.


2.1        Agents

There is a continuum of risk-neutral, agents who can be of two diﬀerent types. Type 1 agents,
of which there is a large measure, are uninformed rentiers, who start out in period 0 with
a given endowment ω (their savings), which they consume in either period 1 or 2. Their
preferences are represented by the utility function

                                               u (c1 , c2 ) = c1 + c2 ,                             (1)

Type 2 agents form the active population. Each type 2 agent can work either as a (self-
employed) entrepreneur in the real sector, or as a dealer in the ﬁnancial sector. Type 2 agents
make an occupational choice decision in period 0.
           We simplify the model by assuming that all type 2 agents start in period 0 with the
same unit endowment, ω = 1, have the same preferences over consumption, face the same
idiosyncratic liquidity shocks in period 1, and are equally able entrepreneurs. Type 2 agents
can only diﬀer in their ability to become well-informed dealers. Speciﬁcally, we represent the
mass of type 2 agents by the unit interval [0, 1] and order these agents d ∈ [0, 1] in increasing
order of the costs they face of acquiring the human capital to become well informed dealers:
φ(d). That is, we assume that φ(d) is non-decreasing. In addition we assume that there exists
a d < 1 such that
                                                 lim φ(d) = +∞.                                     (2)
                                                d−→d

Hence agents d ≥ d¯ always stay in the real sector.

           In all other respects, type 2 agents are identical:

    1. They face the same i.i.d. liquidity shocks: they value consumption only in period 1
          with probability π and only in period 2 with probability (1 − π).7 Their preferences are
    7
        Our main results are robust to assuming that the liquidity shocks depend on the activity.


                                                          7
        represented by the utility function

                                          U (c1 , c2 ) = δ 1 c1 + (1 − δ)c2 ,                             (3)

        where δ ∈ {0, 1} is an indicator variable and prob (δ = 1) = π.

   2. If a type 2 agent chooses to work in the real sector as an entrepreneur, he invests his unit
        endowment in a project in period 0. He then manages the project more or less well by
        choosing a hidden action a ∈ {al , ah } at private eﬀort cost ψ(a), where 0 < al < ah ≤ 1.
        If he chooses a = al then his eﬀort cost ψ(al ) is normalized to zero, but he is then only
        able to generate a high output γρ with probability al (and a low output ρ with probability
        (1 − al )), where ρ ≥ 1 and γ > 1. If he chooses the high eﬀort a = ah , then his eﬀort
        cost is ψ(ah ) = ψ > 0, but he then generates a high output γρ with probability ah . We
        assume, of course, that it is eﬃcient for an entrepreneur to choose eﬀort ah :

                                 (γ − 1)ρ∆a > ψ            where      ∆a = ah − al .

        The output of the project is obtained only in period 2. Thus, if the entrepreneur learns
        that he wants to consume in period 1 (δ = 1) he needs to sell claims to the output of
        his project in a ﬁnancial market to either patient dealers, who are happy to consume in
        period 2, or rentiers, who are indiﬀerent as to when they consume. For simplicity, we
        assume that in period 1 entrepreneurs have no information, except the eﬀort they applied,
        concerning the eventual output of their project. Note also that patient entrepreneurs have
        no output in period 1 that they could trade with impatient entrepreneurs.

   3. If type 2 agent d chooses to work in the ﬁnancial sector as a dealer, he saves his unit
        endowment to period 1, but incurs a utility cost φ(d) to build up human capital in period
        0. This human capital gives agent d the skills to value assets originated by entrepreneurs
        and that are up for sale in period 1. Speciﬁcally, we assume that a dealer is able to per-
        fectly ascertain the output of any asset in period 2, so that dealers are perfectly informed.
        If dealers learn that they are patient (δ = 0) they use their endowment, together with any
        collateralized borrowing, to purchase assets for sale by impatient entrepreneurs.8 If they
  8
      By assuming that informed dealers know precisely the quality of the projects and entrepreneurs only know
the eﬀort they applied we are simplifying the asymmetric information problem.


                                                       8
         learn that they are impatient they simply consume their unit endowment. For simplicity
         in what follows we assume that patient dealers can only acquire one unit of the asset at
         date 1.9


2.2       Financial Markets

An innovation of our model is to allow for a dual ﬁnancial system, in which assets can be traded
either in an over-the-counter (OTC) dealer market or in an organized exchange. Information
about asset values resides in the OTC market, where informed dealers negotiate asset sales on
a bilateral basis with entrepreneurs. On the organized exchange assets are only traded between
uninformed rentiers and entrepreneurs. We also allow for a debt market where borrowing and
lending in the form of default-free collateralized loans can take place. In this market a loan
can be secured against an entrepreneur’s asset. Since the lowest value of this asset is ρ, the
default-free loan can be at most equal to ρ.
         Thus, in period 1 an impatient entrepreneur has several options: i) he can borrow
against his asset; ii) he can go to the organized exchange and sell his asset for the competitive
equilibrium price p; iii) he can go to a dealer in the OTC market and negotiate a sale for a
price pd .
         Consider ﬁrst the OTC market. This market is composed of a measure d(1 − π) of
patient dealers ready to buy assets from the mass (1 − d)π of impatient entrepreneurs. Each
of the dealers is able to trade a total output of at most 1 + ρ, his endowment plus a maximum
collateralized loan from rentiers of ρ, in exchange for claims on entrepreneurs’ output in period
2. Impatient entrepreneurs turn to dealers for their information: they are the only agents that
are able to tell whether the entrepreneur’s asset is worth γρ or just ρ. Just as in Grossman
and Stiglitz (1980), dealers’ information must be in scarce supply in equilibrium, as dealers
must be compensated for their cost φ(d) of acquiring their valuation skills. As will become
clear below, this means not only that dealers only purchase high quality assets worth γρ in
equilibrium, but also that not all entrepreneurs with high quality assets will be able to sell to
a dealer.
   9
       This can be justiﬁed by assuming that searching and managing assets demands the dealers time.




                                                       9
         In period 1 a dominant strategy for impatient entrepreneurs is to attempt to ﬁrst ap-
proach a dealer. They understand that with probability a ∈ {al , ah } the underlying value of
their asset is high, in which case they are able to negotiate a sale with a dealer at price pd > p
with probability m ∈ [0, 1]. If they are not able to sell their asset for price pd to a dealer,
entrepreneurs can turn to the organized market in which they can sell their asset for p.
         We show that in equilibrium only patient dealers and impatient entrepreneurs trade in
the OTC market. We thus assume that the probability m is simply given by the ratio of the
total mass of patient dealers d(1 − π) to the total mass of high quality assets up for sale by
impatient entrepreneurs, which in a symmetric equilibrium where all entrepreneurs choose the
same eﬀort level a is given by a(1 − d)π, so that

                                                        d(1 − π)
                                           m(a, d) =             .                                      (4)
                                                       a(1 − d)π

Note that m(a, d) < 1 as long as d is suﬃciently small and π is suﬃciently large.10 The idea
behind this assumption is, ﬁrst that any individual dealer is only able to manage one project
at a time, and/or to muster enough ﬁnancing to buy only one high quality asset. Second, in a
symmetric equilibrium the probability of a sale of an asset to a dealer is then naturally given
by the proportion of patient dealers to high quality assets.
         The price pd at which a sale is negotiated between a dealer and an entrepreneur is
the outcome of bargaining (under symmetric information). The price pd has to exceed the
status-quo price p in the organized market at which the entrepreneur can always sell his asset.
Similarly, the dealer cannot be worse oﬀ than under no trade, when his payoﬀ is 1, so that
the price cannot be greater than the value of the asset γρ. We take the solution to this
bargaining game to be given by the Asymmetric Nash Bargaining Solution,11 where the dealer
has bargaining power (1 − κ) and the entrepreneur has bargaining power κ (see Nash, 1950,
  10
       The assumption is formally made in expression (6) below.
  11
       For a similar approach to modeling negotiations in OTC markets between dealers and clients see Lagos,
Rocheteau, and Weill (2010).




                                                      10
1953).12 That is, the price pd is given by

                                   pd = arg max {(s − p)κ (γρ − s)(1−κ) },
                                             s∈[p,γρ]

or
                                              pd = κγρ + (1 − κ)p.

In a more explicit, non-cooperative bargaining game, with alternating oﬀers between the dealer
and entrepreneur à la Rubinstein (1982), the bargaining strength κ of the entrepreneur can
be thought of as arising from a small probability per round of oﬀers that the entrepreneur
is hit by an immediacy shock and needs to trade immediately (before hearing back from the
dealer) by selling his asset in the organized market. In that case the dealer would miss out on
a valuable trade. To avoid this outcome the dealer would then be prepared to make a price
concession to get the entrepreneur to agree to trade before this immediacy shock occurs (see
Binmore, Rubinstein and Wolinsky, 1986).13
          The price pd may be higher than the dealer’s endowment. In that case the dealer needs
to borrow the diﬀerence (pd − 1) against the asset to be acquired. As long as this diﬀerence
does not exceed ρ, the dealer will not be ﬁnancially constrained. For simplicity, we restrict
attention to parameter values for which the dealer is not ﬁnancially constrained. We provide
a condition below that ensures that this is the case.14
          Consider next the organized exchange. We show that in equilibrium all assets of impa-
tient entrepreneurs that are not sold in the OTC market trade. That is, (1 − a)(1 − d)π low
quality assets and (1 − m)a(1 − d)π high quality assets are sold in the exchange. The buyers
  12
       In Section 5 we show that our results are robust to assuming that the bargaining power of dealers decreases
with the number of dealers.
  13
     Symmetrically, there may also be a small immediacy shock aﬀecting the dealer, so that the entrepreneur
also wants to make concessions in negotiating an asset sale. Indeed, when a dealer is hit by such a shock the
matched entrepreneur is unlikely to be able to ﬁnd another dealer. More precisely, if θ is the probability per
unit time that an entrepreneur or dealer is hit by an immediacy shock, and if α denotes the probability of
an entrepreneur subsequently matching with another informed dealer then Binmore, Rubinstein and Wolinsky
show that κ = α.
  14
     Note that the possibility that the dealer may be ﬁnancially constrained may be another source of bargaining
strength for the dealer. Exploring this idea, however, is beyond the scope of this paper.



                                                         11
of assets are uninformed rentiers, who are unable to distinguish high quality from low quality
assets. Entrepreneurs also do not know the true underlying quality of their assets. All rentiers
and entrepreneurs can ascertain is the expected value of the assets traded in the exchange,
                                     a(1 − m)γρ + (1 − a)ρ
                                                           ,
                                       a(1 − m) + (1 − a)
so that the competitive equilibrium price in the organized exchange is given by
                              a(1 − m)γρ + (1 − a)ρ   ρ[a(1 − m)γ + (1 − a)]
                 p (a, d) =                         =                        ,                (5)
                                a(1 − m) + (1 − a)            1 − am
where we have omitted the dependence of m on a and d, as in (4), for simplicity. Note also
that p is decreasing in m, from the highest price p = ρ[a(γ − 1) + 1] when m = 0 to the lowest
price p = ρ when m = 1.


2.3   Timing

To summarize, the timing in the model is as follows:

  1. Type 1 agents (rentiers): Without loss of generality we adopt the convention that they
      consume all their endowment in period 2. That is, those rentiers who did not purchase
      any assets from entrepreneurs consume their endowment ω. Those who did purchase
      assets from entrepreneurs consume ω + (γρ − p) if they were lucky to end up with a high
      quality asset, or ω + (ρ − p) if they were unlucky and purchased a bad quality asset.

  2. Type 2 agents: Dealers and entrepreneurs

      (a) In period 0, type 2 agents choose between the occupations of entrepreneur or dealer.
           Dealers incur a personal cost φ(d) of becoming informed dealers, and entrepreneurs
           use their endowment to invest in a project and also choose an eﬀort level a ∈
           {al , ah }. Let dˆ be a type 2 agent with cost φ(d)
                                                            ˆ of becoming a dealer, then under

           our assumption that φ(d) is non-decreasing, if agent dˆ prefers to become a dealer
                                   ˆ also prefer to become dealers.
           then all agents d ∈ [0, d]

      (b) At the beginning of period 1 liquidity shocks are realized and type 2 agents learn
           whether they are patient or impatient. At the same time the underlying value of
           the assets originated by entrepreneurs is determined.

                                               12
      (c) All impatient dealers then consume their endowment, and all impatient entrepreneurs
           seek out a patient dealer to sell their asset to. All patient dealers eventually end
           up matching with an entrepreneur with a high quality asset. They pay pd =
           κγρ + (1 − κ)p for the asset and matched entrepreneurs go on to consume pd .
                                                                 {         }
           Patient dealers can borrow from rentiers an amount max pd − 1, 0 < ρ against
           this asset. The impatient entrepreneurs who do not match with a patient dealer,
           put their asset for sale in the organized exchange at price p given in equation (5)
           and consume p.

      (d) Patient dealers consume their net claim to period 2 output γρ − (pd − 1). As for
           patient entrepreneurs, we will show that along the equilibrium path they hold on to
           the asset they originated in period 0 until maturity and then consume the asset’s
           output. Their expected consumption is then ρ[a(γ − 1) + 1].


2.4   Discussion and parameter restrictions

Our model of the interaction between the real and ﬁnancial sector emphasizes the liquidity
provision and valuation roles of the ﬁnancial industry. It downplays the ﬁnancing role of real
investments. This role, which is emphasized in other work (e.g. Bernanke and Gertler, 1989
and Holmstrom and Tirole, 1997) can be added, by letting entrepreneurs borrow from either
rentiers or dealers at date 0. The assets entrepreneurs sell in period 1 would then be net of
any liabilities incurred at date 0. Since the external ﬁnancing of real investments in period 0
does not add any novel economic eﬀects in our model we have suppressed it.
      The key interaction between the ﬁnancial and real sectors in our model is in the incentives
provided to entrepreneurs to choose high eﬀort ah when dealers are able to identify high quality
assets and oﬀer to pay more for these assets than entrepreneurs are able to get in the organized
market. The social value of dealer information lies here. If it were not for these positive
incentive eﬀects, informed dealers would mostly play a parasitical role in our economy. They
would enrich themselves thanks to their cream-skimming activities in OTC markets but they
would not create any net social surplus.
      We have introduced ex-ante heterogeneity among type 2 agents only in the form of dif-


                                               13
ferent utility costs in acquiring information to become a dealer. We could also, or alternatively,
have introduced heterogeneity in the costs of becoming an entrepreneur. Nothing substantive
would be added by introducing this other form of heterogeneity. We would then simply order
type 2 agents in their increasing comparative advantage of becoming dealers and proceed with
the analysis as in our current model. For simplicity we have therefore suppressed this added
form of heterogeneity.
      As we have argued above, we shall restrict attention to parameter values for which the
measure of patient dealers is smaller than the measure of high quality assets put on the market
by impatient entrepreneurs in period 1, so that

                                     d(1 − π)
                         m(a, d) =             <1      for    a ∈ {al , ah },                   (6)
                                     a(1 − d)π

where, recall, d is deﬁned in expression (2). Under this assumption dealers are always on the
short side in the OTC market, which is partly why they are able to extract informational
rents. Although it is possible to extend the analysis to situations where m ≥ 1, this does not
seem to be the empirically plausible parameter region, given the high rents in the ﬁnancial
sector. When m ≥ 1 there is excess demand by informed dealers for good assets, so that
dealers dissipate most of their informational rent through competition for good assets. Besides
the fact that information may be too costly to acquire for most type 2 agents, there is a
fundamental economic reason why m < 1 is to be expected in equilibrium. Indeed, even if
enough type 2 agents have low costs φ(d) so that if all of these agents became dealers we
would have m ≥ 1, this is unlikely to happen in equilibrium, as dealers would then compete
away their informational rents to the point where they would not be able to recoup even their
relatively low investment in dealer skills φ(d).
      We also restrict attention to parameter values for which dealers are not ﬁnancially con-
strained in their purchase of a high quality asset in period 1. That is, we shall restrict ourselves
to parameter values for which pd − 1 ≤ ρ. For this it is enough to assume that

                                           γρ ≤ 1 + ρ.                                          (7)

      In addition, and in order to simplify the presentation in what follows, we restrict ourselves
to situations where even in the absence of dealer sector, d = 0, type 2 agents would prefer to

                                                14
become entrepreneurs and exercise the low eﬀort rather than simply carry their endowments
forward. We show in the appendix that to obtain this it is enough to assume that

                                      ρ [1 + al (γ − 1)] ≥ 1.                                 (8)


2.5   Deﬁnition of equilibrium

A general equilibrium in our economy is given by: (i) prices p∗ and pd∗ in period 1 at which
the organized and OTC markets clear; (ii) occupational choices by type 2 agents in period 0,
which map into equilibrium measures of dealers d∗ and entrepreneurs (1 − d∗ ); (iii) incentive
compatible eﬀort choices a∗ by entrepreneurs, which in turn map into an equilibrium matching
probability m(a∗ , d∗ ); and (iv) type 2 agents prefer the equilibrium occupational choices rather
than autarchy.
      For simplicity, we restrict attention to symmetric equilibria in which all entrepreneurs
choose the same eﬀort in period 0. Given this assumption our economy admits two types
of equilibria, which may co-exist. One is a low-origination-eﬀort equilibrium, in which all
entrepreneurs choose a∗ = al . The other is a high-origination-eﬀort equilibrium, in which
all entrepreneurs choose a∗ = ah . This latter equilibrium is going to be the focus of what
follows as it is only in this equilibrium that there is a social role for dealers. The main result
of this paper is that whenever there is a role for informed dealers to support the high eﬀort
equilibrium there are “too many of them,” in a sense to be made precise below. In what follows
we sometimes refer to d∗ as the size of the ﬁnancial sector and thus when there are too many
dealers we say that the ﬁnancial sector is too big.
      We begin by describing equilibrium borrowing and trading in assets in period 1, for any
given occupation choices d∗ of type 2 agents and any given action choices a∗ of entrepreneurs
in period 0. We are then able to characterize expected payoﬀs in period 0 for type 2 agents
under each occupation. With this information we can then provide conditions for the existence
of either equilibrium and present illustrative numerical examples.




                                                15
3     Equilibrium payoﬀs and the moral hazard problem

There are two optimization problems in our model. The ﬁrst is the occupational choice problem
of type 2 agents. The second is the eﬀort choice problem of entrepreneurs in period 0. In this
section we derive the equilibrium payoﬀs associated with becoming and entrepreneur and a
dealer, which determine the occupational choice. For this we ﬁrst need to oﬀer a minimal
characterization of agents’s actions along the equilibrium path at date 1, when trading occurs.
In our framework we allow for collateralized lending at the interim date and thus the question
arises as to whether agents in distress prefer to borrow rather than sell. We show in Lemma 1
that this is not the case. We also show that a patient entrepreneur that follows the equilibrium
action prefers to keep his asset rather than sell it (Lemma 2). These two results are enough to
yield the equilibrium expected payoﬀs, as of date 0, of either becoming and entrepreneur or a
dealer. We then turn to the characterization of the entrepreneurs’ moral hazard problem at date
0 and show conditions under which the high and low eﬀort actions are incentive compatible.


3.1    Equilibrium borrowing and asset trading in period 1

Before characterizing the equilibrium occupational choices of type 2 agents in period 0 we
begin by describing behavior in period 1 in either the low or the high eﬀort equilibrium. In
period 1, d∗ , a∗ and, m(a∗ , d∗ ) are given. For any (a∗ , d∗ ) we are able to establish the following
ﬁrst lemma.

 Lemma 1 In period 1 neither (a) an entrepreneur, nor (b) an impatient dealer ever borrows.

      The most interesting result of the lemma is that impatient entrepreneurs are better oﬀ
selling their assets than to borrow against their asset to ﬁnance their consumption. This result
follows immediately from our assumption that only safe collateralized borrowing is available to
the entrepreneur. But this result holds more generally, even when risky borrowing is allowed.
Indeed, in an asset sale the buyer obtains both the upside and the downside of the asset, while
in a loan the lender is fully exposed to the downside, but only partially shares in the upside
with the borrower. As a result the loan amount is always less than the price of the asset. And



                                                  16
since the holder of the asset wants to maximize consumption in period 1 he is always better
oﬀ selling the asset rather than borrowing against it.
      While impatient entrepreneurs always prefer to sell their asset in period 1, the next
lemma establishes that patient entrepreneurs never want to sell their asset.

 Lemma 2 Assume all entrepreneurs choose the same action. Then a patient entrepreneur
      (weakly) prefers not to put up his asset for sale in period 1.


3.2   Equilibrium payoﬀs in period 0

We are now in a position to determine equilibrium payoﬀs for dealers and entrepreneurs in
period 0, that is the expected payoﬀ of, for example, an entrepreneur that chooses the equi-
librium action. Given our focus on the occupational choice of type 2 agents, we characterize
these expected payoﬀ functions as a function of the measure of dealers d. Since we examine
incentive compatible symmetric equilibria, all entrepreneurs are treated identically; only deal-
ers can diﬀer since they may have diﬀerent costs of acquiring information. Let U (a|a′ , d) be
the expected payoﬀ of the entrepreneur who implements action a when all other entrepreneurs
                                                      (        )
                                                        e ′ , d the expected payoﬀ of dealer
do a′ and the measure of dealers is d. Similarly let V d|a
de ≤ d when entrepreneurs implement action a′ and the measure of dealers is d.
      The entrepreneur’s equilibrium expected payoﬀ when the measure of dealers is d is
                                    [                                                          ]
       U (a∗ |a∗ , d) = −ψ (a∗ ) + π a∗ m (a∗ , d) pd (a∗ , d) + (1 − a∗ m (a∗ , d)) p (a∗ , d)       (9)

                                  + (1 − π)ρ [1 + a∗ (γ − 1)]

where recall that

                                                               ρ[a∗ (1 − m (a∗ , d))γ + (1 − a∗ )]
  pd (a∗ , d) = κγρ + (1 − κ) p (a∗ , d)   with p (a∗ , d) =                                         (10)
                                                                        1 − a∗ m (a∗ , d)

and m (a∗ , d) is given by
                                                      d (1 − π)
                                      m (a∗ , d) =                .                                  (11)
                                                     a∗ (1 − d) π
      In expression (9) the ﬁrst term, −ψ (a∗ ), is the cost of exercising eﬀort a∗ , which is 0 if
a∗ = al and ψ if a∗ = ah . The ﬁrst term in brackets is the utility of the entrepreneur if subject to
a liquidity shock, which happens with probability π. If he draws a project yielding γρ, which

                                                  17
occurs with probability a∗ , and gets matched to a dealer, which happens with probability
m (a∗ , d), then he is able to sell the project for pd (a∗ , d), the price for high quality projects
in the dealers’ market. If one of these two things does not occur, an event with probability
1 − a∗ m (a∗ , d), then the agent needs to sell his project in the uninformed exchange for a price
p (a∗ , d). Finally, the second term in brackets is the utility of the entrepreneur conditional
on not receiving a liquidity shock. The expressions for the prices and matching probabilities
as a function of the measure of dealers for a given equilibrium level of eﬀort a∗ are given in
expressions (10) and (11), respectively.


      Notice that all entrepreneurs have identical expected utility. This is not the case with
dealers as we have assumed that the only source of ex-ante cross sectional heterogeneity is in
                                         (        )
                                           e ∗ , d the expected utility of the dealer de ≤ d as
the costs of acquiring information. Let V d|a
a function of the measure of dealers d. Then
                    (        )    ( )
                      e ∗ , d = −φ de + 1 + (1 − π)(1 − κ)(ργ − p (a∗ , d)).
                   V d|a                                                                       (12)

                                e is agent d’s
      The ﬁrst term in (12), −φ(d),        e cost of acquiring information, the second is

the agent’s endowment and the third is the surplus that the dealer obtains in the absence of
a liquidity shock, which happens with probability 1 − π, as in this case the agent captures
a fraction 1 − κ of the diﬀerence between the good asset’s payoﬀ, γρ and the price at which
assets trade in the exchange, p (a∗ , d).
                                                                               (           )
      The next proposition provides a characterization of both U (a∗ , d) and V a∗ , d | de as a
function of the measure of dealers d. The payoﬀ functions are depicted in Figure 2.

 Proposition 3 (a) The utility of an entrepreneur is a decreasing and concave function of the
      measure of dealers, d, and (b) the utility of dealer de is an increasing and convex function
      of the measure of dealers, d.

      To better understand the previous proposition it is useful to consider ﬁrst the following
result, which is immediate,

 Proposition 4 (a) The matching probability m(a, d) is an increasing and convex function of


                                                18
     the measure of dealers and (b) the price in the uninformed exchange p(a, d) is a decreasing
     and concave function of the measure of dealers; moreover p (al , d) < p (ah , d).

      (a) is obvious: The larger the measure of dealers the more likely the fewer remaining
entrepreneurs are to be matched with some dealer. (b) is at the heart of our paper. As the
number of dealers increases entrepreneurs with good projects are more likely to get matched
with some dealer. This can only come at the expense of worsening the pool of assets ﬂowing
into the uninformed exchange, which leads to lower prices there. In other words, dealers in
the OTC market cream skim the good assets and thereby impose a negative externality on the
organized market. Cream skimming thus improves terms for dealers in the OTC market and
worsens them for entrepreneurs in distress.
      The intuition behind Proposition 3 follows from the previous logic. Start with the dealers’
expected payoﬀs. The larger their measure, the lower the price of the asset in the uninformed
exchange and thus the higher the surplus that accrues to them, (1 − κ) (γρ − p (a∗ , d)) when
they acquire high quality assets from entrepreneurs in distress at date 1. This results in
an increasing expected payoﬀ for the dealers as a function of d, holding ﬁxed the action of
entrepreneurs. The additional rents that accrue to dealers when their measure increases can
only come at the expense of the entrepreneurial rents. It follows that the entrepreneur’s
expected payoﬀ is a decreasing function of d.
      That the entrepreneur’s expected payoﬀ is a decreasing function of d is a more subtle
result than it may appear at ﬁrst. Indeed notice that an increase in the number of dealers has
two eﬀects on the utility of the entrepreneurs. On the one hand, if a good project is drawn, the
probability of being matched with an informed dealer goes up, which beneﬁts the entrepreneur
as he obtains a better price from the dealer than from the exchange. But an increase in the
number of dealers results in more cream skimming and thus in lower prices in the uninformed
exchange and thus what dealers are willing to bid for the asset in the OTC market, which,
of course hurts all entrepreneurs in distress, whether they get matched or not. Proposition 3
establishes that the latter eﬀect overwhelms the ﬁrst positive eﬀect yielding a decreasing utility
for the entrepreneur as a function of the measure of dealers in the economy, which is precisely
because of the larger rents that dealers capture due to cream skimming as d goes up. This


                                                19
result captures somewhat the populist sentiment of Main street towards Wall street as a large
ﬁnancial sector can only come at the expense of the proﬁts of entrepreneurs.
         Finally we note another interesting implication of our model, which is that dealers also
prefer dealing in market equilibria with low quality origination of assets. The reason is that
for a given number of dealers, the price in the exchange is lower the lower the proportion of
good projects generated, as the same amount of cream skimming results in fewer good projects
ﬂowing into the exchange. Thus if dealers could induce more bad asset origination, they would
do so.
         The reader may have the impression that dealers serve no welfare enhancing purpose in
our framework, but this is not the case. As we will show next, a strictly positive measure of
dealers is needed to support the high eﬀort. If it were not for the positive incentive eﬀects
of cream skimming in OTC markets on entrepreneurs, informed dealers would mostly play a
parasitical role in our economy. They would enrich themselves by helping entrepreneurs with
good assets get a better price, but they would not create any net social surplus. We turn next
then to the moral hazard problems at t = 0 and the role of OTC markets in relieving these
moral hazard problems.


3.3      Entrepreneur moral hazard

Consider an entrepreneur in period 0 who has made his physical investment and is deciding
whether to choose the low eﬀort al or the high eﬀort ah . This entrepreneur is looking forward
to what may happen in periods 1 and 2 when facing this decision, and this in turn depends
on what all other entrepreneurs are rationally expected to do. That is, the market outcome in
period 1 depends on whether ﬁnancial markets expect entrepreneurs to choose action al or ah .
         A necessary condition for any symmetric equilibrium then is that it is incentive compatible
for entrepreneurs to choose the equilibrium eﬀort, that is,

                             U (a∗ |a∗ , d) ≥ U (a|a∗ , d)   for   a ̸= a∗ .                   (13)

         Throughout we write Uh (d) for the equilibrium expected payoﬀ of the entrepreneur
along the high eﬀort equilibrium path as a function of d and denote by Uhl (d) the utility of


                                                     20
the entrepreneur that deviates and implements action al instead of ah , that is,

                     Uh (d) = U (ah |ah , d)    and      Uhl (d) = U (al |ah , d),

where the subscript hl refers to the payoﬀ from a deviation from ah to al . A similar notation
simpliﬁcation applies when a∗ = al .
      Consider ﬁrst incentive compatibility in the high eﬀort equilibrium, where all entrepreneurs
choose ah . Recall that the entrepreneur’s expected payoﬀ in period 0 when choosing eﬀort ah
in the high eﬀort equilibrium as a function of the measure of dealers is given by:
                 [                                          ]
  Uh (d) = −ψ + π ah mh (d) pdh (d) + (1 − ah mh (d)) ph (d) + (1 − π)ρ [1 + ah (γ − 1)] ,      (14)

where pdh (d), ph (d) and mh (d) refer to the prices and matching probabilities.
      Suppose now that an entrepreneur chooses to deviate in period 0 by choosing the low
eﬀort al . In this case, as Proposition A in the appendix states, it is optimal for this entrepreneur
to put his asset for sale in the OTC market even when he is not hit by a liquidity shock. Indeed
assume that this is the case. If the entrepreneur receives a bid from one of the informed dealers
he rationally infers he has a good asset, refuses the bid and instead carries it to maturity. If
instead he does not receive a bid it may be because he drew a good project but did not get
matched to a dealer or because the project is indeed bad and thus dealers do not bid for it. In
either case the agents lowers his posterior on the quality of his asset. This private valuation is
always below the average quality of projects ﬂowing to the uninformed exchange. The reason
is that this pool is relatively good, even when there is substantial cream skimming, as the
rest of the entrepreneurs implement the high eﬀort. Thus, the shirking entrepreneur if not
found by a dealer, sells at the exchange, hiding behind the better projects of entrepreneurs
that chose high eﬀort. More formally, Proposition A shows that the payoﬀ of an entrepreneur
that deviates to the low eﬀort when the measure of dealers is given by d is,

                    Uhl (d) = ph (d) + al mh (d) (γρ − ph (d)) (πκ + (1 − π)) .                 (15)

      If the measure of dealers is d then high eﬀort is incentive compatible if, and only if,
Uh (d) ≥ Uhl (d). Denote by ∆Uh (d) the diﬀerence in expected monetary payoﬀs, not account-
ing for the eﬀort cost ψ, from the high versus the low eﬀort when the measure of dealers is

                                                 21
d:

            ∆Uh (d) = ψ + Uh (d) − Uhl (d)                                                     (16)

                      = π∆amh (d) κ (γρ − ph (d))

                      + (1 − π) [ρ (1 + ah (γ − 1)) − (ph (d) + al mh (d) (γρ − ph (d)))] .

Incentive compatibility requires that

                                            ∆Uh (d) ≥ ψ.                                       (17)

       Now consider incentive compatibility in the low eﬀort equilibrium, where all entrepreneurs
choose al . In this case, an entrepreneur’s expected payoﬀ in period 0 along the equilibrium
path is then:
                       [                                       ]
             Ul (d) = π al ml (d) pdl (d) + (1 − ah ml ) pl (d) + (1 − π)ρ [1 + al (γ − 1)]    (18)

where pdl (d), pl (d), and ml (d) are deﬁned as in the previous case with the obvious changes in
notation.
       We show in Proposition A in the appendix that an entrepreneur who chooses to deviate
from this equilibrium in period 0 by exercising the high eﬀort ah is better oﬀ holding on to his
asset until period 2, unless he is hit by a liquidity shock. The reason is that now his private
valuation is higher than the average quality of the assets in the exchange. Proposition A states
that his expected payoﬀ under the deviation is given by:

            Ulh (d) = −ψ + π [pl (d) + ah ml (d) κ (γρ − pl )] + (1 − π)ρ [1 + ah (γ − 1)] .

       Incentive compatibility in the low eﬀort equilibrium when the measure of dealers is d
again requires that Ul (d) ≥ Ulh (d), or if we deﬁne ∆Ul (d) as the diﬀerence in expected
monetary payoﬀs, that is, not accounting for eﬀort costs ψ, between the utility under the
deviation and the utility that obtains if the agents sticks to the candidate equilibrium action
al :

                  ∆Ul (d) = ψ + Ulh (d) − Ul (d)

                             = π∆aml (d) κ (γρ − pl (d)) + (1 − π)ρ∆a (γ − 1) ,

                                                  22
then incentive compatibility requires that

                                            ∆Ul (d) ≤ ψ.                                   (19)

      The next proposition characterizes the functions ∆Uh (d) and ∆Ul (d).

 Proposition 5 (a) ∆Uh (d) and ∆Ul (d) are both increasing functions of d and (b) ∆Uh (d) <
      ∆Ul (d) for all d ≥ 0.

      The functions ∆Uh (d) and ∆Ul (d) are shown in Figure 3. The reason why these functions
are increasing functions of the mass of dealers d is simply that with a greater mass of dealers
there is a greater likelihood m(a∗ , d) for an entrepreneur with a good asset to be matched
with an informed dealer. Thus, an entrepreneur deviating from a low-origination equilibrium
al by choosing ah is more likely to get rewarded with a match in the OTC market in the event
that he has a good asset. Therefore his incremental payoﬀ from deviating is larger. As for an
entrepreneur deviating from a high-origination equilibrium ah by choosing al , the higher is d
the more good assets get skimmed in the OTC market, which results in a lower price p in the
organized market at which the entrepreneur can sell his bad asset. This is why ∆Uh (d) is also
increasing in d.
      As for (b) the reason for the fact that ∆Uh (d) < ∆Ul (d) has to do with the diﬀerent out-
of-equilibrium behavior of the entrepreneur when he deviates from the high eﬀort equilibrium
and the low eﬀort one. When entrepreneurs are implementing the high eﬀort the deviant agent
has “more options” than when they are implementing the low eﬀort. A deviant entrepreneur
who implements al instead of ah can beneﬁt from selling in the uninformed exchange, even
in the absence of a liquidity shock, because his private valuation is lower than the average
quality of the assets being traded. This is not the case in the low eﬀort equilibrium; a deviant
entrepreneur implements ah and if he sells his asset in the uninformed exchange in the absence
of a liquidity shock (and a match in the OTC market) he would be providing a subsidy rather
than receiving it. It follows that the deviation when entrepreneurs implement ah is more
proﬁtable than when they implement al , and thus ∆Uh (d) < ∆Ul (d).


      Next, if we deﬁne dbh and dbl respectively by the following equations

                           ∆Uh (dbh ) = ψ       and        ∆Ul (dbl ) = ψ,                 (20)

                                                23
we are able to establish our ﬁrst characterization of equilibrium occupational choice in period
0 in the following proposition.

 Proposition 6 (a) dbl < dbh . (b) A low-origination-eﬀort equilibrium can only be supported
         for d ∈ [0, dbl ] and in particular no low eﬀort equilibrium exists when ψ < (1−π)ρ∆a (γ − 1).
         (c) A high-origination-eﬀort equilibrium can only be supported for d ∈ [dbh , 1] and dbh is
         such that dbh > 0 ; and (d) there is no equilibrium with d ∈ (dbl , dbh ).

          Proposition 6 is key in establishing the main results of the paper and merits emphasizing
some of its implications. Figure 4 is simply Figure 3 where we have added two possible costs
of exercising the high and the low eﬀort, ψ and ψ ′ . First notice that the high eﬀort is never
incentive compatible in the absence of a ﬁnancial sector, that is, when d = 0. If the high eﬀort
is socially optimal, and we provide a condition below under which this is the case, then the
existence of an OTC market of at least size dbh is necessary to support it. Even when the cost
of exercising the high eﬀort is arbitrarily small this eﬀort level is never incentive compatible
when d is close to 0. The reason is that, under the putative high eﬀort equilibrium, the price of
the asset in the uninformed exchange is very high when d is close to 0. There is a large measure
of entrepreneurs, 1 − d, all exercising the high eﬀort and there is little cream skimming and
hence the quality of the pool of assets ﬂowing into the exchange is high. Thus the price in the
uninformed exchange is close to [1 + ah (γ − 1)] ρ, the price the asset commands in the absence
of any cream skimming. The deviation is proﬁtable because when exercising the low eﬀort the
agent, if not receiving an oﬀer from an informed dealer, will be able to sell the asset at t = 1,
independently of whether he suﬀers a liquidity shock, for a price higher than his uninformed
private valuation.15 Also because there are few informed dealers the entrepreneurs have little
hopes of being matched to them at date 1 and thus of capturing some of the surplus γρ − p (d);
thus, given that his high eﬀort provision is likely to go unrewarded in case of distress, the
agents prefer simply to save on eﬀort costs and free ride on the large pool of entrepreneurs
exercising the high eﬀort. Notice as well that this results holds even when ah is low and close
  15
       And keep the asset if he obtains a bid from an informed dealer and is not subject to a liquidity shock, for
in this case he learns the asset will yield γρ at date 2.




                                                            24
to al , precisely because in that case the beneﬁts of adhering to the high eﬀort over the low one
are small.
      A second implication of Proposition 6 is that a low eﬀort equilibrium fails to exist for
a suﬃciently low cost of providing the high eﬀort, independently of the measure of informed
dealers. Indeed there is a condition that is suﬃcient to rule the existence of a low eﬀort
equilibrium:
                                    (1 − π)ρ∆a (γ − 1) > ψ,                                  (21)

which is the case when ψ = ψ ′ in Figure 4. The argument is as follows. When entrepreneurs
are playing the low eﬀort, the price in the uninformed exchange is low. Thus the entrepreneur,
given that eﬀort is not very costly, prefers to exercise the high eﬀort and get rewarded in the
state in which he draws the high quality project and suﬀers no liquidity shock. In addition
when d > 0 he is likely to be matched to an informed dealer in case of a liquidity shock as in
this case there are not many entrepreneurs with high quality projects due to their low eﬀort
provision. These two eﬀects are increasing in ∆a. Indeed as can be seen in Figure 4 and in
(21) the range of ψs for which a low eﬀort equilibrium does not exist is increasing in ∆a.


4     Allocation of talent and welfare

4.1   The equilibrium size of the ﬁnancial and the real sector

We now turn to a central question of our analysis: What is the optimal allocation of talent to
the ﬁnancial sector? Is there too much information acquisition in ﬁnancial markets? In our
model, these questions boil down to determining whether the equilibrium measure of dealers
d∗ is too large. As we have already highlighted, there may be two types of equilibria, each
with an associated size of the OTC market. One type of equilibrium is the low-origination-
eﬀort equilibrium, in which all entrepreneurs choose a = al . As we saw in Proposition 6,
this equilibrium can only be supported when d ≤ dbl . The other type of equilibrium is the
high-origination-eﬀort equilibrium, in which all entrepreneurs choose a = ah , and can only be
supported if d ≥ dbh . Low eﬀort equilibria thus are associated with relatively small ﬁnancial
sectors when compared with high eﬀort equilibria.


                                               25
        It is relatively simple to construct examples for which there is no symmetric equilibrium
and for which there are multiple ones. Rather than provide a full characterization of the many
possible cases we provide in what follows examples of three possible cases: One of which there
are only high eﬀort equilibria, one in which there are only low eﬀort equilibria and one in
which low and high eﬀort equilibria coexist. Recall also that for a particular (a∗ , d∗ ) to be an
equilibrium a∗ must be incentive compatible and, given (22), d∗ has to be such that

                        U (a∗ |a∗ , d∗ ) ≥ V (d|a∗ , d∗ )    for     d ≥ d∗

                        U (a∗ |a∗ , d∗ ) < V (d|a∗ , d∗ )    for     d < d∗ .

        We examine examples in which the cost of acquiring information is simpliﬁed to a step
function:
                  φ (d) = φ     for d < d      and      φ (d) = +∞      for d ≥ d,           (22)

and thus the maximum feasible size of the ﬁnancial sector is given by d. Under (22) all dealers
are identical and thus when plotting the expected payoﬀ function of one of them we also plot
that of the marginal dealer, who determines the size of the OTC market. We may thus write
                     (     )
                       e d .
V (a, d) instead of V d|a,


4.1.1     High eﬀort equilibria

Consider the following parameter values

                     ah = .75    al = .55   γ = 1.5 ρ = .8    κ = .25     π = .5.            (23)

We also choose
                              ψ = .001      φ=0        and     d = .35,

where φ and d were deﬁned in (22). In this case, m ≤ 1 for d ≤ .4286 (see expression (6))
and thus, given that d = .35, that the matching probability is less than one is never a biding
constraint. There is no low eﬀort allocation that is incentive compatible in this example since

                                     (1 − π)ρ∆a (γ − 1) > ψ,

which implies ∆Ul (d) > ψ for all d ≥ 0 (see Figure 4.)

                                                  26
        High eﬀort is incentive compatible as long as d ≥ dbh = .0536, where dbh was deﬁned in
(20). There are two high origination-eﬀort equilibria and they are shown in Figure 5. First,
there is an unstable equilibrium with d∗1 = .3106 in which all agents d ≤ d are indiﬀerent
between becoming entrepreneurs or dealers. Second, there is a stable equilibrium with d∗2 =
d = .35, in which dealers are strictly better oﬀ than entrepreneurs. Notice that all agents who
can become dealers at a ﬁnite cost are dealers in this equilibrium.
        The price of assets in the OTC market in the unstable equilibrium is pd (ah , d∗1 ) = 1.0180,
so that a dealer needs some leverage in order to ﬁnance the purchase of the asset. In contrast,
in the stable equilibrium leverage is not needed as pd (ah , d∗2 ) = .9833, which is less than 1.


4.1.2     Low eﬀort equilibria

Suppose (23) holds but

                                ψ = .0475   φ = .06     and      d = .15.

There are no high eﬀort equilibria in this example as with this parameter speciﬁcation ∆Uh (d) <
ψ for d ∈ [0, .15] (see Figure 4).
        It can be numerically shown that all possible occupational choices yield incentive com-
patible low eﬀort allocations as ∆Ul (d) < ψ for all d ∈ [0, .15]. As shown in Figure 6, there
are then three (low origination-eﬀort) equilibria. First there is an stable equilibrium where
d∗1 = 0. Indeed, notice that when there are no dealers U (al | al , 0) > V (0 | al , 0). Sec-
ond, there is an unstable equilibrium with a measure of informed dealers d∗2 = .0781 with
U (al | al , .0781) = V (.0781 | al , .0781), that is, the marginal dealer is indiﬀerent between
becoming one or an entrepreneur. Finally, there is a stable equilibrium with d∗3 = .15 where
U (al | al , .15) < V (.15 | al , .15).


4.1.3     Coexistence of high and low eﬀort equilibria

One can generate examples where there is both high and low eﬀort equilibria. Consider for
example the case where

                                ψ = .0410   φ = .03     and      d = .41,

                                                  27
and the rest of the parameters are as in (23) with the exception of κ = .5. In this case there are
three equilibria, two that feature the low eﬀort equilibria and one stable high eﬀort equilibrium.
        Start with the low eﬀort equilibria. First, dbl = .0545 and in this region there are two
equilibria. A stable one that features d∗1 = 0 as U (al |al , 0) > V (0, al , 0) and an unstable one
where type 2 agents are indiﬀerent between becoming dealers or entrepreneurs and where the
equilibrium measure of dealers is given by d∗2 = .05.
                                                                  [       ]
        High eﬀort is only incentive compatibles in the region d ∈ dbh , d = [.4020, .41]. There
is a candidate high eﬀort equilibrium at which type 2 agents are indiﬀerent between becom-
ing dealers or entrepreneurs, at d = .3596 but is not incentive compatible. The allocation
(ah , d∗3 = .41) is a stable high eﬀort equilibrium. Moreover all three equilibria meet the partic-
ipation constraint in that equilibrium utilities are above the reservation value of 1.


4.2     Welfare: Are OTC markets too large?

4.2.1     Constrained eﬃciency: Deﬁnition

Our notion of constrained eﬃciency is based on the standard idea that the social planner
should not have an informational advantage relative to an uninformed market participant.
Thus, we only allow the planner to dictate the occupation of type 2 agents but we do not let
the planner make any decisions based on the information obtained by informed dealers. The
planner’s problem in period 0 is then to pick the measure d of type 2 agents that maximizes
ex-ante social surplus. If it is socially eﬃcient to implement the low origination-eﬀort al , then
                                                                                ˆ
                                                      l , is such that dl ∈ [0, dl ], as this is the
the eﬃcient allocation consistent with that outcome, dce                ce


region where the low eﬀort equilibrium is incentive compatible. If instead it is socially eﬃcient
to implement the high origination-eﬀort ah , then the socially eﬃcient allocation consistent with
                                         ˆ
               h must be such that dh ∈ [dh , d], where d is deﬁned in (2).
that outcome, dce                   ce



4.2.2     The allocation of talent and constrained eﬃciency

To establish as sharp a characterization as possible we focus ﬁrst on situations where there is
a role for the ﬁnancial sector. That is, we focus on situations with a suﬃciently large measure
of dealers to support high eﬀort provision by entrepreneurs. The high eﬀort is socially eﬃcient


                                                28
when the associated output compensates for both the costs of exercising this high level of
eﬀort, ψ, and the costs of acquiring information, that is
                                     (      ) ∫           dbh
                                          b
             [ρ (1 + ah (γ − 1)) − ψ] 1 − dh −                  φ (d) dd ≥ ρ (1 + al (γ − 1)) .   (24)
                                                      0

The ﬁrst term of (24) is the output produced by the 1 − dbh entrepreneurs when they implement
the high eﬀort, net of costs. The integral corresponds to the information acquisition costs of
type 2 agents who become dealers. The high eﬀort is socially eﬃcient if this term is more
than what society would obtain if all type 2 agents become entrepreneurs and perform the low
eﬀort, which by (8) dominates the allocation where type 2 agents prefer to simply carry their
endowment to subsequent dates.

 Proposition 7 Suppose that it is socially eﬃcient to implement the high eﬀort action; that
      is, inequality (24) holds. Then all equilibria are generically ineﬃcient and, moreover, the
      high origination-eﬀort equilibrium features too many dealers in OTC markets.

      Notice that this Proposition does not rule out the possibility that an equilibrium involv-
ing low eﬀort obtains when it is optimal to implement the high eﬀort. In this case, in the
(ineﬃcient) low eﬀort equilibrium there are too few dealers. In this equilibrium dealers receive
too little compensation and as a result only those with very low cost of becoming dealers, if
any, choose to do so.
      It is straightforward to verify that for the parameter values given in section 4.1.1 above
the socially eﬃcient origination eﬀort is ah :
                                      (       )
              [ρ (1 + ah (γ − 1)) − ψ] 1 − dbh − φdbh − ρ (1 + al (γ − 1)) = .0201,

and thus both equilibria are ineﬃcient and feature an excessively large ﬁnancial sector in the
form of a large measure of informed dealers. The intuition is by now clear. Conditional on ah
being eﬃcient, the planner wants to support this level of eﬀort with the minimum measure of
dealers dbh , for adding “one” additional dealer detracts from productive entrepreneurial activ-
ities and does not improve incentives; but this level can only be supported as an equilibrium
for a set of economies of measure zero. The reason is by now well understood: Entry into OTC


                                                 29
markets creates a positive externality among dealers via the cream skimming and this leads to
a larger OTC market than constrained eﬃciency would have it.
        In the example in section 4.1.2, dbh exceeds d and thus is not feasible. In this case, the
constrained eﬃcient allocation calls for al and d = 0. Notice that in that case there were three
equilibria, two of which feature excessively large OTC markets and one that indeed supports
the constrained social optimum, (a∗ = al , d∗1 = 0).
        Finally, the case in section 4.1.3, where there were both low and high eﬀort equilibria,
merits some comments. First, in this example (24) is not met and thus high eﬀort is not
socially eﬃcient, though it can be supported as a stable equilibrium. There is thus an eﬃcient
low eﬀort equilibrium with no ﬁnancial sector and an ineﬃcient, unstable, one with a strictly
positive measure of dealers.


4.2.3     Pareto ranking of multiple equilibria

The previous argument highlights that, conditional on a particular level of eﬀort, the diﬀerent
equilibria can be Pareto ranked in decreasing order of the measure of dealers. Thus in the
example in section 4.1.1, the most eﬃcient equilibrium is the unstable one, d∗1 , which dominates
the stable one d∗2 . In the example in section 4.1.2, which deals with the low eﬀort equilibria
case, the result is that d∗1 ≻ d∗2 ≻ d∗3 . We summarize this discussion in the following proposition.

 Proposition 8 Equilibria with the same origination-eﬀort can be ranked by total ex-ante
        social surplus in decreasing order of the measure of dealers that OTC markets attract.


5    Competition between dealers

In our model we assumed that an entrepreneur’s bargaining power κ is invariant to the number
of dealers, d. A natural assumption though is that as the number of dealers increases so does
the entrepreneurs’ bargaining power. That is, κ (d) is an increasing function of d: κ′ > 0. In
this brief section we show that the main results of the paper still hold under this generalization.
In particular, Proposition 7, our main result, remains unaﬀected: If there is a social role for
dealers in supporting the high eﬀort all equilibria are generically ineﬃcient and moreover any


                                                 30
high eﬀort equilibrium features ineﬃciently large OTC markets.
            To understand why our main result still holds, it is useful to return to Proposition 5 and
notice that it remains valid when κ′ > 0. In fact, in this case, the derivative of ∆Uh (d) with
respect to d gains a single extra term

                                         κ′ (d)π∆amh (d)(γρ − ph (d)) > 0.

Similarly, the derivative of ∆Ul (d) with respect to d gains a single positive extra term, with
mℓ and pℓ replacing mh and ph respectively. Hence item (a) in Proposition 5 holds and, since
∆Uh (d) < ∆Ul (d) for any κ, (b) follows as well.
            Proposition 6, which describes the set of possible measures of dealers in the low and high
eﬀort equilibria, is in turn a simple Corollary to Proposition 5 and thus holds as well when
κ′ > 0. This Proposition lies at the heart of the analysis in Section 4 . Proposition 3 on the
other hand no longer holds, as one should no longer expect the utility of a given dealer de to be
monotone in the measure of dealers. Now the positive externality is oﬀset, fully or partially,
by the eﬀect of greater competition. But this monotonicity is unrelated to our main result.
For instance, if a high eﬀort equilibrium exists, stable or unstable, it has to generically feature
a measure of dealers that is strictly greater than dbh , which is the source of the ineﬃciency.
Proposition 7 thus still holds, and if it is eﬃcient to implement high eﬀort then all equilibria are
generically ineﬃcient; moreover, when the equilibrium features high eﬀort it must necessarily
involve ineﬃciently large OTC markets.16


6         Discussion and applications

6.1         Cream skimming in ﬁnancial markets

In addition to the example of futures and forwards discussed in the introduction, there are
several other examples of cream-skimming in ﬁnancial markets. Perhaps the most direct ex-
ample concerns the rise of private securities markets. One of the main goals of the Securities
    16
         Intuition suggests that our main results also hold for the implausible case where κ′ < 0. If an increase in
the number of dealers increases the dealers bargaining power, dealers beneﬁt from double cream skimming. The
reservation prices and the bargaining power of entrepreneurs go down as dealers enter.


                                                           31
Act of 1933 was to protect unsuspecting investors against fraud, via registration of securities
oﬀered to the public and other reporting standards. The Securities Act, however, allowed
for the possibility of non-registration “for transactions by an issuer not involving any public
oﬀering.” Successive rulings and clariﬁcations on the meaning of the exemption led to Rule
506 according to which an oﬀering is exempt from securities regulation as long as takers are
limited to accredited investors and no more than 35 nonaccredited investors.17 This exemp-
tion facilitated the rise of a private placement market, which went from $5bn raised in 1980 to
$250bn in 2006. This market, in turn, funded the rise of the VC and private buyout industry.
Restrictions on the resale of securities, however, prevented securities underwriters from taking
advantage of the exemption, as the Securities Act prohibited the resale of any unregistered
securities unless the sellers were persons other than the issuer, underwriter, or dealer. But, in
1972 Rule 144 somewhat weakened these restrictions and introduced substantial ﬂexibility by
imposing a holding period requirement for resale (of six months) instead of an outright ban on
resale.
         A watershed moment in the evolution of the private securities market came in 1990, when
the SEC adopted Rule 144A which provides a safe harbor from the registration requirements
of the Securities Act of 1933 for certain private resales of minimum $500,000 of restricted
securities to QIBs (qualiﬁed institutional investors), generally large institutional investors with
$100m in investable assets. The adoption of Rule 144A greatly increased the liquidity of
private securities as it facilitated trading amongst QIBs. Eﬀectively the 144A market allows
sophisticated investors to freely trade private securities without any registration requirements.
Rule 144A, as well institutional developments, led to a remarkable increase in private equity
issuance. More equity capital was raised via Rule 144A private placements ($162bn) than in
IPOs in Amex, NASDAQ and NYSE (which totaled $154bn in 2006).18
  17
       SEC Rule 501(a) deﬁnes an accredited investor as any natural person whose individual net worth, or joint
net worth if said natural person has a spouse, exceeds $1.000.000 at the time of the purchase; there are similar
requirements on income. A nonaccredited investor instead has to be “sophisticated” in that he has to have
suﬃcient knowledge and experience to evaluate the merits of the oﬀering independently.
  18
     See Lambe (2007, page 40) and Tang (2007, Figure 1) for a ﬁgure showing private equity capital issuance
compared to IPO issuance for the period 2002 to 2006.




                                                       32
          Financial intermediaries rushed to design proprietary platforms where QIBs trade Rule
144A shares.         Goldman Sachs created the Goldman Sachs Tradable Unregistered Equity
(GSTrUE) platform, Citi, Lehman, Merrill Lynch, BoNY and Morgan Stanley created Opus-5
and NASDAQ followed suit with Portal. An important milestone in the development of this
market occurred when Oaktree Capital Management LLC sold an equity stake for $800m.19
          There are many reasons for the success of private equity placements. Escaping the reg-
ulatory burdens associated with Sarbanes-Oxley must be an important factor, but in addition
there is some evidence that higher quality issuers are ﬂocking to Rule 144A rather than public
oﬀerings. This trend has led some to argue that exchanges run the risk of being deprived of
high quality issues. For instance, Roger Ehrenberg, former CEO of Deutsche Bank’s hedge
fund platform DB Advisors, said

         I think they (Rule 144A equity issuances) will quickly detract from the Nasdaq,
         NYSE and Amex. These private exchanges will eﬀectively skim the cream oﬀ
         the market. The very highest quality issuers will forgo the public markets to issue
         on the private exchanges. (quoted in Lambe (2007, page 42))

          Clearly the liquidity and transparency provided by these platforms are an important
reason for the success of Rule 144A issues but the fact that participants are restricted to be
QIBs leads to the cream skimming: High quality issuers have an incentive to raise equity
capital in Rule 144A markets rather that through IPOs because QIBs are better informed
than the average IPO buyer and can thus oﬀer some price improvement. This clearly lowers
the quality of the oﬀerings in public markets, as Mr. Ehrenberg suggests.


6.2       Some evidence on the allocation of talent

The fundamental ineﬃciency in our model arises because too many agents become dealers
instead of entrepreneurs. Anecdotal evidence suggests that in the last two decades the brightest
minds found a way to Wall Street in either the asset management industry or the broker-dealers
  19
       See Sjostrom (2008) for a description of this deal as well as the discussion of Rule 144A in general. For a
legal analysis that is contemporaneous with the 1990 adoption of Rule 144A see Testy (1990).




                                                         33
and investment banks. Golding and Katz (2008) ﬁnd evidence of this shift using the Harvard
and Beyond data set:

        The most striking changes with regard to occupations concern the ascendancy of
        ﬁnance and management. Amongst the oldest cohort (C1970), 22 percent of the
        men were in occupations in these ﬁelds 15 years after their class graduated. But
        for the youngest cohort (C1990), 38 percent were. The change moreover was driven
        primarily by positions in ﬁnance, which increased from 5 to 15 percent of the total.
        The relative growth in business occupations for men came largely at the expense
        of those in law and medicine, which declined from 39 to 30 percent of the total [...]
        12 percent of women in C1970 were in management and ﬁnance occupations, but
        23 percent were in C1990.20

        In our model this shift comes at the expense of alternative, potentially more socially
productive activities.


6.3      On the inevitability of dealer based markets

Our model oﬀers a simple theory where OTC markets arise naturally, even in the presence of
well functioning exchanges. Both sides of the market have an incentive to meet outside the
exchange: Entrepreneurs in distress with good projects may get recognized as such by informed
dealers and thus obtain better prices for their assets than they would in the exchange and
dealers can use their information to cream skim good projects. Our paper oﬀers a novel theory
of endogenous ﬁnancial markets: Informed agents will have an incentive to create dealer based
markets in which to lever their superior information and cream skimming creates a positive
externality that induces too much information acquisition. This is in contrast with Grossman
and Stiglitz (1980) where, instead, too little information is produced as some of it is imputed
in prices and thus those bearing the costs of acquiring information do not fully capture the
returns associated with it. Our point is that in Grossman and Stiglitz (1980) informed agents
can only trade in organized exchanges when in reality they often create parallel dealer based
markets where they lever their information without having this information revealed in prices.
 20
      Goldin and Katz (2008, page 366.)


                                                 34
         In our model all ﬁrms that have a good project have exactly the same probability of
being found by a dealer. If the probability of obtaining a good project or being matched to
a dealer diﬀers across entrepreneurs, those with more favorable prospects would gain more
from the presence of dealers. As the probability of being matched when having a good project
converges to 1, entrepreneurs would adopt high eﬀort, independently of the eﬀort done by
others and when faced with a liquidity shock beneﬁt from trading directly with a dealer. Thus
it is not surprising that some “big name” ﬁrms, which have long term relationships with banks,
also lobby for keeping OTC markets in their present form.21
         In our model dealers proﬁt from the opaqueness of OTC transactions. This explains
eﬀorts of dealers to prevent OTC contracts from being transferred to organized platforms,22
and why the largest Wall Street ﬁrms seem so intent on avoiding disclosure of prices and fees.23


6.4       IT and the growth of compensation in the ﬁnancial industry

Figure 1 shows that the growth in median compensation in the ﬁnancial industry is driven by
the broker-dealers, which constitute the main entry in ‘other ﬁnance’. Broker-dealers are the
  21
       See Scannell (2009), who writes “Companies from Caterpillar Inc. and Boeing Co. to 3M Co. are pushing
back on proposals to regulate the over-the-counter derivatives market, where companies can make private deals
to hedge against sudden moves in commodity prices or interest rates.” (Emphasis ours). He adds “[A]t least 42
nonﬁnancial companies and trade associations are lobbying Congress on derivatives, according to a Wall Street
Journal analysis of lobbying disclosure forms ﬁled through April. That’s more than triple the 14 nonﬁnancial
companies that lobbied on derivatives in all of 2008 and zero in 2005. The ﬁgures include only companies that
speciﬁcally name derivatives as a lobbying issue.”
  22
     The furious lobbying activity of some banks, as well as the ISDA on their behalf, to avoid any major changes
in the organization of OTC markets has been amply documented in the press. See for example Leising (2009),
Morgenson (2010) and Tett (2010). In fact centralized clearing seems to be less of a problem for dealers than
execution. For instance, Harper, Leising, and Harrington (2009) write:

         [T]he banks ... are expected to lobby to remove any requirements that the contracts be executed
         on exchanges because that would cut them out of making a proﬁt on the trades, according to
         lawyers working for the banks.

  23
       See for example Story (2010), who reports on the eﬀorts by the largest banks to thwart an initiative by
Citadel, the Chicago hedge fund, to set up an electronic trading system that would display prices for CDSs.




                                                       35
main players in OTC markets, and the units inside commercial banks and insurance companies,
such as AIG’s infamous Financial Products group, that have been richly rewarded during the
boom years were precisely those present in these markets. But the timing of the abnormal
growth in ‘other ﬁnance’ requires an explanation.
      Philippon and Resheﬀ (2008), amongst others, argue that it is the wave of deregulation
that led to the phenomenal proﬁts and growth of the ﬁnancial services industry. This, un-
doubtedly played a role but our model suggests a diﬀerent hypothesis: that improvements in
information technology (IT) have decreased the costs of processing and organizing ﬁnancial
information in a way that has particularly beneﬁtted OTC markets, where information tradi-
tionally was dispersed and hard to obtain. In our model this IT revolution could be captured
by an increase in the maximum measure of d. Consider the example in section 4.1.1, which
featured a single stable high eﬀort equilibrium. An improvement in IT can be captured by the
number of type 2 agents for whom φ(d) = 0, which goes from d to d + ε. This would lead to a
new stable high eﬀort equilibrium with a larger OTC market (by an amount ϵ) higher proﬁts
for dealers present in the market (both entrants and incumbents) and lower ex-ante proﬁts for
entrepreneurs.


7    Conclusions

We have presented a model of occupational choice where agents can choose between becoming
entrepreneurs and engaging on productive activities or acquiring information and becoming
ﬁnancial intermediaries, dealers. We identify a novel externality, cream skimming in OTC-
like markets, that leads to ineﬃciencies in ﬁnancial markets. In particular we show that this
externality leads to excessive proﬁts in the ﬁnancial sector. Moreover, if one believes that there
is a social role for ﬁnancial markets in relieving moral hazard problems at origination, then
we show that the ﬁnancial markets that arise in equilibrium, and do indeed solve these moral
hazard problems, are always too large.
      Our theory helps explain the rise on compensation in the ﬁnancial services industry and
why is it concentrated among some ﬁnancial entities and not others. We argue that it is the
intermediaries which are present in OTC markets, mainly broker-dealers and the broker-dealer


                                               36
arms of large commercial banks, that capture these excessively large rents, which is consistent
with observed trends in ﬁnancial markets. In addition, our framework rationalizes the lobbying
eﬀorts of, not only banks, but also corporations on the other side of the market to preserve
OTC markets in their current form, as was observed during the run-up to the passage of the
Dodd-Frank Act in July of 2010 on ﬁnancial regulatory reform. To the extent that opaque
OTC markets facilitate informational rent extraction by informed dealers, it is to be expected
that the move of derivatives and swap trading onto organized exchanges and clearinghouses
required by the Dodd-Frank Act of 2010 will be resisted by the ﬁnancial industry. We expect
that a ﬁrst line of defense is likely be to over-customize derivatives contracts and to oﬀer fewer
standardized, plain-vanilla contracts (which will be required to trade on organized exchanges).
The second line of defense is likely to be to set up clearinghouses that maintain opacity and
do not require disclosure of quotes. A third line of defense is to ensure that the operation of
clearinghouses remains under the control of the main dealers, as has been suggested by Story
(2010).24




  24
       See A Secretive Banking Elite Rules Trading in Derivatives, by Louise Story, New York Times December
11, 2010.


                                                     37
                                           REFERENCES

Afonso, Gara (2010) “Liquidity and Congestion,” Journal of Financial Intermediation, forthcoming.

Allen, Franklin and Douglas Gale (2000), Comparing Financial Systems, The MIT Press, Cambridge
     Massachusetts.

Baumol, William J. (1990), “Entrepreneurship: Productive, Unproductive, and Destructive”, Journal of
     Political Economy, Vol. XCIII, 893-921.

Bernanke, Ben and Mark Gertler (1989), “Agency Costs, Net Worth and Business Fluctuations”, Amer-
     ican Economic Review, Vol. 79, pp. 14-31.

Binmore, Ken, Avner Shaked and John Sutton (1989), “An Outside Option Experiment”, Quarterly
     Journal of Economics, Vol. 104, No. 4, 753-770.

Binmore, Ken, Ariel Rubinstein and Asher Wolinsky (1986), “The Nash bargaining Solution in Eco-
     nomic Modeling”, Rand Journal of Economics, XVII, 176-88.

Duﬃe, Darrell, Nicolae Garleanu and Lasse H. Pedersen (2005) “Over-the-Counter Markets,” Econo-
     metrica, vol. 73 (6), pp 1815-1847.

Glode, Vincent, Richard Green and Richard Lowery (2010), “Financial Expertise as an Arms’ Race”,
     Wharton School Working Paper.

Goldin, Claudia and Larry Katz (2008), “Transitions: Career and Family Life Cycles of the Educational
     Elite ”, American Economic Review Papers & Proceedings May, 98:2, 363-369.

Grossman, Sanford and Joseph Stiglitz (1980), “On the Impossibility of Informationally Eﬃcient Mar-
     kets”, American Economic Review Vol. 70, pp. 393-408.

Harper, Christine, Matthew Leising and Shannon Harrington (2009) “Wall Street Stealth Lobby
     Defends $35 billion Derivatives Haul,” Bloomberg, August 30th, 2009.

Holmstrom, Bengt and Jean Tirole (1997), “Financial Intermediation, Loanable Funds and the Real
     Sector”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 112, 663-91.

Lagos, Ricardo and Gullaume Rocheteau (2009) “Liquidity in Asset Markets with Search Frictions,”
     Econometrica, Vol. 77, No. 2, March, pp. 403-426.

Lagos, Ricardo, Guillaume Rocheteau and Pierre-Olivier Weill (2010), “Crises and Liquidity in Over
     the Counter Markets”, NBER Working Paper 15414.

Lambe, Geraldine (2007) “Public versus Private Equity Markets,” The Banker, September, 2007

Leising, Matthew (2009) “ISDA Hires Rosen to Fight Obama OTC Derivatives Plan” Bloomberg, July 10th,
     2009.

Levine, Ross (2005), “Finance and Growth: Theory and Evidence”, in Handbook of Economic Growth,
     Philippe Aghion and Steven Durlauf (eds.)


                                                   38
Morgenson, Gretchen (2010) “Fair Game: It’s not over until it’s in the Rules” The New York Times,
     August 29th, 2010.

Murphy, Kevin, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny (1991), “The Allocation of Talent: Implications
     for Growth”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 90, 630-49.

Philippon, Thomas (2008), “The Evolution of the US Financial Industry from 1860 to 2007: Theory and
     Evidence”, NYU Stern Working Paper.

Philippon, Thomas and Ariell Reshef (2008), “Wages and Human Capital in the US Financial Industry:
     1926-2006,” NYU Stern Working Paper, December.

Rothschild, Michael and Joseph Stiglitz (1976), Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance Markets: An Essay
     on the Economics of Imperfect Information”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 106, pp. 503-530.

Santos, Tano and Jose A. Scheinkman (2001) “Competition Among Exchanges,” Quarterly Journal of
     Economics, August, 116 (3), pp. 1027-1061.

Scannell, Kara (2009) “Big Companies Go to Washington to Fight Regulations on Fancy Derivatives,” The
     Wall Street Journal, July 10th, 2009.

Sherman, Gabriel (2009) “Show me the money,” New York Magazine, November.

Story, Louise (2010) “A Secretive Banking Elite Rules Trading in Derivatives” The New York Times, De-
     cember 11th, 2010.

Sjostrom, William K. (2008) “The Birth of Rule 144A Equity Oﬀerings,” UCLA Law Journal, 56, pp.
     409-449.

Tang, Vicki Wei (2007) “Economic Consequences of Mandatory Disclosure Regulation: Evidence from
     Rule 144A Equity Private Placements,” McDonough School of Business Working Paper, Georgetown
     University.

Testy, Kellye Y. (1990) “The Capital Markets in Transition: A Response to New SEC Rule 144A,” Indiana
     Law Journal, vol. 66, pp. 233-271.

Tett, Gillian (2010) “Calls for radical rethink of derivatives body,” Financial Times, 26th of August, 2010.

Vayanos, Dimitri and Tan Wang (2007) “Search and Endogenous Concentration of Liquidity in Asset
     Markets,” Journal of Economic Theory, vol. 136, pp. 66-104.

Vayanos, Dimitri and Pierre-Olivier Weill (2008) “A Search-Based Theory on the On-the-Run Phe-
     nomenon,” Journal of Finance, vol. 63, pp. 361-1398.

Zingales, Luigi (2009) “The Future of Securities Regulation” Journal of Accounting Research, vol. 47, no.
     2, May. pp. 391-425.




                                                    39
                                                 APPENDIX


Proof of Lemma 1 Consider ﬁrst an impatient entrepreneur. By selling his asset in the organized market he
     is able to obtain at least p, which is higher than the maximum amount ρ he can borrow against the asset.
     Therefore, an impatient entrepreneur strictly prefers to sell his assets than to borrow. As for a patient
     entrepreneur, since he strictly prefers to consume in period 2 he cannot gain by borrowing and consuming
     in period 1. He also cannot gain (strictly) from borrowing and investing the proceeds from the loan in
     either the organized or OTC markets. A patient entrepreneur is no diﬀerent as an investor than an
     uninformed type 1 agent, and therefore earns the same zero net returns in equilibrium as type 1 agents.
     Finally, consider an impatient dealer. Such a dealer can only borrow against an asset he has acquired in
     either the OTC or organized market. Moreover, he can only gain from acquiring and borrowing against
     an asset if he is able to resell the asset for a proﬁt. But this is not possible in either market at equilibrium
     prices p and pd .                                                                                             2

Proof of Lemma 2. A best response for a patient entrepreneur, who puts his asset up for sale in the OTC
     market is to always reject an oﬀer from a dealer. Indeed, dealers only oﬀer to buy good assets for a
     price pd < ργ. The patient entrepreneur is then strictly better oﬀ holding on to an asset that has been
     identiﬁed as high quality by the dealer. If the asset that has been put up for sale does not generate an
     oﬀer from an informed dealer, then the entrepreneur has the same uninformed value for the asset as type
     1 agents. He is therefore indiﬀerent between selling and not selling the asset at price p in the organized
     market.                                                                                                       2

      In order to prove Proposition 3 it is useful ﬁrst to prove Proposition 4.

Proof of Proposition 4. Trivial algebra shows that

                                ∂m    (1 − π)                                      ∂2m   2md
                     md (a) =      =             >0         and      mdd (a) =         =     > 0,               (25)
                                ∂d   πa (1 − d)2                                   ∂d2   1−d

     and
                                      ∂p      md aρ (1 − a) (1 − γ)
                                pd (a) =  =                         <0        as    γ > 1.                      (26)
                                      ∂d     [a (1 − m) + (1 − a)]2
     Finally, tedious computations show that

                                                             [                           ]
                               ∂2p       aρ (1 − a) (1 − γ)                 2m2d
                    pdd (a) =      =                           mdd +                       < 0.                 (27)
                               ∂d2    [a (1 − m) + (1 − a)]2         a (1 − m) + (1 − a)
     Expressions (25), (26), and (27) are used throughout.                                                        2

Proof of Proposition 3. Start with the utility of the dealer, which trivially is such that
                                      (     )
                                        e d = ∂V = − (1 − π) (1 − κ) pd > 0,
                                    Vd d|a,
                                              ∂d

     and
                                      (     )  2
                                        e d = ∂ V = − (1 − π) (1 − κ) pdd > 0,
                                   Vdd d|a,
                                              ∂d2

                                                       40
     given (26) and (27), which establishes (b).

      As for the utility of the entrepreneur, start by noticing that tedious algebra yields that

                                                   ∂U
                                    Ud (a, d) =       = πpd + aπκ [md (γρ − p) − mpd ] .
                                                   ∂d

     Trivial manipulations show that

                                                                              (                           )
                                           a(1 − m)γ + (1 − a)                    a(1 − m) + (1 − a)           pd
                         γρ − p = γρ −                         ρ=−                                                ,
                                            a(1 − m) + (1 − a)                            a                    md
     and hence                                               (                        )
                                                                 a(1 − m) + (1 − a)                        pd
                           md (γρ − p) − mpd = −                                          pd − mpd = −        ,
                                                                         a                                 a
     and thus we can write Ud (a, d) as

                                                  Ud (a, d) = π (1 − κ) pd < 0.

     Clearly then,
                                                 Udd (a, d) = π (1 − κ) pdd < 0,

     which proves (a).                                                                                                  2

     To prove Proposition 5 we ﬁrst have to derive the utility of the entrepreneur under the deviation.

Proposition A. (a) Assume that putative action in equilibrium is a∗ = ah then the utility of the entrepreneur
     who deviates and chooses instead to exercise action al as a function of the measure of dealers d is given
     by
                                Uhl (d) = ph (d) + al mh (d) (γρ − ph (d)) (πκ + (1 − π)) .                           (28)

     (b) Assume that putative action in equilibrium is a∗ = al then the utility of the entrepreneur who deviates
     and chooses instead to exercise action ah as a function of the measure of dealers d is given by

                     Ulh (d) = −ψ + π [pl (d) + ah ml (d)κ (γωρ − pl (d))] + (1 − π)ωρ [1 + ah (γ − 1)]               (29)

Proof. (a) The key is to show that if the entrepreneur deviates and instead exercises the low eﬀort, then
     even in the absence of a liquidity shock he prefers to sell. For this deﬁne the following notation

                              U sell (al |ah , d, no-liq.)         and     U no-sell (al |ah , d, no-liq.) ,

     the utility of the entrepreneur entering date 1 (that is, before being hit with bids (or no bids) by dealers)
     who (i) deviated from the high eﬀort to implement the low eﬀort at t = 0, (ii) does not suﬀer a liquidity
     shock at t = 1 and (iii) decides to sell and not sell, respectively, as a function of the measure of dealers,
     d. We want to show that

                                    U sell (al |ah , d, no-liq.) > U no-sell (al |ah , d, no-liq.) .




                                                                  41
First, notice that

                          U sell (al |ah , d, no-liq.)   =    al mh (d)γρ + (1 − al mh (d))ph (d)                (30)

                                                         =    ph (d) + al mh (d) (γρ − ph (d)) ,

where the functions ph (d) and mh (d) were given by (10) and (11), respectively, when a = ah . It may
be useful to elaborate on (30). The ﬁrst term is the payoﬀ, conditional on having a good project and
receiving a bid from a dealer, and event with probability al mh (d), in which case the entrepreneur rejects
the bid and carries the project to maturity and obtains, γρ, as recall that he is not subject to the liquidity
shock. The second term is the payoﬀ when he does not receive a bid but sells anyway.

Next notice that
                                     U no-sell (al |ah , d, no-liq.) = ρ [1 + al (γ − 1) .]                      (31)

It is interesting to note that

                U sell (al |ah , d, liq.)   =   al mh (d) [κγρ + (1 − κ)ph (d)] + (1 − al mh (d))ph (d)

                                            =   ph (d) + al mh (d) κ (γρ − ph (d)) ,

that is, when the deviant entrepreneur with a good asset is forced to sell due to the occurrence of the
liquidity shock he is only able to capture a fraction κ of the surplus (γρ − ph (d)) when matched with
an informed dealer. The diﬀerence is precisely that when the deviant agent does not suﬀer the liquidity
shock and receives a bid for the asset, he immediately infers that the asset he holds is a good one and
prefers to carry it to maturity.

Notice next that when d = 0, m (ah , d = 0) = 0 and

                          U sell (al |ah , d = 0, no-liq.)    =   ρ [1 + ah (γ − 1)]

                                                              >   ρ [1 + al (γ − 1)]

                                                          U no-sell (al |ah , d = 0, no-liq.) ,
                                                              =
                                                                                   (        )
where we have used the expression ph (d = 0). Next, deﬁne deh such that m ah , deh = 1. For this measure
              ( )
of dealers, ph deh = ρ, and thus
                          (                          )           (                          )
                    U sell al |ah , d = deh , no-liq. = U no-sell al |ah , d = deh , no-liq. .

Finally notice that U no-sell (al |ah , d, no-liq.) is independent of d and that U sell (al |ah , d, no-liq.) is a de-
creasing function of d, where the proof of this claim follows exactly the same arguments as the proof in
Proposition 3, thus it follows that

                        U sell (al |ah , d, no-liq.) ≥ U no-sell (al |ah , d, no-liq.)   for   d ≤ deh ,

as we wanted to show. It follows that

                Uhl (d) = π [ph (d) + al mh (d)κ (γρ − ph (d))] + (1 − π)U sell (al |ah , d, no-liq.) ,          (32)


                                                             42
    which after some manipulations yields (28).


     (b) Consider now the deviation to ah when the putative equilibrium features al and the measure of
    dealers is given by d. In this case:

                                   U sell (ah |al , d, no-liq.)     =    pl (d) + ah ml (d) (γρ − pl (d))

                           U no-sell (ah |al , d = 0, no-liq.)      =    ρ [1 + ah (γ − 1)] .

    We show that in this case, unlike before,

                              U sell (ah |al , d = 0, no-liq.) < U no-sell (ah |al , d = 0, no-liq.) .             (33)

    First notice that at d = 0, ml (d = 0) = 0 and thus

                            U sell (ah |al , d = 0, no-liq.)      =     ρ [1 + al (γ − 1)]

                                                                  <     ρ [1 + ah (γ − 1)]

                                                                  =     U no-sell (ah |al , d = 0, no-liq.) .
                                                             ( )
    As before deﬁne del , the measure of dealers for which ml del = 1. In this case
                           (                      )                                (                      )
                     U sell ah |al , del , no-liq. = ρ [1 + ah (γ − 1)] = U no-sell ah |al , del , no-liq. .

    Finally, notice that                                                  (       )
                                                                               ah
                                       Udsell (ah |al , d, no-liq.) = pl,d 1 −      > 0,
                                                                               al
    as pl,d < 0, by Proposition 4 and ah > al , and this shows that (33) obtains. Thus

         U (ah |al , d) = −ψ + π [pl (d) + ah ml (d)κ (γωρ − pl (d))] + (1 − π)U no-sell (ah |al , d, no-liq.) .   (34)

    Trivial manipulations of (34) yield (29).                                                                       2

Proof of Proposition 5. (a) Trivial algebraic manipulations show that

                                                   ∂∆Uh         ∆a
                                       ∆Uh,d =          = −ph,d    [πκ + (1 − π)] ,
                                                    ∂d          ah

    as ph,d < 0 by Proposition 4. Moreover, notice that ∆Uh (d = 0) = 0 < ψ and that

                                           Uh (deh ) = ∆a (γ − 1) ρ [πκ + (1 − π)] ,
                                                           ( )
    where deh is the unique measure of dealers for which mh deh = 1. Similarly notice that

                                                                        ∆a
                                                   ∆Ul,d = −pl,d           πκ > 0,
                                                                        al

    but that now
                                             ∆Ul (d = 0) = (1 − π)ρ∆a (γ − 1)



                                                               43
    and that
                                  ∆Ul (del ) = ∆a (γ − 1) ρ [πκ + (1 − π)] = ∆Uh (deh ).




     (b) As for ∆Uh (d) < ∆Ul (d),

                   ∆Uh (d)    =     π∆amh (d)κ (γρ − ph (d))

                              +     (1 − π) [ρ (1 + ah (γ − 1)) − (ph (d) + al mh (d) (γρ − ph (d)))]

                              <     π∆amh (d)κ (γρ − ph (d))

                              +     (1 − π) [ρ (1 + ah (γ − 1)) − ρ [1 + al (γ − 1)]]

                              =     π∆amh (d)κ (γρ − ph (d)) + (1 − π)ρ∆a (γ − 1)

                              <     π∆aml (d)κ (γρ − pl (d)) + (1 − π)ρ∆a (γ − 1)

                              =     ∆Ul (d),

    as
                                      ml (d) > mh (d)        and    pl (d) < ph (d),

    by Proposition 4 and this completes the proof.                                                          2

Comment. Notice thus that the diﬀerence between (28) and (29) is precisely the behavior of the entrepreneur
    in the absence of a liquidity shock. Whereas in the case where the agent deviates to al from ah , he always
    prefer to sell this is not the case when he deviates to ah from al . Eﬀectively then in the case of the
    deviation in the putative high eﬀort equilibrium, the utility level under the deviation is higher than the
    utility of the deviation under the putative low eﬀort equilibrium relative to their respective equilibrium
    utility levels, which is what s driving the result in Proposition 5 (b).                                 2

Proof of Proposition 6. Given the deﬁnition of dbh and dbl in (20) this proposition is an immediate corollary
    of Proposition 5.                                                                                        2

Proof of Proposition 7. This follows immediately from the observation that all high origination-eﬀort
    equilibria have a measure of informed dealers d ∈ [dˆh , d], where d was deﬁned in (2) and it was such
            (    )
    that m a, d ≤ 1 (see expression (6)). Clearly that there exists an equilibrium for which d∗h = dbh
    can only be the case for a set of economies of measure 0, those economies for which the high eﬀort
    equilibrium measure of dealers, d∗h , satisﬁes ∆Uh (d∗h ) = ψ. Finally notice that for any high eﬀort
    equilibrium such that d∗h > dbh , there are too many dealers, which can only detract from eﬃciency, as the
    measure d∗h − dbh > 0, does not serve any additional incentive purposes and could instead be engaged in
    entrepreneurial activities.                                                                             2




                                                        44
Comment. Notice that the arguments in Proposition 7 can be extended to show that even when the high
    eﬀort is not socially eﬃcient, any low eﬀort equilibrium that features a measure of dealers d∗l > 0 is also
    socially ineﬃcient. But, if d∗l = 0 can be supported as an equilibrium and (24) is not met, thee is an
    eﬃcient equilibrium. To put it diﬀerently, in our framework the eﬃcient outcome can be supported as
    an equilibrium only when there is no social role for ﬁnancial markets.

Proof of Proposition 8. This follows immediately from the last part of the proof of Proposition 7.           2




                                                    45
Figure 1: Wages in the ﬁnancial sector relative to non farm private sector. Figure
2-B in T. Philippon and A. Reshef, “Wages and Human Capital in the US Financial Industry:
1926-2006,” NYU working paper, December 2008.




                                           46
                          U, V
                              6


                                                                     (     )
                                                                      e d
                                                                    V d|a,




                                                                   U (a|a, d)




                              r                                       r-
                                                                       d
                         0                                        1
                                                                                       e as a
  Figure 2: Payoﬀ functions. Utility functions of the entrepreneur and a given dealer, d,
  function of the measure of dealers, d

                              ∆U
                              6


∆a (γ − 1) ρ [πκ + (1 − π)]
                                   ∆Ul (d)           ∆Uh (d)




       (1 − π)ρ∆a (γ − 1) r

                              r                             r-  d
                         0             e
                                       dl              e
                                                      dh   1
  Figure 3: Incentive compatibility for the low and high eﬀort proﬁle. The functions
  ∆Ul (d) and ∆Uh (d) are increasing in d and ∆Ul (d) > ∆Uh (d). del and deh are the ﬁrst measures
                        (        )          (       )
  of dealers for which m al , del = 1 and m ah , deh = 1, respectively.



                                                47
                                ∆U
                                6


∆a (γ − 1) ρ [πκ + (1 − π)]
                                     ∆Ul (d)              ∆Uh (d)


                           ψ


   (1 − π)ρ∆a (γ − 1)
                        @
                         @
                         Rr
                           ψ′
                                r                                   r-   d
                           0      dbl                dbh deh       1
  Figure 4: Incentive compatibility. Incentive compatibility for the low and high eﬀort proﬁle.
  When the cost of providing the high eﬀort is given by ψ then a candidate low eﬀort equilibrium
  is only incentive compatible if and only of d ∈ [0, dbl ] and a candidate high eﬀort equilibrium is
  only incentive compatible if and only if d ∈ [dbh , deh ]




                                                     48
                                     U, V
                                        6

                   V (ah , d∗2 )    - r

                                                                              V (ah , d)


U (ah |ah , d∗1 ) = V (ah , d∗1 )   - r



                                                                              U (ah |ah , d)

                U (ah |ah , d∗2 )   - r

                                    1             r          r     r-   d
                                dbh              d∗1     d∗2 = d 1
        Figure 5: High eﬀort equilibria. When the information cost function is as in (22) and
        the parameter values are given in (23) then dbh = .0536 and there are two possible high eﬀort
        equilibria, one in which d∗1 = .3101 where the marginal dealer is indiﬀerent between becoming
        one or an entrepreneur, and another in which d∗2 = d = .35 in which the marginal dealer
        strictly prefers to be one rather than an entrepreneur. Notice also that the allocations meet
        the participation constraint in that U (a∗ |a∗ , d∗ ) ≥ 1 and V (d|a∗ , d∗ ) > 1 for all d ≤ d∗ .




                                                          49
                                     U, V
                                      6

                   V (al , d∗3 )    - r

                U (al |al , 0)      - r     U (al |al , d)



U (al |al , d∗2 ) = V (al , d∗2 )   - r



                    V (al , 0)      - r
                                            V (al , d)

                U (al |al , d∗3 )   - r

                          1 r                  r         r          -    d
                            ∗
                           d1 = 0             d2∗      ∗
                                                      d3 = d    b
                                                                d l

       Figure 6: Low eﬀort equilibria. When the information cost function is as in (22) and the
       parameter values are given in section 4.1.2 then dbl = d = .15 and there are three possible
       low eﬀort equilibria. First one in which d∗1 = 0 where the agent de = 0 prefers to become an
       entrepreneur rather than a dealer. A second low eﬀort equilibrium is one where d∗2 = .0781
       and in which the marginal dealer is indiﬀerent between becoming one or an entrepreneur.
       Finally there is a third low eﬀort equilibrium with d∗3 = d = .15 in which the marginal dealer
       strictly prefers to be one rather than an entrepreneur. Notice also that the allocations meet
       the participation constraint in that U (a∗ |a∗ , d∗ ) ≥ 1 and V (d|a∗ , d∗ ) > 1 for all d ≤ d∗ .




                                                             50
