NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DOES TAX POLICY AFFECT EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION? EVIDENCE FROM
POSTWAR TAX REFORMS
Carola Frydman
Raven S. Molloy
Working Paper 16812
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16812

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2011

We would like to thank the staff at the Historical Collections and Danielle Barney of Baker Library
for making the data collection possible. We thank Eric Engen, Adam Looney, Robert Margo, Thomas
Piketty, and Emmanuel Saez for helpful comments, and John Graham for providing his estimates of
corporate income tax rates. Yoon Chang, LiJia Gong, Yao Huang, Michele McAteer, Timothy Schwuchow,
James Sigel, and Athanasios Vorvis provided excellent research assistance. The views in this paper
do not necessarily reflect those of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, its staff,
or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Carola Frydman and Raven S. Molloy. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Does Tax Policy Affect Executive Compensation? Evidence from Postwar Tax Reforms
Carola Frydman and Raven S. Molloy
NBER Working Paper No. 16812
February 2011
JEL No. G30,H24,H32,J31,J33,N32
ABSTRACT
The trends in executive pay and labor income tax rates since the 1940s suggest a high elasticity of
taxable income with respect to tax policy. By contrast, the level and structure of executive compensation
have been largely unresponsive to tax incentives since the 1980s. However, the relative tax advantage
of different forms of pay was small during this period. Using a sample of top executives in large firms
from 1946 to 2005, we also find a small short run response of salaries, qualified stock options, and
bonuses paid after retirement to changes in tax rates on labor income—even though tax rates were
significantly higher and more heterogeneous across individuals in the first several decades following
WWII. We explore several potential explanations for the conflicting impressions given by the long-run
and short-run correlations between taxes and pay, including changes in social norms and concerns
about pay equality.

Carola Frydman
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-642
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
frydman@mit.edu
Raven S. Molloy
Federal Reserve Board of Governors
20th and C Streets NW
Washington, DC 20551
raven.s.molloy@frb.gov

1. Introduction
An extensive literature in corporate finance and labor economics has debated potential
explanations for the growth in the level of executive compensation and the increase in
performance-related pay over the past three decades. Tax policy seems like a possible candidate
since the rise in pay coincided with a marked drop in marginal income tax rates (see Figure 1).
However, the handful of studies on this topic has found modest effects of tax policy on
managerial pay, at best (Goolsbee 2000a, Hall and Liebman 2000, Rose and Wolfram 2002).1
These results are consistent with the literature on the elasticity of taxable income, which finds
limited behavioral response of top income earners —a group that includes but is not limited to
corporate executives— to tax changes (Saez, Slemrod and Giertz 2010).
Using a novel dataset on top executive compensation since the 1940s, we provide new
evidence on the effects of tax policy on managerial pay. Prior research on this topic has focused
on the period since the 1980s, when low tax rates on labor income make the effect of taxes hard
to identify. To obtain variation in tax rates, these studies compare highly-paid executives with
those receiving a more modest paycheck. Thus, these estimates are based on the questionable
comparability of individuals at very different points in the income distribution at a time of
growing income inequality. By contrast, labor income tax rates were much higher and varied

1

Goolsbee (2000a) finds that the tax increase of 1993 led to a significant decrease in the taxable income of
corporate executives, but that this decline could be almost entirely attributed to a change in the timing of stock
option exercises rather than to a permanent change in behavior. However, Hall and Liebman (2000) find no
evidence that tax reforms influenced stock option exercises in the 1980s. They also document that the tax advantage
of stock options was relatively small in the 1980s and 1990s and that it had little effect on stock option grants at that
time. Using a difference-in-difference approach, Rose and Wolfram (2002) find the rule limiting salaries to $1
million in 1993 had only a small effect on salaries and no effect on total compensation.

1

appreciably across top executives from the 1950s to the 1970s, providing a better environment to
examine the effects of tax policy.
Differences in the tax-deductibility, time deferral, and tax treatment of various forms of
remuneration imply that tax policy should affect the types of compensation used to remunerate
executives (Scholes and Wolfson 1992, Hall and Liebman 2000, Graham 2003). We focus on
the effect of labor income tax rates on three major components of the compensation package:
salary plus current bonus (a bonus that is paid out in the same year that it is awarded), qualified
stock option grants, and bonuses paid after retirement.2 We also examine the sum of all forms of
compensation that are taxable as labor income—which we refer to as “total taxable
compensation”—because tax policy may also influence total taxable earnings relative to forms of
compensation that are difficult to tax, such as perquisites and private benefits.
Time-series evidence points to a strong role for tax policy in affecting executive pay:
total taxable compensation was significantly lower in the 1950s and 1960s when labor income
tax rates were higher, whereas the sharp increase in pay in recent decades occurred at a time of
lower tax rates (see Figure 1). On the other hand, the level of taxable compensation did not
significantly change after major tax reforms, suggesting that the rise in compensation over time
might be driven by other factors that led to a secular rise in the incomes of the highly-paid.
Indeed, we find that the strong correlation between tax rates and the level of compensation over
time is driven by long-run trends rather than by high-frequency fluctuations.
2

Due to difficulties of identification, our estimates of the effects of capital gains or corporate income tax rates on the
compensation package are not as reliable (see Section 3). When we do take the tax rates on these two types of
income into account, the estimated effects on labor income tax rates are qualitatively similar. Throughout the rest of
the paper, the term “taxes rates” refers to labor income tax rates unless otherwise specified.

2

A limitation of the time series correlations is that they can be influenced by a large
number of possible omitted variables, and therefore cannot be interpreted in a causal manner.3
To account for omitted factors, we focus on the short-term response to tax changes and identify
the effect of tax policy by comparing pre-reform to post-reform pay across executives in
different tax brackets. We estimate these effects using both time-series and cross-sectional
variation in changes in tax rates, using a variety of strategies to control for other factors that may
confound the effect of tax changes.
For each form of compensation, we find no relationship between changes in tax rates and
changes in pay. This result holds in both the entire sample and in the years from 1946 to 1972,
when changes in tax rates were substantially larger and more heterogeneous across individuals.
The large variation in tax rates in our sample allows us to reject statistically any meaningful
short-run effect of tax rates on all of the types of remuneration that we analyze. Changes in tax
rates have a small effect on compensation even when we allow these effects to occur over 3, 5
and 10-year time periods.
We also find that changes in tax rates had a negligible short-run effect on the total taxable
labor income of executives, measured as the sum of salary, current bonus, long-term bonus
payouts, and the value of exercised non-qualified stock options. We can reject an elasticity of
taxable compensation with respect to taxes greater than 0.2, a value that is on the lower end of
the broad range of estimates found in the public finance literature on this topic (Lindsey 1987,

3

See Saez, Slemrod and Giertz (2010) for a detailed explanation of the identification issues that difficult obtaining a
reliable estimate of the long-run elasticity of taxable income.

3

Feldstein 1995, Goolsbee 1999, Gruber and Saez 2002, Saez 1999, Saez, Slemrod and Giertz
2010).4
The results based on the correlation between changes in tax rates and changes in
remuneration contrast sharply with the time-series correlation between the levels of these two
variables. One possible way to reconcile these two findings is if tax rates affect pay with a
considerable lag. This lag would have to be fairly long, since we do not find an effect on
changes in pay over periods shorter than 10 years, the longest period for which we can follow a
reasonable number of executives. Social norms might play a role in creating such a long lag if
the social acceptability of changing an executive’s pay relative to other workers makes radical
changes in pay difficult, limiting firms’ ability to alter compensation packages to take advantage
of tax considerations. Another way to reconcile these findings is if the long-run correlation is
driven by trends in other factors. For example, a general perception that top managers have
become more productive and that high tax rates suppress productivity may have led to both
higher levels of pay and lower tax rates.

4

Lindsay (1987) and Feldstein (1995) estimate a large elasticity of taxable income (between 1 and 3) by examining
changes in the distribution of taxable income around the 1981 and 1986 tax reforms. Feenberg and Poterba (1993)
also find large increases in high incomes in response to the 1986 tax cuts. However, these results are potentially
biased by the secular increase in income inequality in those years. Gruber and Saez (2002) use panel data on
individuals in the 1980s to control for the biases imparted by inequality and mean reversion, and find that the
elasticity of taxable income was about 0.6 among individuals earning more than $100,000. However, this response
is largely due to changes in tax preferences such as exemptions and itemized deductions, not to changes in earned
income. Using aggregate income tax return data from 1960 to 2000, Saez (2004) estimates an elasticity of wage
income in the top 1 percent between 0.4 and 1. However, consistent with our results, he finds that high-income
earners did not respond to Kennedy’s large tax cuts in the early 1960s. Saez (1999) finds that the elasticity of
adjusted gross income is 0.25 when identified from individuals near the boundary of a tax bracket 1979-1981.
Finally, Goolsbee (1999) uses average incomes reported for different income groups in the Statistics of Income to
estimate the elasticity of taxable income in reforms from the 1920s to the 1960s. His estimates for the top income
group range from 0.2 to 0.7 in most reforms, but are negative for the 1935 and 1964 reforms.

4

The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents time-series evidence on the
long-run correlation between executive pay and tax rates. Section 3 describes the data and
estimation strategy used to analyze changes in remuneration. Sections 4 and 5 report results for
two important types of compensation: salaries and qualified stock options. Section 6 discusses
the potential roles of unobserved forms of pay, and Section 7 provides estimates on the elasticity
of a broad measure of income composed of all forms of compensation that are taxable as labor
income. Finally, Section 8 discusses possible explanations for why the correlation between
changes in tax rates and changes in pay is so small, while the time series correlation appears to
be much stronger.

2. Long-Run Trends in Tax Rates and Executive Pay
As shown in Figure 1, the trends in tax rates and executive pay in the post-war period suggest
that the increase in remuneration might be partly due to a decline in tax rates. To provide formal
evidence for this relationship, we regress the logarithm of the level of executive pay on the
logarithm of one minus the average marginal tax rate faced by top executives, a standard
specification in the literature to estimate the elasticity of taxable income.5 The measures of
executive pay and tax rates are from a sample of top corporate executives that we describe in the
next section. The time-series regression yields a coefficient equal to 1 (see Table 1), which is on

5

See Gruber and Saez (2002) and Saez, Slemrod and Giertz (2010) for detailed discussions on different
methodologies to estimate the elasticity of taxable income.

5

the high end of available estimates of the elasticity of taxable income.6 However, this estimate
does not reflect purely the influence of tax policy due to a mechanical correlation between pay
and tax rates. Specifically, the tax rate faced by an executive is a function of her tax bracket,
which in turn is determined by her realized income. To eliminate this mechanical correlation, we
replace the average tax rate faced by this group of executives with the maximum tax rate on
labor income. The estimated coefficient is reduced substantially but it remains significantly
positive and above 0.4 (see column 2), the upper end of the range of accepted estimates in the
literature.
Although these simple time-series regressions estimate a strong correlation between the
level of tax rates and the level of executive pay, inspection of Figure 1 shows that these two
variables do not always move together, at least in the short run. For example, compensation did
not increase materially in the early 1970s, even though the average tax rate fell by 25 percent (18
percentage points) during this period. Moreover, the sharp increase in executive pay in the
1990s occurred at a time of little change in the tax rates faced by top executives. To control for
secular factors that may have contributed to changes in tax rates and compensation, we add a
time trend to the regressions. Although it is not clear a priori what form the time trend should
take, we find qualitatively similar results no matter whether we use a linear, quadratic, or cubic
trend. In every case, the estimated correlation between taxes and pay changes sign and no longer
suggests that tax cuts can explain the increase in compensation (columns 3 to 8). These results

6

Although earlier papers obtained estimates in the range of 1 to 3 (Feldstein 1995, Lindsey 1987), more accepted
estimates from subsequent work put the long run elasticity between 0.12 and 0.4 (Saez, Slemrod and Giertz 2010).

6

indicate that the positive correlation between the levels of executive pay and tax rates is driven
by their long-run trends rather than by high-frequency fluctuations.
One possible interpretation of the time-series evidence is that an unobserved third factor
caused both the decline in tax rates and the rise in executive pay, in which case tax policy by
itself had no direct impact on compensation. On the other hand, the effect of taxes may only be
observed at very low frequencies if compensation practices adjust slowly over time. In this case,
including a time trend (which by itself has no economic interpretation) obscures a true causal
relationship. Thus, controlling for a time trend does not definitively reveal the true causal effect
of tax rates on executive pay.
Another way to assess the importance of omitted variables is to examine the income of a
different group of workers that are affected by similar economic forces as top corporate
executives, but face different tax rates. To this end, we use the decennial Census to gather
information on the salaries paid to middle managers.7 If an unobserved factor was driving the
correlation between the taxes and pay of top executives, we might expect to see a similar
relationship between the taxes and pay of this group as well. The right-hand panel of Figure 2
plots the median real value of wage and salary income against the average marginal tax rate of
these individuals.8 Although there are only six data points, there is no obvious correlation
between the tax rates and remuneration of this group. By contrast, there is a strong negative
7

Specifically, we use individuals in the occupation “managers, officials and proprietors (nec)” who report being
employed in a private non-agricultural industry, who worked for wages for at least 30 hours per week, and who
earned non-zero labor income. We exclude observations with top-coded wage and salary income both because this
group likely includes top executives and because topcoding prevents us from determining the appropriate tax rate.
8
We calculate an individual’s marginal tax rate assuming he is married, files jointly and has no household income
other than his wage and salary income. These are the same assumptions that we use for top executives (Section 3).

7

relationship between the pay and tax rates of top executives at these same six points in time (see
the left-hand panel). Of course, the tax rates faced by middle managers did not change as much
as those faced by top executives during this period, so the incentive to alter salaries was smaller.
Nevertheless, the positive correlation between taxes and compensation does not seem to be
generalizable to all workers in the economy, but rather seems to be specific to individuals with
very high incomes.9
In the end, it is difficult to determine the causal effect of tax policy from time series
correlations alone due to the large number of possible omitted variables. An alternative strategy
is to use micro data to compare changes in compensation for executives experiencing large
versus small changes in tax rates. To be able to ascribe the effects to tax policy, we calculate
changes in tax rates facing these individuals that are attributable solely to tax reforms, and
examine changes in various types of compensation in response to these changes in tax rates.

3. Data description and empirical strategy
3.a. Data
We use a panel dataset on the compensation of top executives in large publicly-traded firms from
1946 to 2005.10 The sample is based on the 50 largest publicly-held corporations in 1940, 1960,

9

This result is consistent with a number of studies that have found the response to tax changes to be concentrated at
the upper end of the income distribution (see, for example, Slemrod 1995, Saez 2004, and Saez, Slemrod and Gietz
2010).
10
The majority of the sample (about 75 percent) is composed of manufacturing firms. See Frydman and Saks
(2010) for a detailed description of the data collection, sample selection, and variable definitions.

8

and 1990 (a total of 101 firms). 11 The data from 1946 to 1991 were hand-collected from proxy
statements, and from 1992 to 2005 they were obtained from Compustat’s Executive
Compensation database (ExecuComp). Firm-level information is from CRSP and Compustat,
with some variables in the early parts of our sample collected from various editions of Moody’s
Industrial Manual, Moody’s Transportation Manual, and Moody’s Public Utility Manual.
Table 2 reports basic descriptive statistics of the entire dataset, which includes the five
highest-paid officers in each firm in a given year.12 There are nearly 3,000 individual executives
and each one is observed for an average of 6 years, giving a total of 15,000 executive-year
observations (col. 1). Since these data are representative of the compensation of top executives
in the 300 largest publicly traded firms in a given year (Frydman and Saks 2010), our results on
the effect of tax policy should be interpreted accordingly.13
The dataset includes four different types of labor income that we can measure
consistently over time: salaries plus current bonuses (bonuses awarded and paid out in the same
year), the Black-Scholes value of stock option grants, the value of exercised stock options, and

11

Our analysis includes the executives in every firm for as many years as we can follow, regardless of the firm’s
size in that year. Thus, a concern is that the smaller firms in our sample are not representative because they are
either going to become successful or are formerly successful firms in decline. However, the results are robust to
including only observations where the firm is ranked among the 50 largest firms in that year.
12
Frydman and Saks (2010) used only the 3 highest-paid executives in each firm because many corporations did not
disclose information on lower-paid executives prior to World War II. Since our focus is on the postwar period, we
are able to include the 4th and 5th highest-paid executives. Including these executives improves the power of our
estimates, but all of the results are qualitatively similar when we restrict the sample to the top 3 managers.
13
Our results do not necessarily extend to small firms or private companies. For example, Cadman, Klasa and
Matsunaga (2010) show that the determinants of executive pay are different for ExecuComp and non-ExecuComp
firms.

9

long-term incentive pay (bonuses that are received for several years after they are awarded).14
We also present evidence on bonuses paid after retirement, for which we have data through
1991. Finally, we provide estimates of the elasticity of taxable income by studying the
responsiveness of all taxable forms of compensation to changes in tax policy.

3.b. Estimation strategy and identification issues
Since many issues about identification are pertinent for all forms of pay, we follow a similar
estimation strategy to evaluate the effect of tax policy on each type of remuneration.
Specifically, we regress the change in each separate type of remuneration on the change in the
logarithm of one minus the marginal tax rate on labor income, which we refer to as the “net-oftax rate”:15
Δ ln(remun it ) = βΔ ln(1 − τ it ) + ΓX it + ε it

(1)

where the vector Xit includes individual and firm characteristics (to be described below).
Theory predicts that changes in taxes should affect the share of compensation awarded in
various forms, as firms substitute tax-advantaged for tax-disadvantaged forms of pay. Our
specifications use the level of pay because we do not observe all of the components of total pay
required to calculate the denominator (like pensions and perks), but results are similar when
using each form of compensation as a fraction of total pay as the dependent variable. Thus, our

14

Although it would be useful to separate salaries from current bonus payments, many firms reported only the sum
of the two prior to 1992.
15
For every type of compensation except salaries, a considerable number of observations take a value of zero.
Therefore, we examine the first difference of these forms of pay instead of the change in the logarithm. The
distributions of these first differences are very heteroskedastic, so we trim the top and bottom 1 percent in each year.

10

specification is similar in spirit to estimates of the elasticity of taxable income, in which untaxed
forms of income are unobserved.
In addition to labor income tax rates, taxes on capital gains and corporate income also
alter the tax incentives for different components of the compensation package (Scholes and
Wolfson 1992, Hall and Liebman 2000). Thus, a thorough analysis of how tax policy affects
compensation decisions should have a broad perspective that takes into account the implications
of all types of taxes for both the employer and the employee. However, assessing the effects of
capital gains and corporate income tax rates in our data is difficult. These rates changed
infrequently during our sample period and, when they did change, these changes usually
occurred at the same time, making identification of their separate effects based on time series
problematic (see Figure 2). Several factors also limit our ability to identify the effects of these
rates by exploiting cross-sectional differences in taxes. First, there is no cross-sectional variation
in the marginal capital gains tax rate, as all executives faced the same rate. In addition, there is
little cross-sectional variation in the corporate income tax rate in the firms in our sample. Prior
papers have estimated cross-sectional differences in corporate tax rates from cases in which
firms have negative earnings or can take advantage of tax-loss carryforwards (Hall and Liebman
2000, Plesko 2003). However, these outcomes are rare in our sample of large firms. For
example, more than 95 percent of the firms in our sample report pre-tax income more than 10
times the cutoff for the maximum corporate income tax rate.16

16

Using a more sophisticated approach, Graham (1996, 2007) uses dynamic information on both net operating loss
carrybacks and carryforwards to calculate firms’ tax rates from 1980 to 2005. His data confirm the lack of crosssectional variation in corporate income tax rates in our sample: For the firms in our sample that we can match to

11

Given these limitations, for most types of compensation we focus on labor income tax
rates. The analysis of qualified stock options is an important exception; due to the difference in
the tax deductibility of qualified options compared to cash, controlling for all tax rates is
essential.17 Nevertheless, in general we do not find important effects of changes in capital gains
or corporate income tax rates, nor does including these rates alter the estimated effect on labor
income tax rates.
By focusing on the changes in pay and taxes rather than on the levels of these variables,
estimating equation (1) mitigates many person-specific omitted factors that would bias our
estimates. Still, due to the progressive structure of tax policy, the change in the tax rate faced by
an executive will reflect other changes in his or her income beyond those induced by changes in
tax policy. In particular, if individuals endogenously alter their behavior in response to the
marginal tax rate of each tax bracket, the observed change in tax rates will not reveal the
exogenous effect of the change in policy. To solve this problem, we calculate the change in tax
rates in year t as the rate an individual would have faced had his or her income been the same as
it was in the previous year (Gruber and Saez 2002).
We calculate an executive’s marginal income tax rate assuming that his income is equal
to the total annual compensation that is taxable as personal labor income (defined as
salary+current bonus+payouts from long-term incentive programs+the value of exercised non-

Graham’s estimates, 84 percent of Graham’s estimates are within 1 percentage point of the maximum corporate rate.
It is possible that these estimates overestimate the actual tax rate faced by the firm because of stock option
deductions, but Graham, Lang and Shackelford (2004) show that this effect is small for S&P 100 firms.
17
For example, Core and Guay (2001) find that high tax-rate firms are less likely to use option compensation for
non-executive employees, possibly to take advantage of the immediate deduction of cash compensation.

12

qualified stock options) and that he files jointly with a spouse. Unobserved sources of household
income and tax deductions make this estimate an imperfect approximation of the actual marginal
rate faced by an individual. However, microdata from the Statistics of Income (which are
available from 1960 onward) suggest that the measurement error in our estimate of tax rates is
relatively small.18
Table 3 shows the distribution of changes in the net-of-tax rate on labor income in every
year of our sample in which tax rates changed. In the first half of the sample, a number of tax
reforms led to significant changes in the net-of-tax rate. For example, large positive values of
the change in the net-of-tax rate in 1964 and 1965 illustrate the tax cuts associated with the 1964
Tax Reform. In spite of being among the highest-paid individuals in the economy, the tax
system was so progressive that the executives in our sample were in different tax brackets. Thus,
there is considerable variation in tax rates across individuals during most of these reforms, which
allows us to precisely estimate the effect of changes in tax rates. By contrast, all executives were
in the top income bracket after 1971, and the changes in tax rates after that year were much
smaller. Therefore, the earlier part of our sample is a more natural environment to look for an
effect of tax policy on executive pay.
We estimate equation (1) pooling the data from all years in a single regression and
controlling for each executive’s initial taxable compensation. Thus, we identify the effect of tax
18

Specifically, we match the executives in our sample in 1960, 1970, 1980, 1990, and 2000 to individuals in the
SOI data who report a similar amount of wage income. For 1980 to 2000 we compute an “SOI tax rate” as the
average reported marginal income tax rate in the SOI data among individuals with similar wage income. For 1960
and 1970 (when marginal tax rates are not reported) the SOI tax rate is the marginal income tax rate implied by the
level of total taxable income reported in the corresponding SOI data. In each year, the correlation of our estimated
tax rate based on executive compensation and the SOI tax rate is greater than 0.98.

13

rates by comparing two executives with similar levels of compensation but at two different
points in time—one prior to one reform and the other prior to a different reform—such that they
faced different changes in tax rates due to the different reforms. This strategy controls for mean
reversion in income, which causes higher-income executives to experience larger reductions in
labor income, thereby leading to a systematic relationship between the predicted change in tax
rates and the change in pay even if there is no true effect of tax policy (Gruber and Saez 2002).19
Estimating a single regression over the entire sample period is also appealing because it
generates more variation in changes in tax rates than can be obtained from any single reform.
However, results based on comparisons over time might be misleading if omitted factors that
evolve over time, such as income inequality or corporate governance, are correlated with both
tax policy and changes in compensation. Therefore, we also estimate specifications that include
year fixed effects on a sample ending with the 1969 reform (which enacted a series of changes in
marginal income tax rates through 1972), since there is no cross-sectional variation in changes in
tax rates after that time. We find similar results using either specification.20
In all specifications, we control for a number of other variables that might be correlated
with both changes in tax rates and changes in executive pay: the executive’s job title in the
previous year and whether this title changed in the current year, whether the executive sat on the

19

Gruber and Saez (2002) account for mean reversion by controlling for a nonparametric function of income in
addition to ln(income). Our results are similar when we control for lagged compensation in a similar manner, but
we report specifications with only ln(income) for simplicity.
20
A third estimation strategy would be to estimate the regression for each separate tax reform. However, it is
difficult to control for mean reversion in such a specification because changes in tax rates are determined by initial
income. Moreover, we cannot implement this strategy for post-1971 data because tax rates do not vary across the
executives in our sample after 1971.

14

board of directors in the previous year and whether their director status changed in the current
year, the firm’s sales in the previous year (to proxy for firm size), the firm’s market value in the
previous year (another measure of firm size), the rate of return on the firm’s stock price in the
previous year (to capture past firm growth), the firm’s leverage in the previous year (defined as
the ratio of liabilities to assets), and the firm’s market-to-book ratio in the previous year (to
proxy for growth opportunities). An extensive literature in accounting and corporate finance
shows that these variables have an effect on the level and structure of executive pay (see, for
example, Smith and Watts 1992, Bizjak, Brickley and Coles 1993, Core, Holthausen, and
Larcker 1999, Murphy 1999, Core, Guay, and Larcker 2008, Graham, Li and Qiu 2009).
Despite its advantages, an important drawback of estimating the effect of tax rates from
annual fluctuations in tax rates and pay is that this methodology only captures the immediate
effect of tax rates on compensation. In some specifications we examine changes over 3-, 5- or
10-year periods to allow the effect of taxes to occur slowly over time, but this strategy still
cannot address the possibility that it takes longer than 10 years for these effects to surface. We
will return to this issue in Section 8 when we discuss the interpretation of our results.

4. The Effect of Taxes on Salary and Bonus
We start by examining the relationship between tax rates and the logarithm of salaries plus
current bonuses (which we will refer to as “salaries”). We would expect the coefficient on the
net-of-tax rate to be positive, since a decline in tax rates (and therefore an increase in the net-oftax rate) should make salaries a more attractive form of remuneration. As shown in column 1 of

15

Table 4, there is no meaningful relationship between changes in taxes and salaries when we look
at the simple correlation of these two variables with minimal controls; the coefficient on the netof-tax rate is small, and we can reject an elasticity greater than 0.2 with 95 percent confidence.21
Controlling for mean reversion in compensation (column 2) does not alter this result.
A potential source of bias in these estimates is that the secular trend in income inequality
might be correlated with changes in tax rates over time (Slemrod 1996).22 We address this issue
by including a cubic time trend to account for smooth changes in income inequality during our
sample period. We also interact this trend with lagged income to allow the effect of inequality
on changes in salaries to vary with the level of income. Including these controls has no material
effect on the estimated coefficient on the net-of-tax rate (column 3). Results are similar if we
control for inequality by including the share of aggregate wages and salaries earned by the 95th to
99th percentile of the income distribution (computed by Piketty and Saez 2003) and growth in
real GDP (Goolsbee 2000b) (results not shown).
Another concern is that firms may differ along dimensions that might be correlated with
both changes in tax rates and changes in pay. As discussed above, a large literature in finance
and accounting shows that a host of industry and firm characteristics are important correlates of
the level and structure of executive pay. Although we control for as many firm-specific factors
as possible, many other firm characteristics, such as corporate governance, are more difficult to

21

In all specifications, we cluster the standard errors by year because clustering along other dimensions yields much
smaller standard errors. Thus, clustering by year makes it the most difficult to reject a large elasticity. Results are
similar when we use a two-way clustering method to cluster by both year and executive.
22
Slemrod (1996) shows that an apparent effect of taxes on the income of the rich during the Revenue Act of 1986
disappears when directly controlling for a measure of income inequality.

16

measure. In column 4, we control for unobserved differences across firms by including decadespecific firm fixed effects; we still find little effect of taxes in this specification.23
Because the attractiveness of various forms of remuneration depends on corporate
income and capital gains tax rates in addition to personal income tax rates, in column 5 we
control for changes in the net-of-tax rates on all three types of income. Including these other tax
rates does not materially change the coefficient on the net-of-tax rate on labor income. In
addition, the coefficient on the net-of-tax rate on corporate income has an unexpected sign, since
a decrease in corporate income taxes (increase in the net-of-tax rate) should make payment of
salaries less advantageous to the firm relative to other forms of pay that are not deductible.
However, the coefficients on the corporate and capital gains tax rates should be interpreted with
caution because they are identified only from changes in these rates over time, which occurred
infrequently.
Finally, we control for omitted factors that might be correlated with changes in tax policy
over time by including year fixed effects in the regression. The sample period is limited to 19471972 because we do not have cross-sectional variation in tax rates after that period. Another
advantage of examining this period separately is that income inequality did not change
dramatically at that time (Piketty and Saez 2003), so any bias from a correlation between
inequality and tax rates should be small. As shown by columns 6 to 8, neither changing the

23

Controlling only for firm fixed effects would be insufficient to capture unobservable factors because firms may
have changed substantially during the 60-year sample period. Therefore, we allow the firm fixed effects to vary by
decade. We do not present results that allow the firm fixed effects to vary by year because we have at most 5
executives per firm in each year. Nevertheless, the effect of tax rates is unchanged in such a specification.

17

sample period nor including year fixed effects leads us to find that changes in salaries were
related to changes in income tax rates.
In summary, using micro-data we find no evidence that the effect of tax policy on annual
changes in salaries and current bonuses was sizable. However, we would not expect annual
changes in pay to reflect changes in tax rates immediately if salaries adjust slowly over time. To
investigate this possibility, we examine changes in salaries over 3-year, 5-year and 10-year
periods. Table 5 reports results over these longer horizons based on the specifications in
columns 3 and 4 of Table 4 (our preferred specifications because they include rough controls for
income inequality and/or omitted firm characteristics). Although there is a small positive
correlation between 3-year changes in tax rates and 3-year changes in salaries when decadespecific firm fixed effects are included (column 2), this result is not robust across specifications
(column 1). Moreover, the coefficient estimates become negative when we examine changes in
pay over longer periods of time (columns 3 to 6).24 Thus, salaries and bonuses do not appear to
respond to changes in tax rates, even after a period of up to five or ten years.

5. The Effect of Taxes on the Use of Qualified Stock Options
Since the early 1990s, employee stock options have become a major component of an
executive’s compensation package (Murphy 1999). The vast majority of these options have been
non-qualified, meaning that they are taxed as labor income and firms can claim them as a

24

We also estimate an elasticity close to zero for the other specifications shown in Table 4 (not shown).

18

corporate deduction (like cash compensation).25 Taking into account the tax implications for
both the firm and the executive, Hall and Liebman (2000) show that non-qualified stock options
have had only a minor tax advantage relative to cash compensation, which is primarily due to the
deferral of the tax payment.26 The dashed line in Figure 4 uses their formula to show the tax
advantage of non-qualified options relative to cash for the average executive in our sample. The
tax advantage of these options relative to cash has been relatively small, reaching a maximum of
only about 6¢ per $1 of compensation in the late 1980s and early 1990s. Thus, it is not
surprising that tax policy appears to have had at most a minor role on the rapid growth of nonqualified stock options since the 1980s (Goolsbee 1999, Hall and Liebman 2000, Katuscak
2005).
In contrast to the options that are prevalent today, the majority of employee stock options
granted in the 1950s and 1960s were “qualified.” Stock options were rarely used to compensate
top executives prior to the 1950s, in part due to uncertainty about their tax implications for firms
and executives (Washington and Rothschild 1962). This uncertainty was resolved by the 1950
Revenue Act, which introduced qualified (also called “restricted” or “incentive”) stock options.
Executives receiving qualified options were untaxed on both the grant and the exercise date,

25

For most of our sample period, non-qualified stock options were not taxed upon grant. Instead, the gains from
exercising non-qualified options were taxed as personal income at the time of exercise, while future appreciation on
the shares purchased with these options were taxed as capital gains. The corporation received a tax deduction upon
exercise for the amount of the exercised gains.
26
As described by Hall and Liebman (2000), cash and stock options receive different rates of return over the period
in which option payouts are deferred. While executives can invest option payouts at a pre-personal-tax rate of
return, cash compensation would yield a lower after-tax rate. Moreover, the advantage of deferring taxes is higher
when the corporate tax rate is low.

19

while the appreciation on shares acquired with these options was taxed as capital gains.
However, firms received no corporate tax deduction on qualified stock options.
Was the tax advantage of qualified options large enough to alter the compensation
packages of corporate executives in a meaningful way? As with any form of compensation,
determining its advantage relative to other forms of pay requires taking into account the tax
implications for both the firm and the executive. Given the large differences between the
marginal tax rates on labor income and capital gains at that time (see Figure 3), this type of
remuneration was advantageous from the executive’s perspective. However, from the firm’s
perspective qualified options were disadvantageous relative to cash compensation because they
could not be deducted from corporate income.
The solid line in Figure 4 depicts the average advantage of qualified stock options relative
to cash compensation over our sample period using the method of Hall and Liebman (2000),
which takes into account the tax implications for both the firm and the executive. From 1950 to
1963, qualified options had an advantage of about 14¢ for each $1 of compensation for the
average executive in our sample, more than twice the peak of the tax advantage of non-qualified
stock options relative to cash compensation. Firms began introducing qualified stock option
plans in the early 1950s, and the use of this type of option became relatively common over the
following 20 years (Frydman and Saks 2010).
Subsequent tax reforms in the 1960s and 1970s reduced the tax advantage of options by
lowering labor income tax rates, increasing capital gains tax rates, and imposing more stringent
requirements on the attributes of qualified options. In fact, qualified stock options became

20

disadvantageous relative to cash compensation from a pure tax perspective in 1971. Firms
began to substitute qualified option plans for non-qualified ones around this time (Hite and Long
1982), again suggesting a response of compensation practices to tax policy. The granting of
qualified stock options was banned from 1976 to 1981 and has been subject to a stringent cap
since then. Since then, the vast majority of options granted have been non-qualified.27
While both the adoption of qualified stock option plans in the 1950s and their replacement
with non-qualified option plans in the early 1970s are suggestive of the importance of tax
considerations, the timing alone does not prove a causal effect of tax policy. Rigorous analysis
of the 1950 reform is not feasible due to the lack of option use prior to the reform.28 Instead, we
focus our analysis on the period between 1950 to 1975, when the tax advantage of qualified
options was notable and varied considerably across executives due to differences in labor income
tax rates. In addition, several tax reforms during this period introduced large changes in this
advantage across executives. Using variation in changes in tax rates across executives is
appealing because it controls for unobservable differences across individuals as well as factors
that might have been correlated with the evolution of tax rates and option grants over time.

27

The rapid growth in non-qualified options since the 1990s could be related to their advantageous tax deductibility
because the tax code imposed a cap of $1 million for corporate deductions of non-performance-based executive pay
in 1993. However, research has found only a modest effect of the cap on the structure and level of executive pay
(Rose and Wolfram 2002, Hall and Liebman 2000, Perry and Zenner 2001).
28
The standard “difference-in-difference” estimation strategy is not feasible because almost no executive received a
grant prior to the reform. Thus, the pre-reform period cannot be used to control for differences across executives in
the probability of receiving a grant. Still, we find no evidence that executives facing higher tax rates received more
options during the five years after the 1950 reform. However, since tax rates are determined by an individual’s
income level, they are likely correlated with many other unobservable factors (such as productivity) that also affect
the use of stock options.

21

We test for an effect of tax rates on stock option grants by estimating changes in the BlackScholes value of qualified options granted to each executive as a function of changes in her netof-tax rates on labor income, corporate income, and capital gains. We use this specification to
allow different tax rates to affect stock options in a flexible way, but results are similar when we
include the tax advantage as formulated by Hall and Liebman (2000) or a simplified version of
this advantage.29 We would expect changes in stock option grants to be positively correlated
with the net-of-tax rates on corporate income and capital gains, but negatively correlated with the
net-of-tax rate on labor income. We include all of the same controls as in the salary and bonus
specification.
As shown in column 1 of Table 6, there is no statistically significant effect of changes in
any of the tax rates on the value of qualified stock option grants for the 1951 to 1975 period.
Moreover, the signs of the coefficients are not in the expected directions. As we discussed in
Section 3, the effects on capital gains and corporate income tax rates should be interpreted with
caution because these rates changed in only a few occasions over our sample period and they do
not vary across firms or individuals. As an alternative, we include year fixed-effects to control
for any year-specific omitted factors that might be correlated with changes in labor income tax
rates and qualified stock option grants (column 2). The coefficient on the labor income tax rate
is unchanged, and we can reject with 95 percent confidence that a 1-standard deviation increase

29

Ignoring the benefits from investing the different forms of pay over the period of deferral of option payouts, the
tax advantage of qualified stock options relative to cash compensation to the firm can be measured
by (1− τ c )(1− τ cg ) − (1− τ p ) , where τ c is the tax rate on corporate income, τ cg is the rate on capital gains, and

τ p is the personal income tax rate. We find no significant effects of tax rates using this specification.

22

in the net-of-tax rate would reduce the value of qualified stock option grants by more than
$7,500 (equivalent to less than 1/20 of a standard deviation of the changes in the value of stock
option grants in this sample).
Because employee stock options were generally granted only once every few years to
each executive during this sample period, using annual changes in option awards may
underestimate the effect of changes in tax policy. To address this problem, we estimate the same
specification for the average value of options granted over a three-year period (columns 3 and
4).30 We do not find statistically significant effects of any net-of-tax rate on this smoothed
measure of option grants, and the signs are still frequently opposite from the expected direction.
In sum, we find little evidence of a short-run effect of changes in tax rates on option
grants, even during a period when qualified stock options had a sizable tax advantage over other
forms of pay. However, this strategy may underestimate the effect of tax policy if it takes more
than several years for remuneration to respond to changes in tax advantages. Because the timing
of the proliferation of qualified stock option plans and substitution of non-qualified for qualified
options coincides strongly with the rise and fall of the tax advantage of qualified options, it is
difficult to conclude that the use of qualified options was not at least partly attributable to tax
considerations. Nevertheless, the unresponsiveness of option grants to changes in their tax
advantage suggests that other factors may have been more salient determinants of option use.
30

Specifically, the dependent variable is the 3-year change in the average value of qualified options granted in the
past 3 years. The sample size shrinks significantly because it is limited to executives who remain in the sample for a
longer period of time and because the sample does not begin until 1955 (the first year for which the 3-year change in
the 3-year average of option grants includes only years in which qualified options were allowed). The sample for
the fixed-effects specification ends in 1974 (instead of 1972 as in col. 2) because the 3-year change in tax rates
varies across individuals in 1973 and 1974.

23

6. Other Forms of Pay: Retirement Benefits and Perks
Several types of compensation that we do not observe are not taxed as labor income when they
are awarded. It is possible that these other forms of pay responded to changes in tax rates, even
though observed forms of pay did not. Thus, our analysis may underestimate the effect of taxes
by only including some components of pay. Two main unobserved forms of pay that we are
particularly concerned about are retirement benefits and perquisites.
For a given tax rate on corporate income, pensions are tax-advantaged at times of high
personal income tax rates since executives are not taxed until retirement, when they usually drop
down to a lower income tax bracket. In fact, experts on executive compensation in the 1950s
and 1960s frequently mentioned high taxes as a reason for the expansion of executive pension
plans (NICB 1953, Patton 1961, Smyth 1960). We do not have enough information to analyze
the pensions of the executives in our sample.31 However, prior research suggests that the value
of pensions as a fraction of total executive pay was not much lower in recent years than it was in
the 1960s, even though labor income tax rates were much higher at that time.32
A type of post-retirement compensation that we do observe in our data is the award of
bonuses to be paid after retirement as part of plans designed specifically for top executives. The

31

Proxy statements present descriptions of retirement plans, but an assessment of their value for each individual
would require information that we lack, such as the executive’s age, tenure, and salary prior to retirement.
32
Lewellen (1968) reports that retirement benefits were 15 percent of after-tax total pay from 1950 to 1963.
Because pensions were taxed at a lower rate than labor income, their value relative to total pre-tax pay must have
been even lower than 15 percent. By contrast, Sundaram and Yermack (2006) find increases in the actuarial value
of pensions to be about 10 percent of CEO pay from 1996 to 2002, and Bebchuk and Jackson (2005) report that the
ratio of executives’ retirement benefits to total pay received during the CEO’s entire career was 34 percent in 2004.

24

fraction of executives receiving these bonuses rose from near zero in the 1940s to 25 percent in
the 1960s and then fell back to 12 percent from the mid-1970s to 1990 (ExecuComp did not
record these bonuses so we cannot observe them post-1991). To assess the correlation of these
bonuses with tax rates, we regress the change in the dollar value of the retirement bonuses
awarded to each executive as a function of the change in their net-of-tax rate. We expect the
coefficient on the net-of-tax rate to be negative, since a decrease in taxes on labor income
(increase in the net-of-tax rate) should reduce the tax advantage of retirement pay. There is no
relationship between these two variables in the full sample (column 1 of Table 7) or when the
sample is limited to 1947-1972, the years when the historical record suggests that tax policy
spurred deferred pay (column 2). We find a small effect when we include year fixed effects
(column 3), but the estimated coefficient has the wrong sign: executives facing larger tax cuts
get larger increases in retirement bonuses.33 We also find no effect if we examine changes in the
3-year average value of retirement bonus awards, which reduces volatility of bonus awards and
allows taxes to have a delayed effect (results not shown).
Perquisites and other private benefits are other likely candidates for remunerating
executives when tax rates are high. Even though the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 included
fringe benefits as taxable income, the IRS was unable to enforce taxes on perquisites because of
a lack of information about these benefits (McGahran 1988).34 The SEC’s disclosure

33

We also find no correlation of changes in tax rates with changes in the logarithm of retirement bonus awards,
indicating that the magnitude of these awards does not depend on tax rates.
34
Information from court cases against executives in the 1950s suggests that perquisites were not large enough to
account for the low level of observed compensation mid-century. For example, penalties for high business
expenses—i.e. amounts that executives were forced to return to the corporation because they were found to be

25

requirements changed in 1978 to include perks over a minimum threshold, but data on perks
remained problematic because they were lumped with many other forms of remuneration and
firms often claimed to be below the minimum threshold of disclosure. Although information on
perks improved after 1992, its accuracy was still questionable and prompted a further
improvement in disclosure requirements in 2006.35
Due to these data limitations, the only way to gauge the value of perks awarded to the
executives in our sample is to look at “other compensation,” a measure that lumps perquisites
with other forms of pay, and for which we have values from 1978-1981 and 1993-2005. The
median value of this category relative to total taxable compensation was about 3 percent in the
earlier period (when the top marginal tax rate was 50 percent) and less than 1 percent in the later
years (when the top marginal tax rate was between 35 and 40 percent). These statistics are
consistent with the idea that perks were used more when labor income tax rates were higher,
although the evidence is inconclusive because more forms of pay were included in the “other
compensation” category in the earlier period. In any case, the difference between the two
periods in the magnitude of “other compensation” is much smaller than the difference in tax
rates.
In summary, it is difficult to assess whether the introduction of pensions or perks earlier
in the century was spurred by the high tax rates at that time. However, the available evidence
excessive—were in the range of $20,000 to $40,000 (Washington and Rothschild (1962), less than half of observed
remuneration in our sample.
35
Most research has focused on whether a certain perk was offered rather than on its actual value (Rajan and Wulf
2006, Yermack 2006). Moreover, average disclosed perquisites increased by 190% following an improvement in
the SEC’s disclosure rules in December 2006, suggesting that the level of perks was severely underestimated in
earlier years (Grinstein, Weinman and Yehuda 2009).

26

suggests that these forms of pay were unrelated to tax policy in subsequent years: these benefits
did not materially decrease as their tax advantages diminished, and differences across individuals
were not correlated with tax rates. It is possible that firms did not optimally tailor these forms of
compensation to take advantage of the tax system because their tax implications were difficult to
fully comprehend and benefit plans tended to change only infrequently (Patton 1961).

7. The Effect of Taxes on Total Taxable Compensation
Finally, we combine different forms of remuneration to examine the effect of tax policy on an
executive’s total taxable compensation. This analysis is similar in spirit to the literature on the
elasticity of taxable income (Slemrod 2000). We define compensation that is taxable as labor
income as the sum of salary, current bonus, long-term bonus payouts, and the value of exercised
non-qualified stock options.36 Although an executive’s remuneration is not the only form of
income she receives in a year, our measure of taxable compensation is highly correlated with
taxable income reported in the SOI data.37
Table 7 reports the results of regressing the change in the logarithm of taxable
compensation on the change in the logarithm in the net-of-tax rate. As in the case of salaries, we
expect the coefficient on the net-of-tax rate on labor income to be positive because a decrease in
tax rates (and therefore an increase in the net-of-tax rate) should make taxable forms of
36

Since long-term bonuses are taxed as labor income and can be deducted as an expense from the firm’s income,
their only tax advantage relative to cash is that the tax payment is deferred. The payout-period of these bonuses is
usually around four years, so the advantage of this deferral is relatively small. Consequently, we do not analyze the
correlation of tax rates with long-term bonuses separately. In unreported results, we find no correlation between
long-term bonuses and tax rates.
37
Matching the individuals in our sample in 1960, 1970, 1980, 1990, and 2000 with individuals with similar wages
in the SOI microdata, the correlation of our estimate of taxable compensation with taxable income in the SOI data is
greater than 0.94 in every year.

27

remuneration more attractive. We use the same specifications as in Section 3 to control for mean
reversion, income inequality, and observable and unobservable firm characteristics. Results are
very similar to the estimated effect on salary and bonus alone—in every specification we can
confidently reject an elasticity of taxable compensation with respect to the net-of-tax rate greater
than 0.2. These results are consistent with the negligible effect of tax rates found by Goolsbee
(1999) for tax reforms prior to 1986, using both the income share of high earners (based on
aggregate data from tax records) and executive compensation micro-data during the 1971-72 and
1935 tax reforms.
Although the estimated coefficients on tax rates in Table 7 are small, they are still a bit
larger than the estimated effects on salary+bonus alone. Thus, it appears that the other forms of
remuneration that are taxed as labor income—gains from exercising non-qualified options and
long-term incentive bonus awards—are somewhat more sensitive to changes in tax rates than
salaries. Indeed, other researchers have found that tax reforms have sometimes altered the
timing of when executives receive bonuses and exercise stock options (Goolsbee 2000a, US
Bureau of Economic Analysis 1993). In a specification similar to Gooslbee (2000a), we also
find that changes in the value of option exercises are positively related to the change in the netof-tax rate on labor income in the current year and negatively related to the change in the net-oftax rate on labor income in the subsequent year. Consistent with Hall and Liebman (2000), this
result is entirely driven by the 1992 tax reform. We find no evidence of such effects on the
timing of stock option exercises in the periods from 1975 to 1990 or from 1995 to 2005.

28

8. Reconciling the Time Series Evidence with the Short-Run Correlation of Compensation
and Tax Rates
In summary, we have found little evidence that changes in tax rates are related to changes in
executive pay, even though the correlation between the levels of these two variables over a long
period of time seems large. Three possible interpretations of these findings are that (a) we have
no accurately identified the short-run effect of taxes on pay, which is actually substantial, (b) we
have not accurately identified the long-run effect of taxes on pay, which is actually small, or (c)
both of these results are valid and there is a reason why the short-run elasticity is much smaller
than the long-run elasticity. We address each of these possibilities in turn.
The lack of correlation between annual changes in compensation and tax rates is
remarkably robust across a number of different types of remuneration and a variety of
specifications. Moreover, these estimates are precise enough to rule out any economically
meaningful effect. Nevertheless, it is possible that unobserved factors may be masking the true
effect of taxes on pay. One such possibility is that some tax reforms were intended by legislators
to be temporary. Firms may choose not to respond to transitory changes in taxes if the cost of
altering the compensation package for a brief period is sufficiently high. Using the narrative
analysis of postwar tax changes of Romer and Romer (2008), we repeat our estimation for each
type of pay assuming that no change in taxes occurred in tax reforms that they identify as
temporary. However, we find no correlation of the permanent changes in tax rates with any
component of executive pay (Panel A of Table 8).

29

A similar concern is that some tax reforms are endogenous to changes in national income
and the state of the economy, which might bias the estimated effect of tax rates on executive pay.
Therefore, we repeat our estimation for each type of pay assuming that no change in taxes
occurred in tax reforms that Romer and Romer (2008) identify as endogenous. Even in this case,
the correlation of the exogenous changes in tax rates with any component of executive pay is
negligible (Panel B of Table 8).
A third reason why executive pay may be unresponsive to changes in tax rates is that
compensation might be primarily determined by the provision of managerial incentives as in a
standard principal-agent model, leaving little scope to alter pay for other reasons. We assess this
explanation by controlling for the correlation between wealth and firm performance, measured
by the executive’s dollar gain in stock and stock option wealth from a 1 percent increase in
market value (following Core and Guay 1999) or from a dollar increase in market value (as in
Jensen and Murphy 1990). Changes in each form of pay are not appreciably related to either
measure of the sensitivity of wealth to performance, and these controls do not alter our estimates
for the changes in labor income tax rates (Panels C and D of Table 9). Thus, incentive provision
does not seem to explain our findings.
Turning to the large estimated elasticity from the long-run evolution of taxes and
executive pay, it is certainly possible that an omitted factor has caused both the level of
compensation to increase and tax rates to fall over time. The absence of a correlation between
the tax rates and salaries of middle managers suggests that such an omitted factor would be
specific to individuals at the very top of the income distribution. One such plausible force might

30

be social norms. Social tolerance of income inequality seems to have diminished during this
period (Piketty and Saez 2003, Levy and Temin 2008), which might have led to an increase in
top incomes and a decrease in top tax rates. Another factor that might have shaped the trends in
executive pay and tax rates is a general social perception about productivity and incentives. A
belief that top executives have become more productive, whether accurate or not, may have
increased firms’ willingness to pay a higher premium for their CEO. At the same time, the idea
that high tax rates reduce productivity and labor supply might have bolstered support for lower
tax rates. For example, Alesina and Angeletos (2005) show that a belief that an individual’s
effort determines her income would lead to low taxes and low redistribution, while the opposite
would be true in societies that attribute wealth to luck or connections.
In practice, these hypotheses are difficult to test because social perceptions are hard to
measure and are likely correlated with many other secular trends in the economy. One shred of
evidence supporting the idea that the perceived return to having a talented CEO may have
increased is that the pay differential between the highest-paid and other executives in the same
firm expanded considerably from the 1980s to the 2000s, while pay differentials between the
other four top executives were relatively unchanged. However, the difference between the
highest-paid and other executives might reflect a change in the market for CEOs or a true
increase in the relative productivity of the highest-paid (Murphy and Zábojník 2004, Gabaix and
Landier 2008), rather than a change in perceptions about their marginal product that may have
affected both tax rates and the compensation they could extract from firms.

31

Finally, is it possible that the long-run elasticity can be large even though the short-run
elasticity is small? One mechanism that could reconcile these two effects is if compensation
arrangements change only very slowly over time. For example, top executives may have a longterm contract with their firm that determines their pay for at least several years in the future.
More generally, if executive pay is determined through a complex bargaining process that
involves, among other considerations, the social acceptability of high pay, it may take a long
period of time for the effect of taxes to fully affect compensation. Thus, social norms could also
deter the responsiveness of remuneration to tax incentives by making radical changes in pay
more difficult.
One potential weakness of this hypothesis is that we found little responsiveness of
salaries to changes in tax rates for up to ten years after a tax reform. However, we observe only
relatively few individuals over such a long period of time, and the type of executive with a long
tenure in our sample might not be representative of the larger group. Furthermore, if social
norms are responsible for delaying the response of incomes to tax rates, then it might take more
than ten years for these effects to take place.
Another possible way to reconcile these two sets of results is if pay was unresponsive to
tax rates in the first half of our sample, but became more sensitive to tax rates over time. Our
short-run results are identified mainly from the 1946-1972 period because tax rates only vary
across individuals in this portion of the sample. By contrast, the long-run estimates are mainly
driven by the increase in compensation and decrease in tax rates since 1980—the time-series
coefficient estimate is 0.18 for the period 1946 to 1979, and 2.3 for 1980 to 2005. One factor

32

that might have changed markedly during our sample period is a concern about equality within
the firm, which may have limited firms’ ability to differentiate executives’ compensation
packages during the 1950s and 1960s. Arch Patton—one of the best-known management
consultants of the post-World War II era (New York Times Nov. 30 1996)—stated that in the
1960s and 1970s “the compensation of upper-echelon positions moves in lockstep, like soldiers
in a parade” (Patton 1994).
If concerns about equality abated over time, firms would have had more scope to align
individuals’ compensation packages with their tax advantages. Although equality concerns, and
social norms more generally, are difficult to measure, several other researchers have found
evidence consistent with a decrease in social preference for income equality (Piketty and Saez
2003, Levy and Temin 2008). Thus, one interpretation of our results is that the estimated
correlation between pay and tax rates captures a combined effect of social norms and taxes:
social pressure prevented firms from aligning pay with tax rates mid-century, but as these norms
changed compensation packages became more flexible to adapt to tax advantages.

9. Conclusion
Using a novel dataset on top executive compensation in the entire post-war era, we find little
response of executive salaries, bonuses (both short-term and long-term), and stock option grants
to changes in labor income tax rates. In contrast to previous studies of executive pay that focus
on the period since the 1980s, the historical data provide much larger variation in tax rate
changes both across individuals and over time with which to identify the effect of tax policy.

33

Because our results are precisely estimated, we can rule out any meaningful response of the
forms of executive pay that we observe to changes in tax rates in the short or medium run (within
five to ten years).
Our results do not imply that tax policy has not affected any aspect of executive pay. For
example, high tax rates in the 1950s and 1960s might have spurred the adoption of qualified
stock options even though the use of options did not decrease as their tax advantage diminished
over time. Tax policy also appears to influence the choice between qualified and non-qualified
stock options (Hite and Long 1982, Madeo and Omer 1994, Austin, Gaver and Gaver 1998),
CEOs’ willingness to sell their equity in the firm (Jin and Kothari 2009), the timing of when
executives receive bonuses and exercise stock options (Goolsbee 2000a, Hall and Liebman
2000), and the backdating of option exercises (Dhaliwal, Erickson and Heitzman 2008). In
addition, the tax incentives of different forms of pay can affect other aspects of corporate
financial policies. For example, firms that can deduct large amounts of compensation from
corporate income have a smaller incentive to use debt as a tax shield (DeAngelo and Masulis
1980). On the other hand, the economic magnitude of the effect of tax policy on corporate
financial decisions tends to be small (Graham 2003).
The small short-run response of remuneration to tax rates that we documented stands in
sharp contrast to the strong correlation between the long-run trends of these variables. These
divergent results suggest that the long-run trends in tax rates and pay are driven by slow-moving
aspects of the economic and social environment, possibly intangible factors such as social
tolerance of income inequality or managerial productivity (both actual and perceived). Although

34

hard evidence on such unobservable influences is difficult to find, our results suggest that they
might be important in explaining the joint evolution of tax rates and executive compensation in
the past fifty years. Thus, an important challenge for future research is to disentangle the pure
tax effect from the effects of other factors that are related to the long-run evolution of tax rates.
Moreover, our results imply that policy makers should use caution if attempting to use tax policy
to regulate the pay of corporate executives and other high-income earners, because other factors
such as social norms or bargaining processes that determine pay may limit the ability of taxes to
affect compensation practices, at least in the short run.

References
Alesina, Alberto and Marios Angeletos. 2005.
Economic Review, vol. 95, no. 3, pp. 960-980

“Fairness and Redistribution.” American

Austin, Jeffrey R., Jennifer J. Gaver, and Kenneth M. Gaver. 1998. “The Choice of Incentive
Stock Options vs. Nonqualified Options: A Marginal Tax Rate Perspective,” Journal of the
American Taxation Association (20): 1-21.
Bebchuk, Lucian Arye and Robert J. Jackson.
Corporation Law, Vol. 30, No. 4: 823-855

2005. "Executive Pensions," Journal of

Bizjak, J. M., J. A. Brickley, and J. L. Coles. 1993. Stock-Based Incentive Compensation and
Investment Behavior. Journal of Accounting and Economics 16:349–72.
Cadman, Brian, Sandy Klasa and Steve Matsunaga. 2010. “Determinants of CEO pay: A
comparison of ExecuComp and non-ExecuComp firms.” Accounting Review, 85(5): 15111543
Core, J., R. W. Holthausen, and D. F. Larcker. 1999. “Corporate Governance, Chief Executive
Officer Compensation, and Firm Performance.” Journal of Financial Economics 51:371–

35

406.
Core, John, and Wayne Guay, 2001, “Stock option plans for non-executive employees,
Journal of Financial Economics 61, 253–287.
Core, John E., Wayne Guay, and David F. Larcker. 2008. “The Power of the Pen and Executive
Compensation.” Journal of Financial Economics 88(1): 1-25.
DeAngelo, H and R. W. Masulis. 1980. “Optimal Capital Structure under Corporate and
Personal Taxation,” Journal of Financial Economics (8): 3-29.
Dhaliwal, Dan, Merle Erickson and Shane Heitzman. 2008. “Taxes and the Backdating of Stock
Option Exercise Dates,” Working paper.
Feenberg, Daniel, and James Poterba. 1993. “Income Inequality and the Incomes of the VeryHigh-Income Tax Payers.” In Tax Policy and the Economy, edited by James Poterba, vol. 7
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Feldstein, Martin. 1995. “The Effect of Marginal Tax Rates on Taxable Income: A Panel Study
of the 1986 Tax Reform Act.” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 103(3), June: 551-72
Frydman, Carola, and Raven E. Saks. 2010. “Executive Compensation: A New View from a
Long-Term Perspective, 1936-2005.” Review of Financial Studies 23: 2099-2138.
Gabaix, Xavier and Agustin Landier. 2008. “Why has CEO pay increased so much?” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 123(1):49‐100
Goolsbee, Austan. 1999. “Evidence on the High-Income Laffer Curve from Six Decades of Tax
Reform.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: 1-64.
Goolsbee, Austan. 2000a. “What Happens When You Tax the Rich? Evidence from Executive
Compensation,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 108(2), April.
Goolsbee, Austan. 2000b. “It’s Not About the Money: Why Natural Experiments Don’t Work on
the Rich.” In Does Atlas Shrug? The Economic Consequences of Taxing the Rich, edited by
Joel B Slemrod, New York, NY: The Russell Sage Foundation.
Graham, John R. 1996. “Proxies for the corporate marginal tax rate,” Journal of Financial
Economics 42: 187-221

36

Graham, John R. 2003. “Taxes and Corporate Finance: A Review,” Review of Financial Studies
16: 1074-1128.
Graham, John R., Mark H. Lang, and Douglas A. Shackelford. 2004. “Employee Stock Options,
Corporate Taxes, and Debt Policy.” Journal of Finance LIX(4): 1585-1618
Graham JR, Li S, Qiu J. 2009. “Managerial attributes and executive compensation.“ Work. Pap.,
Duke Univ.
Graham, John R., and Lillian Mills. 2007. “Simulating Marginal Tax Rates Using Tax Return
Data,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, forthcoming
Grinstein Y, Weinbaum D, Yehuda N. 2009. “The economic consequences of perks disclosure.”
Work. Pap., Cornell Univ.
Gruber, Jon and Emmanuel Saez, 2002. ‘The Elasticity of Taxable Income: Evidence and
Implications,” Journal of Public Economics 84: 1-32.
Hall, Brian J. and Jeffrey B. Liebman. 1998. “Are CEOs Really Paid like Bureaucrats?”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 113 (August): 653-691.
Hall, Brian J. and Jeffrey B. Liebman. 2000. “The Taxation of Executive Compensation.” In Tax
Policy and the Economy, vol. 14, edited by James Poterba. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hite, Gailen L., and Michael S. Long. 1982. “Taxes and Executive Stock Options,” Journal of
Accounting and Economics (4): 3-14.
Jin, L. and S.P. Kothari. 2009. “Effect of Personal Taxes on Managers’ Decision to Sell
Unrestricted Equity.” Journal of Accounting & Economics.
Katuscak, Peter. 2005. “Impact of Personal Income Taxation on Executive Compensation.” The
Proceedings from the 98th Annual Conference of the National Tax Association.
Levy, Frank S. and Peter Temir. 2007. “Inequality and Institutions in 20th Century America,”
MIT Department of Economics Working Paper No. 07-17
Lewellen, Willbur G. 1968. Executive Compensation in Large Industrial Corporations. New
York: National Bureau of Economic Research.

37

Lindsey, Lawrence. 1987. “Individual Taxpayer Response to Tax Cuts, 1982-1984, with
Implications for the Revenue Maximizing Tax Rate.” Journal of Public Economics 33: 173206.
Loss, Louis and Joel Seligman. 2003. Securities Regulation. Aspen Publishers, 3rd Edition.
Madeo, S. and T. Omer. 1994. “The Effect of Taxes on Switching Stock Option Plans: Evidence from
the Tax Reform Act of 1969,” Journal of the American Taxation Association (16): 24-42.
McGahran, Kathleen T. 1988. “SEC Disclosure Regulation and Management Perquisites.” The
Accounting Review 63(1): 23-42
Murphy Kevin J. 1999. “Executive compensation.” In Handbook of Labor Economics Vol.3B, ed. O
Ashenfelter, D Card, pp. 2485‐563. Amsterdam: Elsevier/North‐Holland
Murphy Kevin J, and Jan Zábojník. 2004. “CEO pay and appointments: a market‐based explanation for
recent trends.” American Economic Review 94(2):192‐96
National Industrial Conference Board. 1953. Top Management Compensation.
Statistics, No. 8.

Studies in Labor

Patton, Arch. 1961. Men Money and Motivation. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Book Company.
Perry, Tod and Marc Zenner. 2001. “Pay for performance? Government regulation and the
structure of compensation contracts.” Journal of Financial Economics 62(3): 453-488
Piketty, Thomas and Emmanuel Saez. 2003. “Income Inequality in the United States: 19131998.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118: 1-39.
Plesko, George. 2003. “An evaluation of alternative measures of corporate tax rates.” Journal of
Accounting and Economics 35, 201–226.
Rajan, Raghuram G and Julie Wulf. 2006. “Are Perks Purely Managerial Excess?,” Journal of
Financial Economics 79: 1-33
Romer, Christina and David Romer. 2008. “A Narrative Analysis of Postwar Tax Changes.”
Working Paper.
Rose, Nancy L. and Catherine Wolfram. 2002. “Regulating Executive Pay: Using the Tax Code
to Influence Chief Executive Officer Compensation.” Journal of Labor Economics 20(2):
S138-75.

38

Saez, Emmanuel. 1999. “The Effect of Marginal Tax Rates on Income: A Panel Study of
‘Bracket Creep’,” NBER Working Paper No. 7367
Saez, Emmanuel. 2004. “Reported Incomes and Marginal Tax Rates, 1960-2000: Evidence and
Policy Implications.” In Tax Policy and the Economy 18, edited by James Poterba,
Cambridge, MA: the MIT Press.
Saez, Emmanuel, Joel Slemrod and Seth H. Giertz. 2010. “The Elasticity of Taxable Income
with Respect to Marginal Tax Rates: A Critical Review.” Journal of Economic Literature,
forthcoming.
Scholes, Myron and Mark Wolfsen. 1992. Taxes and Business Strategy. Princeton, NJ:
Prentice-Hall.
Slemrod, Joel B. 1992. “Do Taxes Matter? Lessons from the 1980s,” American Economic
Review 82: 250-256.
Slemrod, Joel B. 1995. “Income Creation or Income Shifting? Behavioral Responses to the Tax
Reform Act of 1986.” American Economic Review 85(2): 175-180
Slemrod, Joel B. 1996. “High-Income Families and the Tax Changes of the 1980s.” In
Empirical Foundations of Household Taxation, edited by Martin Feldstein and James
Poterba. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Slemrod, Joel B. 2000. “The Economics of Taxing the Rich.” In Does Atlas Shrug? The
Economic Consequences of Taxing the Rich, edited by Joel B Slemrod, New York, NY: The
Russell Sage Foundation.
Smith Jr., C. W., and R. L. Watts. 1992. “The Investment Opportunity Set and Corporate
Financing, Dividend, and Compensation Policies.” Journal of Financial Economics 32:263–
92.
Sundaram, Rangarajan K. and David Yermack. 2005. "Pay Me Later: Inside Debt and its Role in
Managerial Compensation," NYU, Law and Economics Research Paper No. 05-08
United States Bureau of Economic Analysis. 1993. Survey of Current Business. August: p28.
Washington, George Thomas and V. Henry Rothschild. 1962. Compensating the Corporate
Executive. New York: The Roland Press Company.

39

Yermack, David. 2006. “Flights of Fancy: Corporate Jets, CEO Perquisites, and Inferior
Shareholder Returns,” Journal of Financial Economics 80: 211-242

40

Table 1
Correlation of Tax Rates and Executive Compensation
(dependent variable= Median Ln(Real Taxable Compensation))
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Ln(1-average tax rate)
1.00**
-0.32*
-0.20**
(0.11)
(0.18)
(0.06)
Ln(1-top tax rate)
0.41**
-0.28**
-0.09**
(0.60)
(0.07)
(0.03)
Time trend
No
No
Linear
Linear Quadratic Quadratic
# Obs.
60
60
60
60
60
60

(7)
-0.08
(0.08)

Cubic
60

(8)

-0.04
(0.03)
Cubic
60

Note. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. * and ** indicate significance at the 5 and 10 percent levels,
respectively. Regression is estimated from 1946 to 2005. Real taxable compensation is (salary+bonus+long-term
incentive pay+exercised non-qualified stock options) deflated by the CPI. Median compensation is calculated
from a sample of the 5 highest-paid executives in the 50 largest firms in 1940, 1960, and 1990 (a total of 101
firms). Average tax rate is the average marginal tax rate faced by the executives in the sample. Top tax rate is the
highest marginal tax rate on labor income in the tax schedule. See Section 3 for details on the sample,
measurement of compensation, and calculation of tax rates.

41

Table 2
Summary Statistics
Entire Sample
(1946-2005)
Observations
15,429
Executives
2,924
Mean firms per year
53
Mean executives per firm per year
4.1
Mean observations per executive
6.3
Mean salary+bonus ($2000)
$990,645
Mean value of stock options granted ($2000)
$508,568
Mean value of long-term bonus pay
$315,047
+
$72,482
Mean value of retirement bonuses
Mean firm market value (billions of $2000)
16.5
Median firm market value (billions of $2000)
6.0
Mean firm rank by sales
103
Median firm rank by sales
59

1946-1972
6,457
1217
40
4.1
6.3
$755,293
$66,582
$79,584
$67,577
11.4
4.0
64
43

+ This average is for 1946-1991 only because we do not observe these grants after 1991.
Note. Sample based on the 5 highest-paid executives in the 50 largest firms in 1940, 1960, and 1990 (a total
of 101 firms). Salary and bonus measured as the level of salaries and bonuses (paid out in either stock or
cash) awarded and disbursed in the year. The value of stock options granted is measured using the BlackScholes formula. Market value measured from CRSP at the end of the fiscal year. Firm rank is the ranking
by sales of all firms traded on the NYSE, S&P, NASDAQ or ASE.

42

Table 3
Distribution of the Change in Ln(1-Marginal Labor Income Tax Rate)
1948
1950
1951
1952
1954
1964
1965
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1987
1988
1991
1993
2001
2002
2003

10th
0.381
-0.125
-0.464
-0.115
0.083
0.147
0.074
-0.192
-0.073
0.124
0.035
0.174
0.207
0.055
0.060
-0.133
0.008
0.008
0.057

25th
0.458
-0.078
-0.277
-0.150
0.089
0.230
0.092
-0.183
-0.073
0.136
0.093
0.223
0.207
0.055
0.060
-0.133
0.008
0.008
0.057

Percentiles
50th
0.562
-0.054
-0.239
-0.095
0.096
0.307
0.134
-0.143
-0.053
0.166
0.212
0.223
0.207
0.055
0.060
-0.133
0.008
0.008
0.057

75th
0.708
-0.044
-0.183
-0.077
0.113
0.443
0.189
-0.119
-0.048
0.206
0.312
0.223
0.207
0.055
0.060
-0.133
0.008
0.008
0.057

90th
0.789
-0.038
-0.146
-0.061
0.141
0.759
0.244
-0.109
-0.039
0.206
0.348
0.223
0.207
0.055
0.060
-0.133
0.008
0.008
0.057

Standard
Deviation
0.144
0.030
0.118
0.027
0.027
0.215
0.062
0.034
0.014
0.036
0.118
0.036
0.006
0.004
0.004
0.011
0.000
0.006
0.002

Note. Based on the marginal tax rates of the 5 highest-paid executives in the 50 largest firms in 1940, 1960, and
1990 (a total of 101 firms). There is no change in marginal income tax rates in all other years. The 1982 reduction
of the top marginal income tax rate from 70 to 50 percent does not appear in this table because the marginal tax rate
on labor income had already been reduced to 50 percent by 1972.

43

Table 4
Annual Changes in Ln(Real Salary+Bonus)
∆ Ln(Net-of-tax rate on labor income)

(1)
0.003
(0.033)

(2)
-0.001
(0.027)
-0.082**
(0.009)

1947-2005
(3)
0.017
(0.031)
-0.120**
(0.039)

(4)
0.024
(0.031)
-0.354**
(0.058)

Ln(Initial real income)

--

∆ Ln(Net-of-tax rate on corporate
income)
∆ Ln(Net-of-tax rate on capital gains)

--

--

--

--

--

--

--

--

Yes
No
No
No
No
No
15429
0.03

Yes
No
No
No
No
No
15327
0.06

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
15327
0.08

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
15327
0.14

Other controls
Cubic time trend
Initial real income*cubic time trend
Initial real income*decade FE
Firm*decade FE
Year FE
# Obs.
Adj. R2

(5)
-0.034
(0.036)
-0.121**
(0.036)
0.338**
(0.152)
0.025
(0.117)
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
15327
0.08

(6)
0.033
(0.035)

--

1947-1972
(7)
0.031
(0.019)
-0.119**
(0.016)

--

--

--

--

--

--

Yes
No
No
No
No
No
6457
0.04

Yes
No
No
No
No
No
6457
0.12

Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
6457
0.14

Note. Standard errors are clustered by year. All regressions control for the executive’s job title in the previous year, director status in the previous
year, indicators for whether job title or director status changed from the previous to the current year, and the firms’ market value, sales, leverage
and market-to-book ratio in the previous year. Real income is the executive’s taxable income (salary+bonus+long-term incentive pay+exercised
non-qualified stock options) deflated by the CPI. The change in the net-of-tax rate on labor income is calculated assuming that an individual’s
remuneration remains constant and that tax rates change only due to tax reforms. The corporate income tax rate is the top marginal rate. * and **
indicate significance at the 10 percent and 5 percent levels, respectively.

44

(8)
-0.089
(0.074)
-0.122**
(0.016)

Table 5
Longer-Run Changes in Ln(Real Salary+Bonus)
3-year change
5-year change
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
∆ Ln(Net-of-tax rate on labor
0.042
0.078**
0.001
0.028
income)
(0.036) (0.028) (0.051) (0.040)
Cubic time trend
Yes
No
Yes
No
Firm*decade FE
No
Yes
No
Yes
Other controls
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
# Obs.
11361
11361
8094
8094

10-year change
(5)
(6)
0.014
0.056
(0.046) (0.037)
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
3084
3084

Note. Standard errors are clustered by year. All regressions control for the executive’s real income, job title and
director status in the initial year, indicators for whether job title or director status changed from the initial year to the
current year, and the firms’ market value, sales, leverage and market-to-book ratio in the initial year. The change in the
net-of-tax rate on labor income is calculated assuming that an individual’s remuneration remains constant and that tax
rates change only due to tax reforms. * and ** indicate significance at the 10 percent and 5 percent levels, respectively.

Table 6
Changes in Qualified Option Grants in the 1950s and 1960s
Real Value of Grantst –
Real Value of Grantst-1
∆ Ln(Net-of-tax rate on
labor income)
∆ Ln(Net-of-tax rate on
corporate income)
∆ Ln(Net-of-tax rate on
capital gains)
Other controls

Year FE
Sample period
# Observations

(1)
0.011
(0.055)
-0.175
(0.202)
-0.963
(0.838)
Yes
No
1951-75
6137

(2)
0.043
(0.044)
--Yes
Yes
1951-72
5261

Average Real Value of Grantst-2 to t –
Average Real Value of Grantst-5 to t-3

(3)
-0.040
(0.045)
0.198
(0.150)
-0.077
(0.188)
Yes
No
1955-75
2324

(4)
0.011
(0.037)
--Yes
Yes
1955-74
2222

Note. Standard errors are clustered by year. Real income is the executive’s taxable income (salary+bonus+longterm incentive pay+exercised non-qualified stock options) deflated by the CPI. All regressions control for the
executive’s initial job title and director status, indicators for whether job title or director status changed from the
initial year to the current year, and the firms’ market value, sales, leverage and market-to-book ratio in the initial
year. Initial values are t-1 for columns 1-2 and t-3 for columns 3-4. The change in the net-of-tax rate is from t-1 to
t in columns 1-2 and from t-3 to t in columns 3-4. The change in the net-of-tax rate on labor income is calculated
assuming that an individual’s remuneration remains constant and that tax rates change only due to tax reforms. *
and ** indicate significance at the 10 percent and 5 percent levels, respectively.

45

Table 7
Correlation of Retirement Bonus Grants with Income Tax Rates

∆ Ln(Net-of-tax rate)
Other controls
Year Fixed Effects
Sample period
# Observations

Real Value of Grantst –
Real Value of Grantst-1
(1)
(2)
(3)
0.029
0.031
0.012
(0.021)
(0.021)
(0.011)
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
1947-91
1947-72
1947-72
10841
5285
5285

Note. Standard errors are clustered by year. Real income is the executive’s taxable income (salary+bonus+long-term
incentive pay+exercised non-qualified stock options) deflated by the CPI. All regressions control for the executive’s initial
job title and director status, indicators for whether job title or director status changed from the initial year to the current
year, and the firms’ market value, sales, leverage and market-to-book ratio in the initial year. Initial values are the previous
year and the change in the net-of-tax rate is from t-1 to t. The change in the net-of-tax rate on labor income is calculated
assuming that an individual’s remuneration remains constant and that tax rates change only due to tax reforms. * and **
indicate significance at the 10 percent and 5 percent levels, respectively.

46

Change in ln(1-mtr)
Other controls
Cubic time trend
Firm*decade FE
Adjusted R2
# Obs.

Table 8
Changes in Ln(Real Taxable Compensation)
1-year change
3-year change
5-year change
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.037
0.039
0.047
0.094** -0.018
-0.011
(0.032) (0.043) (0.041) (0.037) (0.062) (0.067)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
0.17
0.26
0.21
0.39
0.26
0.49
15316 15316 11351
11351
8088
8088

10-year change
(7)
(8)
-0.079* -0.046
(0.045) (0.068)
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
0.43
0.65
3081
3081

Note. Standard errors are clustered by year. All regressions control for the executive’s job title and director status in the
initial year, indicators for whether job title or director status changed from the initial to the current year, and the firm’s
market value, sales, leverage and market-to-book ratio in the initial year. Real taxable compensation is
(salary+bonus+long-term incentive pay+exercised non-qualified stock options) deflated by the CPI. The change in the netof-tax rate on labor income is calculated assuming that an individual’s remuneration remains constant and that tax rates
change only due to tax reforms. * and ** indicate significance at the 10 percent and 5 percent levels, respectively.

47

Table 9
Testing Explanations for the Lack of a Short-Run Correlation Between Taxes and Executive Pay

ΔLn(Net-of-tax rate)
ΔLn(Net-of-tax rate)
ΔLn(Net-of-tax rate)
Pay-to-performance
ΔLn(Net-of-tax rate)
Pay-to-performance

∆ Ln(Salary +
∆ Stock Option
∆ Retirement
Bonus)
Grants
Bonus Grants
(1947-1972)
(1951-1972)
(1947-1972)
(1)
(2)
(3)
Panel A: Excluding Temporary Tax Reforms
-0.082
0.058
0.012
(0.086)
(0.063)
(0.014)
Panel B: Excluding Endogenous Tax Reforms
-0.100
-0.001
0.010
(0.106)
(0.021)
(0.017)
Panel C: Including Pay-to-Performance (Jensen-Murphy statistic)
-0.109
0.017
0.024**
(0.070)
(0.021)
(0.012)
-0.002
-0.001
-0.000
(0.003)
(0.002)
(0.000)
Panel D: Including Pay-to-Performance (Equity-at-Stake)
-0.109
0.017
0.024**
(0.070)
(0.021)
(0.012)
-0.002
-0.001
-0.000
(0.003)
(0.002)
(0.000)

∆ Ln(Taxable
Compensation)
(1947-1972)
(4)
-0.041
(0.093)
-0.043
(0.111)
-0.083
(0.078)
-0.002
(0.003)
-0.083
(0.078)
-0.001
(0.003)

Note. Standard errors are clustered by year. Column (2) uses changes in annual compensation for period 1951-1972. All
other columns use data from 1947 to 1972. Each panel shows a separate regression with the dependent variable named in
the column heading. All regressions include year fixed effects and control for the executive’s initial job title and director
status, indicators for whether job title or director status changed from the previous year to the current year, and the firm’s
market value, sales, leverage and market-to-book ratio in the previous year. Temporary (1950, 1951, and 1968) and
endogenous (the temporary reforms plus the reform in 1969) reforms are identified according to Romer and Romer (2008).
The Jensen-Murphy statistic is measured as the dollar increase in the previous year’s stock and stock option holdings for a
$1000 change in the firm’s market value. Equity-at-stake is measured as the dollar increase in the previous year’s stock
and stock option holdings for a 1 percentage point increase in the firm’s rate of return (Core and Guay 1999). The change
in the net-of-tax rate on labor income is calculated assuming that an individual’s remuneration remains constant and that
tax rates change only due to tax reforms. * and ** indicate significance at the 10 percent and 5 percent levels, respectively.

48

Figure 1
Taxable Compensation and Labor Income Tax Rates
Taxable Compensation (left)

Tax Rate (right)

3.6

.8

Marginal Tax Rate on Labor Income
(Average across Executives)

Median Taxable Compensation
(millions of $2000, log scale)

3
.7

2.4

1.8

.6

1.2

.5

.4

.6

.3
1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

year

Note. Based on a sample of the 5 highest-paid executives in the 50 largest firms in
1940, 1960, and 1990 (a total of 101 firms). Taxable compensation is the sum of
salary, current bonus, long-term incentive payouts, and gains from exercised nonqualified stock options. Marginal tax rates on labor income for each executive are
calculated assuming that his reported labor income is equal to his taxable
compensation and that he files jointly with a spouse.

Figure 2
Correlation of Remuneration with Tax Rates Over Time
Middle Managers
50

2.5

Executives

1969

45
Thousands of Year 2000 Dollars
30
35
40

Millions of Year 2000 Dollars
1
1.5

2

1999

1989

1999
1989

1979
1959

1979
1969
1959

25

1949

1949

.3

.4
.5
.6
.7
Average Marginal Tax Rate

.8

.18

.2
.22
.24
Average Marginal Tax Rate

.26

Note. Executive tax rates and compensation are as described in the notes to Figure 1.
Tax rates and compensation for middle managers are individuals in the “manager,
nec” occupation in the decennial Census. See Section 2 for details.

49

Figure 3
Tax Rates
Labor Income
Corporate Income

Capital Gains

.8
.7
.6
.5
.4
.3
.2
.1
1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

year

Note. The labor income tax rate is the marginal rate on labor income averaged
across the executives in our sample. The rate for each executive is calculated
assuming that his reported labor income is equal to his taxable compensation and
that he files jointly with a spouse. The corporate income tax rate is the top
marginal rate.

Figure 4
Tax Advantage of Stock Options Relative to Cash
Qualified

Non-Qualified

.16
.12

Cents Per Dollar of Cash

.08
.04
0
-.04
-.08
-.12
-.16
-.2
-.24
1950

1960

1970

1980
year

1990

2000

Note. Each line shows the average across executives. The tax advantages are
calculated following Hall and Liebman (2000).

50

