NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ADVANCES IN CONSUMPTION-BASED ASSET PRICING:
EMPIRICAL TESTS
Sydney C. Ludvigson
Working Paper 16810
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16810

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2011

Forthcoming in Volume 2 of the Handbook of the Economics of Finance, edited by George Constantinides,
Milton Harris and Rene Stulz. I am grateful to Timothy Cogley, Martin Lettau, Abraham Lioui, Hanno
Lustig, Stephan Nagel, Monika Piazzesi, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, Laura Veldkamp, Annette VissingJorgensen, and to the editors for helpful comments, and to Peter Gross and David Kohn for excellent
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Sydney C. Ludvigson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Advances in Consumption-Based Asset Pricing: Empirical Tests
Sydney C. Ludvigson
NBER Working Paper No. 16810
February 2011, Revised April 2011
JEL No. E21,G1,G12
ABSTRACT
The last 15 years has brought forth an explosion of research on consumption-based asset pricing as
a leading contender for explaining aggregate stock market behavior. This research has propelled further
interest in consumption-based asset pricing, as well as some debate. This chapter surveys the growing
body of empirical work that evaluates today's leading consumption-based asset pricing theories using
formal estimation, hypothesis testing, and model comparison. In addition to summarizing the findings
and debate, the analysis seeks to provide an accessible description of a few key econometric methodologies
for evaluating consumption-based models, with an emphasis on method-of-moments estimators. Finally,
the chapter offers a prescription for future econometric work by calling for greater emphasis on methodologies
that facilitate the comparison of multiple competing models, all of which are potentially misspecified,
while calling for reduced emphasis on individual hypothesis tests of whether a single model is specified
without error.
Sydney C. Ludvigson
Department of Economics
New York University
19 W. 4th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10002
and NBER
sydney.ludvigson@nyu.edu

1

Introduction

The last 15 years has brought forth an explosion of research on consumption-based asset
pricing as a leading contender for explaining aggregate stock market behavior. The explosion itself represents a dramatic turn-around from the intellectual climate of years prior, in
which the perceived failure of the canonical consumption-based model to account for almost
any observed aspect of financial market outcomes was established doctrine among financial economists. Indeed, early empirical studies found that the model was both formally
and informally rejected in a variety of empirical settings.1 These findings propelled a widespread belief (summarized, for example, by Campbell (2003) and Cochrane (2005)) that the
canonical consumption-based model had serious limitations as a viable model of risk.
Initial empirical investigations of the canonical consumption-based paradigm focused
on the representative agent formulation of the model with time-separable power utility. I
will refer to this formulation as the “standard” consumption-based model hereafter. The
standard model has diﬃculty explaining a number of asset pricing phenomena, including the
high ratio of equity premium to the standard deviation of stock returns simultaneously with
stable aggregate consumption growth, the high level and volatility of the stock market, the
low and comparatively stable interest rates, the cross-sectional variation in expected portfolio
returns, and the predictability of excess stock market returns over medium to long-horizons.2
In response to these findings, researchers have altered the standard consumption-based
model to account for new preference orderings based on habits or recursive utility, or new
restrictions on the dynamics of cash-flow fundamentals, or new market structures based
on heterogeneity, incomplete markets, or limited stock market participation. The habitformation model of Campbell and Cochrane (1999), building on work by Abel (1990) and
Constantinides (1990), showed that high stock market volatility and predictability could be
explained by a small amount of aggregate consumption volatility if it were amplified by timevarying risk aversion. Constantinides and Duﬃe (1996) showed that the same outcomes could
1

The consumption-based model has been rejected on U.S. data in its representative agent formulation with
time-separable power utility (Hansen and Singleton 1982, 1983; Ferson and Constantinides, 1991; Hansen
and Jagannathan, 1991; Kocherlakota, 1996); it has performed no better and often worse than the simple
static-CAPM in explaining the cross-sectional pattern of asset returns (Mankiw and Shapiro, 1986; Breeden,
Gibbons, and Litzenberger, 1989; Campbell, 1996; Cochrane, 1996; Hodrick, Ng and Sengmueller, 1998);
and it has been generally replaced as an explanation for systematic risk by financial return-based models
(for example, Fama and French, 1993).
2
For summaries of these findings, including the predictability evidence and surrounding debate, see Lettau
and Ludvigson (2001b), Campbell (2003), Cochrane (2005), Cochrane (2008), and Lettau and Ludvigson
(2010).

1

arise from the interactions of heterogeneous agents who cannot insure against idiosyncratic
income fluctuations. Epstein and Zin (1989) and Weil (1989) showed that recursive utility
specifications, by breaking the tight link between the coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion and
the inverse of the elasticity of intertemporal substitution (EIS), could resolve the puzzle
of low real interest rates simultaneously with a high equity premium (the “risk-free rate
puzzle”). Campbell (2003) and Bansal and Yaron (2004) showed that when the Epstein
and Zin (1989) and Weil (1989) recursive utility function is specified so that the coeﬃcient
of relative risk aversion is greater than the inverse of the EIS, a predictable component in
consumption growth can help rationalize a high equity premium with modest risk aversion.
These findings and others have reinvigorated interest in consumption-based asset pricing,
spawning a new generation of leading consumption-based asset pricing theories.
In the first volume of this handbook, published in 2003, John Campbell summarized
the state-of-play in consumption-based asset pricing in a timely and comprehensive essay
(Campbell (2003)). As that essay reveals, the consumption-based theories discussed in the
previous paragraph were initially evaluated on evidence from calibration exercises, in which
a chosen set of moments computed from model-simulated data are informally compared to
those computed from historical data. Although an important first step, a complete assessment of leading consumption-based theories requires moving beyond calibration, to formal
econometric estimation, hypothesis testing, and model comparison. Formal estimation, testing, and model comparison present some significant challenges, to which researchers have
only recently turned.
The objective of this chapter is three-fold. First, it seeks to summarize a growing body
of empirical work, most of it completed since the writing of Volume 1, that evaluates leading
consumption-based asset pricing theories using formal estimation, hypothesis testing, and
model comparison. This research has propelled further interest in consumption-based asset
pricing, as well as some debate. Second, it seeks to provide an accessible description of a few
key methodologies, with an emphasis on method-of-moments type estimators. Third, the
chapter oﬀers a prescription for future econometric work by calling for greater emphasis on
methodologies that facilitate the comparison of competing models, all of which are potentially
misspecified, while calling for reduced emphasis on individual hypothesis tests of whether a
single model is specified without error. Once we acknowledge that all models are abstractions
and therefore by definition misspecified, hypothesis tests of the null of correct specification
against the alternative of incorrect specification are likely to be of limited value in guiding
2

theoretical inquiry toward superior specifications.
Why care about consumption-based models? After all, a large literature in finance is
founded on models of risk that are functions of asset prices themselves. This suggests that
we might bypass consumption data altogether, and instead look directly at asset returns. A
diﬃculty with this approach is that the true systematic risk factors are macroeconomic in
nature. Asset prices are derived endogenously from these risk factors. In the macroeconomic
models featured here, the risk factors arise endogenously from the intertemporal marginal
rate of substitution over consumption, which itself could be a complicated nonlinear function
of current, future and past consumption, and possibly of the cross-sectional distribution of
consumption, among other variables. From these specifications, we may derive an equilibrium
relation between macroeconomic risk factors and financial returns under the null that the
model is true. But no model that relates returns to other returns can explain asset prices in
terms of primitive economic shocks, however well it may describe asset prices.
The preponderance of evidence surveyed in this chapter suggests that many newer consumption theories provide statistically and economically important insights into the behavior
of asset markets that were not provided by the standard consumption-based model. At the
same time, the body of evidence also suggests that these models are imperfectly specified
and statistical tests are forced to confront macroeconomic data with varying degrees of measurement error. Do these observations imply we should abandon models of risk based on
macroeconomic fundamentals? I will argue here that the answer to this question is ‘no.’ Instead, what they call for is a move away from specification tests of perfect fit, toward methods
that permit statistical comparison of the magnitude of misspecification among multiple, competing models, an approach with important origins in the work of Hansen and Jagannathan
(1997). The development of such methodologies is still in its infancy.
This chapter will focus on the pricing of equities using consumption-based models of
systematic risk. It will not cover the vast literature on bond pricing and aﬃne term structure
models. Moreover, it is not possible to study an exhaustive list of all models that fit the
consumption-based description. I limit my analysis to the classes of consumption-based
models discussed above, and to studies with a significant econometric component.
The remainder of this chapter is organized as follows. The next section lays out the
notation used in the chapter and presents background on the consumption-based paradigm
that will be referenced in subsequent sections. Because many estimators currently used
are derived from, or related to, the Generalized Method of Moments (GMM) estimator of
3

Hansen (1982), Section 3 provides a brief review of this theory, discusses a classic GMM asset
pricing application based on Hansen and Singleton (1982), and lays out the basis for using
non-optimal weighting in GMM and related method of moments applications. This section
also presents a new methodology for statistically comparing specification error across multiple, non-nested models. Section 4 discusses a particularly challenging piece of evidence for
leading consumption-based theories: the mispricing of the standard model. Although leading theories do better than the standard model in explaining asset return data, they have
diﬃculty explaining why the standard model fails. The subsequent sections discuss specific
econometric tests of newer theories, including debate about these theories and econometric
results. Section 5 covers scaled consumption-based models. Section 6 covers models with
recursive preferences, including those that incorporate long-run consumption risk and stochastic volatility (Section 7). Section 8 discusses estimation of asset pricing models with
habits. Section 9 discusses empirical tests of asset pricing models with heterogeneous consumers and limited stock market participation. Finally, Section 10 summarizes and concludes
with a brief discussion of models that feature rare consumption disasters.

2

Consumption-Based Models: Notation and Background

Throughout the chapter lower case letters are used to denote log variables, e.g., let  denote
the level of consumption; then log consumption is ln ( ) ≡  . Denote by  the price of
an equity asset at date , and let  denote its dividend payment at date  I will assume,
as a matter of convention, that this dividend is paid just before the date- price is recorded;
hence  is taken to be the -dividend price. Alternatively,  is the end-of-period price.
The simple  return at date  is denoted
< ≡

 + 
− 1
−1

The continuously compounded return or log return,  , is defined to be the natural logarithm
of its gross return:
 ≡ log (1 + < ) 
I will also use +1 denote the gross return on an asset from  to  + 1,
 ≡ 1 + < 
4

Vectors are denoted in bold, e.g., R denotes a  × 1 vector of returns { }
=1 
Consumption-based asset pricing models imply that, although expected returns can vary
across time and assets, expected discounted returns should always be the same for every
asset, equal to 1:
1 =  (+1 +1 ) 

(1)

where +1 is any traded asset return indexed by . The stochastic variable +1 for which
(1) holds will be referred to interchangeably as either the stochastic discount factor ( SDF),
or pricing kernel. +1 is the same for each asset. Individual assets display heterogeneity in
their risk adjustments because they have diﬀerent covariances with the stochastic variable
+1 .
The moment restriction (1) arises from the first-order condition for optimal consumption
choice with respect to any traded asset return +1 , where the pricing kernel takes the form
+1 +1 )
, given a utility function  defined over consumption and possibly other
+1 =   (
 ( +1 )

arguments  , and where  denotes the partial derivative of  with respect to  +1 is
therefore equal to the intertemporal marginal rate of substitution (MRS) in consumption
The substance of the asset pricing model rests with the functional form of  and its
arguments; these features of the model drive variation in the stochastic discount factor. The
statistical evaluation of various models for  comprises much of the discussion of this chapter.
The return on one-period riskless debt, or the risk-free rate <+1 , is defined by
1 + <+1 ≡ 1 (+1 )

(2)

 is the expectation operator conditional on information available at time . <+1 is the
return on a risk-free asset from period  to  + 1. <+1 may vary over time, but its value is
known with certainty at date . As a consequence,
1 =  (+1 (1 + <+1 )) =  (+1 ) (1 + <+1 )
which implies (2).
Apply the definition of covariance Cov( ) =  () −  ()  () to (1) to arrive

5

at an expression for risk-premia as a function of the model of risk +1 :
1 =  (+1 )  (+1 ) + Cov (+1  +1 )
 (+1 )
+ Cov (+1  +1 )
=
+1

(3)

or
+1 =  (+1 ) + +1 Cov (+1  +1 )
 (+1 ) − +1 = −+1 Cov (+1  +1 )
= −+1   (+1 )   (+1 ) Corr (+1  +1 ) 

(4)
(5)
(6)

where   (·) denotes the conditional standard deviation of the generic argument (·). I will
refer to the random variable  (+1 ) − +1 as the risk premium, or equity risk premium,
if +1 denotes a stock market index return. The expression above states that assets earn
higher average returns, in excess of the risk-free rate, if they covary negatively with marginal
utility. Those assets are risky because they pay oﬀ well precisely when investors least need
them to, when marginal utility is low and consumption high.
If we assume that +1 and returns +1 are conditionally jointly lognormal we obtain
2
= − 
 +1 − +1 +
2

(7)

where
£
¤
2 ≡ Var (+1 ) =  (ln +1 −  ln +1 )2

  ≡ Cov (+1  +1 ) 

An important special case arises when +1 is derived from the assumption that a representative agent with time separable power utility chooses consumption by solving:
max 


∞
X





=0

Ã

1−
+
1−

!



subject to a budget constraint
+1 = (1 + <+1 ) ( −  ) 
6

where  is the stock of aggregate wealth <+1 is its net return. In this case the pricing
kernel takes the form
+1 = 

µ

+1


¶−



It is often convenient to use the linear approximation for this model of the stochastic discount
factor:
+1 ≈  [1 − ∆ ln +1 ] 
Inserting this approximation into (5), we have
 (+1 ) − +1 = −+1 Cov (+1  +1 )
µ
¶
Var (+1 )
Cov (+1  +1 )
−
=
Var (+1 )
 (+1 )
µ 2 2
¶
−Cov (∆ ln +1  +1 )
  Var (∆ ln +1 )
=
−
Var (∆ ln +1 )
 (+1 )
¶
µ
Cov (∆ ln +1  +1 ) Var (∆ ln +1 )
=

Var (∆ ln +1 )
 (+1 )
{z
}|
|
{z
}
≡ 

(8)

 0

In (8),   is the conditional consumption beta, which measures the quantity of consumption
risk. The parameter  measures the price of consumption risk, which is the same for all
assets. The asset pricing implications of this model were developed in Rubinstein (1976),
Lucas (1978), Breeden (1979), and Grossman and Shiller (1981). I will refer to the model
(8) as the classic consumption CAPM (capital asset pricing model), or CCAPM for short.
When power utility preferences are combined with a representative agent formulation as in
the original theoretical papers that developed the theory, I will also refer to this model as
the standard consumption-based model.
Unless otherwise stated, hats “b” denote estimated parameters.

3

GMM and Consumption-Based Models

In this section I review the Generalized Method of Moments estimator of Hansen (1982) and
discuss its application to estimating and testing the standard consumption based model.
Much of the empirical analysis discussed later in the chapter either directly employs GMM
or uses methodologies related to it. A review of GMM will help set the stage for the discussion
of these methodologies.
7

3.1

GMM Review (Hansen, 1982)

Consider an economic model that implies a set of  population moment restrictions satisfy:
{h (θ w )} = 0
| {z }

(9)

(×1)

where w is an  × 1 vector of variables known at , and θ is an  × 1 vector of unknown
parameters to be estimated. The idea is to choose θ to make the sample moment as close as
possible to the population moment. Denote the sample moments in any GMM estimation
as g(θ; y ):
g(θ; y )≡ (1 )
| {z  }
(×1)


X

h (θ w ) 

=1

¡
¢0
where  is the sample size, and y ≡ w0  w0 −1  w01 is a  ·  × 1 vector of observations.
b minimizes the scalar
The GMM estimator θ
 (θ; y T ) = [g(θ; y )]0 W [g(θ; y  )]
(1×)

(×)

(10)

(×1)

where {W }∞
 =1 a sequence of  ×  positive definite matrices which may be a function of
the data, y .
If  = , θ is estimated by setting each g(θ; y ) to zero. GMM refers to the use of (10)
to estimate θ when   . The asymptotic properties of this estimator were established by
Hansen (1982). Under the assumption that the data are strictly stationary (and conditional
b is consistent, converges at a rate
on other regularity conditions) the GMM estimator θ
proportional to the square root of the sample size, and is asymptotically normal.

Hansen (1982) also established the optimal weighting W = S−1 , which gives the minib in the class of GMM estimators. The optimal weighting matrix
mum variance estimator for θ

is the inverse of

S =

×

∞
X

=−∞

n
£ ¡
¢¤0 o

 [h (θ  w )] h θ  w−

In asset pricing applications, it is often undesirable to use W = S−1 . Non-optimal weighting
is discussed in the next section.
The optimal weighting matrix depends on the true parameter values θ . In practice
b which depends on S
b . This simultaneity is typically
b  depends on θ
this means that S
8

b(1) , by
handled by employing an iterative procedure: obtain an initial estimate of θ= θ

(1)
b to obtain
minimizing  (θ; y T ) subject to arbitrary weighting matrix, e.g., W = I. Use θ


b (1) ;
S


b (1) .
S


Re-minimize  (θ; y T ) using initial estimate
obtain new
initial estimate of S =
(2)
b . Continue iterating until convergence, or stop after one full iteration. (The two
estimate θ

estimators have the same asymptotic distribution, although their finite sample properties
can diﬀer.) Alternatively, a fixed point can be found.

Hansen (1982) also provides a test of over-identifying (OID) restrictions based on the
test statistic  :

´
³

b y ∼
2 ( − )
 ≡   θ;

(11)

where the test requires   . The OID test is a specification test of the model itself. It tests
whether the moment conditions (9) are as close to zero as they should be at some level of
statistical confidence, if the model is true and the population moment restrictions satisfied.
The statistic  is trivial to compute once GMM has been implemented because it is simply
 times the GMM objective function evaluated at the estimated parameter values.

3.2

A Classic Asset Pricing Application: Hansen and Singleton
(1982)

A classic application of GMM to a consumption-based asset pricing model is given in
Hansen and Singleton (1982) who use the methodology to estimate and test the standard
consumption-based model. In this model, investors maximize utility
max 


"∞
X

#



  (+ ) 

=0

The utility function is of the power utility form:
 ( ) =

1−
1−

0

 ( ) = ln( )  = 1
If there are  = 1   traded asset returns, the first-order conditions for optimal consumption choice are

©
− ª
− =  (1 + <+1 ) +1
9

 = 1  

(12)

The moment conditions (12) form the basis for the GMM estimation. They must be rewritten so that they are expressed in terms of strictly stationary variables, as required by
GMM theory:

½
∙
− ¸¾
+1

0 =  1 −  (1 + <+1 ) −


(13)

Although the level of consumption has clear trends in it, the growth rate is plausibly stationary.
The standard model has two parameters to estimate:  and . Using the notation
above, θ = ( )0 . Equation (13) is a cross-sectional asset pricing model: given a set of
 = 1   asset returns, the equation states that cross-sectional variation in expected
returns is explained by the covariance of returns with +1 =  (+1  )− .
Let x∗ denote the information set of investors. Then (13) implies
0=

ª¤ ª
©£
©
−
− |x∗
1 −  (1 + <+1 ) +1

 = 1 

(14)

Let x ⊆ x∗ be a subset of x∗ observable by the econometrician. Then the conditional
expectation (14) implies the following unconditional model:
¾
½∙
½
− ¾¸
+1
x
0 =  1 −  (1 + <+1 ) −


 = 1 

(15)

If x is  × 1, then there are  =  ·  moment restrictions with which the asset pricing
model can be tested, where
⎡ h
n
− oi
+1
1 −  (1 + <1+1 )  −
x
⎢ h

n
− oi
⎢
⎢ 1 −  (1 + <2+1 ) +1
x
⎢
−
⎢
⎢
·
h (θ w+1 ) = ⎢
⎢
×1
⎢
·
⎢
⎢
·
⎢
oi
n
⎣ h
 −
x
1 −  (1 + <+1 ) +1
−


⎤

⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦

The model can be estimated and tested as long as  ≥ 2.
Take sample mean of (16) to obtain g(θ; y ). Hansen and Singleton minimize
b −1 [g(θ; y )] 
min  (θ; y ) = [g(θ; y )]0 S




10

(16)

b −1 is an estimate of the optimal weighting matrix, S−1 .
where S


Hansen and Singleton use lags of consumption growth and lags of asset returns in x . They

use both a stock market index and industry equity returns as data for < . Consumption is

measured as nondurables and services expenditures from the National Income and Product
Accounts. They find estimates of  that are approximately 099 across most specifications.
They also find that the estimated coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion, 
b is quite low, ranging

from 035 to 0999. There is no equity premium puzzle here because the model is estimated
using the conditioning information in x . As a consequence, the model is evaluated on a set of

“scaled” returns, or “managed” portfolio equity returns R+1 x . These returns diﬀer from the
simple (unscaled) excess return on stock market that illustrate the equity premium puzzle.
The implications of using conditioning information, or scaling returns, and the importance of
distinguishing between scaled returns and “scaled factors” in the pricing kernel is discussed
in several sections below.
Hansen and Singleton also find that the model is rejected according to the OID test.
Subsequent studies that also used GMM to estimate the standard model find even stronger
rejections whenever both stock returns and a short term interest rate such as a commercial
paper rate are included among the test asset returns, and when a variable such as the pricedividend ratio is included in the set of instruments x (e.g., Campbell, Lo, and MacKinlay
(1997)). The reason for this is that the standard model cannot explain time variation in the
observed equity risk premium. That is, the model cannot explain the significant forecastable
variation in excess stock market returns over short-term interest rates by variables like the
price-dividend ratio. The moment restrictions implied by the Euler equations state that the
£
¤

= 0, where
conditional expectation of discounted excess returns must be zero  +1 +1


denotes the return on the stock market index in excess of a short-term interest rate.
+1


varies. It
Predictability of excess returns implies that the conditional expectation  +1

follows that a model can only explain this predictable variation if +1 fluctuates in just
the right way, so that even though the conditionally expected value of undiscounted excess
£
¤

is constant and equal
returns varies, its stochastically discounted counterpart  +1 +1

to zero in all time periods. The GMM results imply that discounted excess returns are still
´−
³
+1
, leading to large violations of the estimated Euler
forecastable when +1 =  
equations and strong rejections of overidentifying restrictions.

In principle, the standard model could explain the observed time-variation in the equity
premium (and forecastability of excess returns by variables such as the price-dividend ratio),
11

given suﬃcient time-variation in the volatility of consumption growth, or in its correlation
with excess returns. To see this, plug the approximation +1 ≈  [1 − ∆ ln +1 ] into
(6). The GMM methodology allows for the possibility of time-varying moments of ∆ ln +1 ,
because it is a distribution-free estimation procedure that applies to many strictly stationary
time-series processes, including GARCH, ARCH, stochastic volatility, and others. The OID
rejections are therefore a powerful rejection of the standard model and suggest that a viable
model of risk must be based on a diﬀerent model of preferences. Findings of this type have
propelled interest in other models of preferences, to which we turn below.
Despite the motivation these findings provided for pursuing newer models of preferences,
explaining the large violations of the standard model’s Euler equations is extremely challenging, even for leading consumption-based asset pricing theories with more sophisticated
specifications for preferences. This is discussed in Section 4.

3.3
3.3.1

GMM Asset Pricing With Non-Optimal Weighting
Comparing specification error: Hansen and Jagannathan, 1997

GMM asset pricing applications often require a weighting matrix that is diﬀerent from the
optimal matrix, that is W 6= S−1 . One reason is that we cannot use W = S−1 to
assess specification error and compare models. This point was made forcibly by Hansen and
Jagannathan (1997).
(1)

Consider two estimated models of the SDF, e.g., the CCAPM with SDF +1 = (+1  )− ,
(2)

and the static CAPM of Sharpe (1964) and Lintner (1965) with SDF +1 =  + +1 ,
where +1 is the market return. Suppose that we use GMM with optimal weighting to estimate and test each model on the same set of asset returns and, doing so, find that the OID
(1)

(2)

restrictions are not rejected for +1 but are for +1  May we conclude that the CCAPM
(1)

+1 is superior? No. The reason is that Hansen’s  -test statistic (11) depends on the
model-specific  matrix. As a consequence, Model 1 can look better simply because the
SDF and pricing errors  are more volatile than those of Model 2, not because its pricing
errors are lower and its Euler equations less violated.
Hansen and Jagannathan (1997) (HJ) suggest a solution to this problem: compare models

12

 (θ ) where θ  are parameters of the th SDF model, using the following distance metric:
q
Dist (θ  ) ≡ ming (θ )0 G−1
 g (θ  )



1X
G ≡
 0
 =1 | {z }
×


1X
g (θ  ) ≡
[ (θ )R − 1 ]
 =1

The minimization can be achieved with a standard GMM application, except the weighting is
−1
non-optimal with W = G−1
 rather than W = S . The suggested weighting matrix here is

the second moment matrix of test asset returns. Notice that, unlike S−1 , this weighting does
not depend on estimates of the model parameters θ  , hence the metric Dist is comparable
across models. I will refer to Dist (θ ) as the HJ distance.
The HJ distance does not reward SDF volatility. As a result, it is suitable for model
comparison. The HJ distance also provides a measure of model misspecification: it gives
least squares distance between the model’s SDF  () and the nearest point to it in space of
all SDFs that price assets correctly. It also gives the maximum pricing error of any portfolio
formed from the  assets. These features are the primary appeal of HJ distance. The metric
explicitly recognizes all models as misspecified, and provides method for comparing models
by assessing which is least misspecified. If Model 1 has a lower Dist (θ) than Model 2, we
may conclude that the former has less specification error than the latter.
The approach of Hansen and Jagannathan (1997) for quantifying and comparing specification error is an important tool for econometric research in asset pricing. Tests of overidentifying restrictions, for example using the  test, or other specification tests, are tests of
whether an individual model is literally true, against the alternative that it has any specification error. Given the abstractions from reality our models represent, this is a standard any
model is unlikely to meet. Moreover, as we have seen, a failure to reject in a specification
test of a model could arise because the model is poorly estimated and subject to a high
degree of sampling error, not because it explains the return data well. The work of Hansen
and Jagannathan (1997) addresses this dilemma, by explicitly recognizing all models as approximations. This reasoning calls for greater emphasis in empirical work on methodologies
that facilitate the comparison of competing misspecified models, while reducing emphasis on
individual hypothesis tests of whether a single model is specified without error.
Despite the power of this reasoning, most work remains planted in the tradition of relying primarily on hypothesis tests of whether a single framework is specified without error
13

to evaluate economic models. One possible reason for the continuation of this practice is
that the standard specification tests have well-understood limiting distributions that permit
the researcher to make precise statistical inferences about the validity of the model. A limitation of the Hansen and Jagannathan (1997) approach is that it provides no method for
comparing HJ distances statistically:  (1) may be less than  (2) , but are they statistically
diﬀerent from one another once we account for sampling error? The next section discusses
one approach to this problem.
3.3.2

Statistical comparison of HJ distance

Chen and Ludvigson (2009) develop a procedure for statistically comparing HJ distances of
 competing models using a methodology based on White’s (White (2000)) reality check
approach. An advantage of this approach is that it can be used for the comparison of any
number of multiple competing models of general form, with any stationary law of motion for
the data. Two other recent papers develop methods for comparing HJ distances in special
cases. Wang and Zhang (2003) provide a way to compare HJ distance measures across
models using Bayesian methods, under the assumption that the data follow linear, Gaussian
processes. Kan and Robotti (2008) extend the procedure of Vuong (1989) to compare two
linear SDF models according to the HJ distance. Although useful in particular cases, neither
of these procedures are suﬃciently general so as to be broadly applicable. The Wang and
Zhang procedure cannot be employed with distribution-free estimation procedures because
those methodologies leave the law of motion of the data unspecified, requiring only that it
be stationary and ergodic and not restricting to Gaussian processes. The Kan and Robotti
procedure is restricted to the comparison of only two stochastic discount factor models, both
linear. This section describes the method used in Chen and Ludvigson (2009), for comparing
any number of multiple stochastic discount factor models, some or all of them possibly
nonlinear. The methodology does not restrict to linear Gaussian processes but instead
allows for almost any stationary data series including a wide variety of nonlinear time-series
processes such as diﬀusion models, stochastic volatility, nonlinear ARCH, GARCH, Markov
switching, and many more.
Suppose the researcher seeks to compare the estimated HJ distances of several models.
Let 2 denote the squared HJ distance for model : 2 ≡ (Dist (θ ))2 . The procedure
can be described in the following steps.
1. Take a benchmark model, e.g., the model with smallest squared HJ distance among
14

 = 1  competing models, and denote its square distance 21 :
21 ≡ min{2 }
=1 
2. The null hypothesis is 21 − 22 ≤ 0, where 22 is the competing model with the next
smallest squared distance.
3. Form the test statistic   ≡

√
 (21 − 22 ).

4. If null is true, the historical value of   should not be unusually large, given sampling
error.
5. Given a distribution for   , reject the null if its historical value, Tb  , is greater than
the 95th percentile of the distribution for   .

The work involves computing the distribution of    which typically has a complicated
limiting distribution. However, it is straightforward to compute the distribution via block
bootstrap (see Chen and Ludvigson (2009)). The justification for the bootstrap rests on the
existence of a multivariate, joint, continuous, limiting distribution for the set {2 }
=1 under

the null. Proof of the joint limiting distribution of {2 }
=1 exists for most asset pricing

applications: for parametric models the proof is given in Hansen, Heaton, and Luttmer
(1995). For semiparametric models it is given in Ai and Chen (2007).
This method of model comparison could be used in place of or in addition to hypothesis
tests of whether a single model is specified without error. The method follows the recommendation of Hansen and Jagannathan (1997) that we allow all models to be misspecified
and evaluate them on the basis of the magnitude of their specification error. Unlike their
original work, the procedure discussed here provides a basis for making precise statistical
inference about the relative performance of models. The example here provides a way to
compare HJ distances statistically, but can also be applied to any set of estimated criterion
functions based on non-optimal weighting.
3.3.3

Reasons to Use (and Not to Use) Identity Weighting

Before concluding this section it is useful to note two other reasons for using non-optimal
weighting in GMM or other method of moments approaches, and to discuss the pros and cons
of doing so. Aside from model comparison issues, optimal weighting can result in econometric
15

problems in small samples. For example, in samples with large number of asset returns and
a limited time-series component, the researcher may end up with a near singular weighting
−1
matrix S−1
 or G . This frequently occurs in asset pricing applications because stock returns

are highly correlated cross-sectionally. We often have large  and modest  . If   , the
covariance matrix for  asset returns or the GMM moment conditions is singular. Unless
  , the matrix can be near-singular. This suggests that a fixed weighting matrix that
is independent of the data may provide better estimates even if they are not eﬃcient. Altonji
and Segal (1996) show that first-stage GMM estimates using the identity matrix are more
robust to small sample problems than are GMM estimates where the criterion function has
been weighted with an estimated matrix. Cochrane (2005) recommends using the identity
matrix as a robustness check in any estimation where the cross-sectional dimension of the
sample is less than 1/10th of the time-series dimension.
Another reason to use the identity weighting matrix is that permits the researcher to
investigate the model’s performance on economically interesting portfolios. The original test
assets upon which we wish to evaluate the model may have been carefully chosen to represent
economically meaningful characteristics, such as size and value eﬀects, for example. When
we seek to test whether models can explain these return data but also use W = S−1
 or
G−1
 to weight the GMM objective, we undo the objective of evaluating whether the model
can explain the original test asset returns and the economically meaningful characteristics
they represent.
To see this, consider the triangular factorization of S−1 = (P0 P), where P is lower
triangular. We can state two equivalent GMM objectives:
min g0 S−1 g ⇔ (g0 P0 )I(Pg )
Writing out the elements of g0 P0 for the Euler equations of a model +1 (θ  ), where
g(θ; y ) ≡ (1 )


X
=1

[+1 (θ  ) R+1 − 1] 

and where R+1 is the vector of original test asset returns, it is straightforward to show
that min(g0 P0 )I(Pg ) and min g0 Ig are both tests of the unconditional Euler equation
restrictions taking the form  [+1 (θ  ) R+1 ] = 1, except that the former uses as test asset
returns a (re-weighted) portfolio of the original returns R+1 = AR+1  whereas the latter

16

uses R+1 = R+1 as test assets. By using S−1 as a weighting matrix, we have eliminated
our ability to test whether the model +1 (θ  ) can price the economically meaningful test
assets originally chosen.
Even if the original test assets hold no special significance, the resulting GMM objective
using optimal weighting could imply that the model is tested on portfolios of the original
test assets that display a small spread in average returns, even if the original test assets
display a large spread. This is potentially a problem because if there is not a significant
spread in average returns, there is nothing for the cross-sectional asset pricing model to test.
The re-weighting may also imply implausible long and short positions in original test assets.
See Cochrane (2005) for further discussion on these points.
Finally, there may also be reasons not to use W = I For example, we may want our
statistical conclusions to be invariant to the choice of test assets. If a model can price a set
of returns R then (barring short-sales constraints and transactions costs), theory states that
the Euler equation should also hold for any portfolio AR of the original returns. A diﬃculty
with identity weighting is that the GMM objective function in that case is dependent on the
initial choice of test assets. This is not true of the optimal GMM matrix or of the second
moment matrix.
To see this, let W = [ (R0 R)]−1 , and form a portfolio, AR from  initial returns R,
where A is an  ×  matrix. Note that portfolio weights sum to 1 so A1 = 1 , where
1 is an  × 1 vector of ones. We may write out the GMM objective on the original test
assets and show that it is the same as that of any portfolio AR of the original test assets:
−1

[ (R) − 1 ]0  (RR0 )

[ (R − 1 )]
−1

= [ (AR) − A1 ]0  (ARR0 A)

[ (AR − A1 )] 

This shows that the GMM objective function is invariant to the initial choice of test assets
when W = [ (R0 R)]−1 . With W = I or other fixed weighting, the GMM objective
depends on the initial choice of test assets.
In any application these considerations must be weighed and judgement must be used
to determine how much emphasis to place on testing the model’s ability to fit the original
economically meaningful test assets versus robustness of model performance to that choice
of test assets.

17

4

Euler Equation Errors and Consumption-Based Models

The findings of HS discussed above showed one way in which the standard consumptionbased model has diﬃculty explaining asset pricing data. These findings were based on
an investigation of Euler equations using instruments x to capture conditioning information
upon which investors may base expectations. Before moving on to discuss the estimation and
testing of newer consumption-based theories, it is instructive to consider another empirical
limitation of the standard model that is surprisingly diﬃcult to explain even for newer
theories: the large unconditional Euler equation errors that the standard model displays
when evaluated on cross-sections of stock returns. These errors arise when the instrument
set x in (15) consists solely of a vector of ones. Lettau and Ludvigson (2009) present
evidence on the size of these errors and show that they remain economically large even when
preference parameters are freely chosen to maximize the standard model’s chances of fitting
the data. Thus, unlike the equity premium puzzle of Mehra and Prescott (1985), the large
Euler equation errors cannot be resolved with high values of risk aversion.
Let +1 = (+1  )− . Define Euler equation errors as  or 
 ≡ [+1 +1 ] − 1

(17)

 ≡ [+1 (+1 − +1 )]
Consider choosing parameters by GMM to
min g0 W g


where th element of g is given by either

1X 
 
 ( ) =
 =1 

in the case of raw returns, or
 () =


1X 

 =1 

in the case of excess returns. Euler equation errors can be interpreted economically as pricing
18

errors, also commonly referred to as “alphas” in the language of financial economics. The
pricing error of asset  is defined as the diﬀerence between its historical mean excess return
over the risk-free rate and the risk-premium implied by the model with pricing kernel +1 .
The risk premium implied by the model may be written as the product of the asset’s beta
for systematic risk times the price of systematic risk (see Section 5 for an exposition). The
pricing error of the th return,  , is that part of the average excess return that cannot
be explained by the asset’s beta risk. It is straightforward to show that  =



(+1 )

Pricing errors are therefore proportional to Euler equation errors. Moreover, because the
term  (+1 )−1 is the mean of the risk-free rate and is close to unity for most models,
pricing errors and Euler equation errors are almost identical quantities. If the standard
model is true, both errors should be zero for any traded asset return and for some values of
 and .
Using U.S. data on consumption and asset returns, Lettau and Ludvigson (2009) estimate
Euler equation errors  and  for two diﬀerent sets of asset returns. Here I focus just on
the results for excess returns. The first “set” of returns is the single return on a broad stock
market index return in excess of a short term Treasury bill rate. The stock market index is
measured as the CRSP value-weighted price index return and denoted  . The Treasury
bill rate is measured as the three-month Treasury bill rate and denoted  . The second set
of returns in excess of the T-bill rate are portfolio value-weighted returns of common stocks
sorted into two size (market equity) quantiles and three book value-market value quantiles
available from Kenneth French’s Dartmouth web site. I denote these six returns R  .
To give a flavor of the estimated Euler equation errors, the figure below reports the root
mean squared Euler equation error for excess returns on these two sets of assets, where
v
u

u1 X
2
t
[ ]
 =
 =1
£
¤
 =   (+1  )− (+1 − +1 ) 
To give a sense of how the large pricing errors are relative to the returns being priced, the
RMSE is reported relative to RMSR, the square root of the average squared (mean) returns
of the assets under consideration
v
u

u1 X
t
[ (+1 − +1 )]2 
 ≡
 =1
19

Source: Lettau and Ludvigson (2009).  is the excess return on CRSP-VW index over 3-Mo
T-bill rate.  & 6 FF refers to this return plus 6 size and book-market sorted portfolios provided
by Fama and French. For each value of ,  is chosen to minimize the Euler equation error for the
T-bill rate. U.S. quarterly data, 1954:1-2002:1.

The errors are estimated by GMM. The solid line plots the case where the single excess
return on the aggregate stock market, +1 − +1 , is priced; the dotted line plots the
case for the seven excess returns +1 − +1 and R  − +1 . The two lines lie almost

on top of each other. In the case of the single excess return for the aggregate stock market,
the RMSE is just the Euler equation error itself. The figure shows that the pricing error for
the excess return on the aggregate stock market cannot be driven to zero, for any value of .
Moreover, the minimized pricing error is large. The lowest pricing error is 5.2% per annum,
which is almost 60% of the average annual CRSP excess return. This result occurs at a value
for risk aversion of  = 117. At other values of  the error rises precipitously and reaches
several times the average annual stock market return when  is outside the ranges displayed
in Figure 1. Even when the model’s parameters are freely chosen to fit the data, there are
no values of the preference parameters that eliminate the large pricing errors of the model.

20

Similar results hold when Euler equation errors are computed for the seven excess returns
+1 − +1  R  − +1 . The minimum RMSE is again about 60% of the square root
of average squared returns being priced, which occurs at  = 118 These results show that
the degree of mispricing in the standard model is about the same regardless of whether
we consider the single excess return on the market or a larger cross-section of excess stock
market returns. Unlike the equity premium puzzle of Mehra and Prescott (1985), large Euler
equation errors cannot be resolved with high risk aversion.
These results are important for what they imply about the joint distribution of aggregate
consumption and asset returns. If consumption and asset returns are jointly lognormally
¤
£
distributed, GMM estimation of   (+1  )− +1 = 1 on any two asset returns should

find estimates of  and  for which the sample Euler equations are exactly satisfied. The

results above therefore imply that consumption and asset returns are not jointly lognormal.
Statistical tests for joint normality confirm this implication.
To explain why the standard model fails, we need to develop alternative models that
can rationalize its large Euler equation errors. Lettau and Ludvigson (2009) study three
leading asset pricing theories and find that they have diﬃculty explaining the mispricing of
classic CCAPM. These are (i) the representative agent external habit-persistence paradigm
of Campbell and Cochrane (1999) that has been modified to accommodate a cross-section of
tradeable risky assets in Menzly, Santos, and Veronesi (2004), (ii) the representative agent
long-run risk model based on recursive preferences of Bansal and Yaron (2004), and (iii) the
limited participation model of Guvenen (2003).
Lettau and Ludvigson (2009) find that, if the benchmark specification of any of these
¤
£
newer theories had generated the data, GMM estimation of   (+1  )− +1 = 1
would counterfactually imply that the standard model has negligible Euler equation errors

when  and  are freely chosen to fit the data. In the model economies, this occurs because
the realized excess returns on risky assets are negative when consumption is falling, whereas
in the data they are often positive. It follows that these models fail to explain the mispricing of the standard model because they fundamentally mischaracterize the joint behavior
of consumption and asset returns in recessions, when aggregate consumption is falling. By
contrast, a stylized model in which aggregate consumption growth and stockholder consumption growth are highly correlated most of the time, but have low or negative correlation in
recessions, produces violations of the standard model’s Euler equations and departures from
joint lognormality of aggregate consumption growth and asset returns that are remarkably
21

similar to those found in the data. More work is needed to assess the plausibility of this
channel.
In summary, explaining why the standard consumption-based model’s unconditional
Euler equations are violated—for any values of the model’s preference parameters—has so
far been largely elusive, even for today’s leading consumption-based asset pricing theories.
This anomaly is striking because early empirical evidence that the standard model’s Euler
equations were violated provided much of the original impetus for developing the newer models studied here. Explaining why the standard consumption-based model exhibits such large
unconditional Euler equation errors remains an important challenge for future research, and
for today’s leading asset pricing models.

5

Scaled Consumption-Based Models

A large class of consumption-based models have an approximately linear functional form
for the stochastic discount factor. In empirical work, it is sometimes convenient to use
this linearized formulation rather than estimating the full nonlinear specification. Many
newer consumption-based theories imply that the pricing kernel is approximately a linear
function of current consumption growth, but unlike the standard consumption-based model
the coeﬃcients in the approximately linear function depend on the state of the economy. I
will refer to these as scaled consumption-based models because the pricing kernel is a statedependent or “scaled” function of consumption growth and possibly other fundamentals.
Scaled consumption-based models oﬀer a particularly convenient way to represent statedependency in the pricing kernel. In this case we can explicitly model the dependence of
parameters in the stochastic discount factor on current period information. This dependence
can be specified by simply interacting, or “scaling,” factors with instruments that summarize
the state of the economy (according to some model). As explained below, precisely the same
fundamental factors (e.g., consumption, housing etc.) that price assets in traditional unscaled
consumption-based models are assumed to price assets in this approach. The diﬀerence is
that, in these newer theories of preferences, these factors are expected only to conditionally
price assets, leading to conditional rather than fixed linear factor models. These models can
be expressed as multifactor models by multiplying out the conditioning variables and the
fundamental consumption-growth factor.
As an example of a scaled consumption based model, consider the following approximate
22

formulation for the pricing kernel:
+1 ≈  +  ∆+1 
Almost any nonlinear consumption-based model can be approximated in this way. For
example, the classic CCAPM with CRRA utility:
1−
⇒ +1 ≈  −  ∆+1 
( ) =
|{z} |{z}
1−
 =0

(18)

 =0

The pricing kernel in the CCAPM is an approximate linear function of consumption growth
with fixed weights  = 0 and  = 0 . Notice that there is no reason based on this model
of preferences to specify the coeﬃcients in the pricing kernel as functions of conditioning
information; those parameters are constant and known functions of primitive preference parameters. This does not imply that the conditional moments  [+1 R+1 − 1] are constant.
There may still be a role for conditioning information in the Euler equation, even if there
is no role for conditioning in the linear pricing kernel. This distinction is discussed further
below.
Alternatively, consider the model of Campbell and Cochrane (1999) (discussed further
below), and the closely related model of Menzly, Santos, and Veronesi (2004), with habit
formation and time-varying risk aversion:
(   ) =

(  )1−

1−

+1 ≡

 − 


where  is an external habit that is a function of current and past average (aggregate)
consumption and  is the so-called “surplus consumption ratio.” In this case the pricing
kernel may be approximated as
+1 ≈  (1 − ( ) − ( − 1)) ( − )−(1 + ( ))∆+1 
{z
}|
{z
}
|
=

(19)

=

where  is the log of the surplus consumption ratio,  is a parameter of utility curvature,
 is the mean rate of consumption growth,  is the persistence of the habit stock, and
( ) is the sensitivity function specified in Campbell and Cochrane. In this model, the
pricing kernel is an approximate state-dependent linear function of consumption growth.
This model provides an explicit motivation for modeling the coeﬃcients in the pricing kernel
23

as functions of conditioning information, something (Cochrane (1996)) refers to as “scaling
factors.” Although the parameters  and  in (19) are nonlinear functions of the model’s
primitive parameters and state-variable  , in equilibrium they fluctuate with variables that
move risk-premia. Proxies for time-varying risk-premia should therefore be good proxies for
time-variation in  and  if models like (19) are valid.
Motivated by specifications such as (19), Lettau and Ludvigson (2001b) study a reducedform variant of this model by assuming +1 ≈  +  ∆+1 and directly specifying the
time-varying coeﬃcients  and  as linear functions of conditioning information. They
focus on a single observable conditioning variable,  , where  is chosen because it is an
empirical proxy for time-varying risk premia. The variable  is a cointegrating residual for
log consumption, log asset wealth, and log labor income. Empirically, it is a strong predictor
of excess stock market returns (see Lettau and Ludvigson (2001a) and Lettau and Ludvigson
(2010)). To summarize, the empirical specification studied by Lettau and Ludvigson (2001b)
sets
+1 =  +  ∆+1
with
 = 0 + 1  

 = 0 + 1 

 =  ≡  −   −   
where  and  are cointegrating parameters.
Other examples of scaled consumption based models follow from including housing consumption explicitly in the utility aggregator. Consider an agent’s utility over two goods
takin the form:
1

e1− 

(   ) =  1
1− 


h −1
−1 i
e =   + (1 − )   −1 


where  is non-housing consumption of an individual and  is the stock of housing,  is
the coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion,  is the relative weight on non-housing consumption
in utility, and  is the constant elasticity of substitution between  and . Implicit in this
specification is the assumption that the service flow from houses is proportional to the stock

24

. Here the pricing kernel takes the form

+1 =

+1


⎡
⎤
−
⎡
⎤ (−1)
´ −1
³

+1
⎢µ  ¶− 1  + (1 − ) 
⎥
+1
⎢
⎥
⎢
⎥
+1
=⎢
⎥
⎣
−1 ⎦
´
³
⎣ 
⎦


 + (1 − ) 

(20)

This model has been studied in its representative agent formulation by Piazzesi, Schneider, and Tuzel (2007). The stochastic discount factor (20) makes explicit the two-factor
structure of the pricing kernel. Piazzesi, Schneider, and Tuzel (2007) show that the log
pricing kernel can be written as a linear two-factor model
ln +1 =  + ∆ ln +1 + ∆ ln +1
where
+1 ≡

(21)


 

  + 
 


is the consumption expenditure share on non-housing consumption and 
 and  are the

prices of non-housing and housing consumption, respectively. Piazzesi, Schneider, and Tuzel
(2007) focus on the time-series implications of the model. According to the model, the
dividend yield and the nonhousing expenditure share forecast future excess stock returns.
They find empirical support for this prediction and document that the expenditure share at
predicts excess stock returns better than does the dividend yield.
The representation (21) is a multifactor model, but not a scaled multifactor model: the
coeﬃcients on the factors ∆ ln +1 and ∆ ln +1 in the pricing kernel are constant and
known functions of preference parameters. But, because the level of the pricing kernel +1
is nonlinear in the factors +1  and +1  , Piazzesi, Schneider, and Tuzel (2007) show
that the log pricing kernel can be approximated as a scaled multifactor model by linearizing

∆ ln +1 around the point +1 =  , where +1 ≡ 
    to obtain:

ln +1 ≈  + ∆ ln +1 +  (1 − ln  ) ∆ ln +1 
Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh (2005) study a model in which households have the same
specification for preferences as in (20) but they dispose of the representative agent formulation, instead studying a heterogeneous agent model with endogenously incomplete markets
(with complete contingent claims but limited commitment) and collateralized borrowing.
25

This leads to a scaled consumption-based model where the pricing kernel is now a statedependent function of the two fundamental factors ∆ ln +1 and ∆ ln +1 . In their model,
a drop in the housing collateral (relative to human capital) adversely aﬀects the risk sharing
that permits households to insulate consumption from labor income shocks. The crosssectional variance of consumption growth increases as this ratio decreases. This eﬀect can
be captured by the tightness of the borrowing constraint, which in turn depends on the
housing collateral ratio, measured empirically by the ratio of housing wealth to total wealth.
Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh (2005) show that the log pricing kernel can be approximated
as a linear state-dependent two-factor model
ln +1 ≈  +  ∆ ln +1 +  ∆ ln +1
where
 = 0 + 1 ( )
 = 0 + 1 ( )
 = 0 + 1 ( )
and  is a aggregate consumption,  is a measure of the aggregate consumption expenditure
share on non-housing consumption, and  is a measure of the national housing collateral
ratio.
Santos and Veronesi (2006) study a standard consumption-based model, but assume an
endowment economy with two trees: a labor income or human capital tree, and a dividend or
financial security tree. They show that the conditional consumption CAPM can be expressed
in terms of the conditional dependence on two risk factors: the return to financial wealth
and the return to human wealth. To account for human wealth, the Santos-Veronesi model
includes two types of returns as factors, one for non-human wealth  (a stock market
return) and the other for human wealth  (measured by labor income growth). The
resulting model for the pricing kernel is again a scaled model with
¡
¡
¢
¢
ln +1 ≈  + 0 +   +1 + 0 + 1  +1 
where  is the ratio of labor income to consumption.
Given these approximately linear pricing kernels, the scaled consumption-based models
26

above are all tested on unconditional Euler equation moments:  [+1 R+1 ] = 1. The
papers above then ask whether the unconditional covariance between the pricing kernel and
returns can explain the large spread in unconditional mean returns on portfolios of stocks
that vary the basis of size (market capitalization) and book-to-market equity ratio.

5.1

Econometric Findings

The studies above find that state-dependency in the linear pricing kernel greatly improves
upon the performance of the unscaled counterpart with constant coeﬃcients as an explanation for the cross-section of average stock market returns. Explaining the cross-section of
returns on portfolios sorted according to both size and book-to-market equity has presented
one of the greatest challenge for theoretically-based asset pricing models such as the static
CAPM of Sharpe (1964) and Lintner (1965), and the classic CCAPM discussed above. The
strong variation in returns across portfolios that diﬀer according to book-to-market equity
ratios cannot be attributed to variation in the riskiness of those portfolios, as measured by
either the CAPM (Fama and French (1992)) or the CCAPM (see discussion below). Fama
and French (1993) find that financial returns related to firm size and book-to-market equity,
along with an overall stock market return, do a good job of explaining the cross-section of
returns on these portfolios. If the Fama—French factors truly are mimicking portfolios for underlying sources of macroeconomic risk, there should be some set of macroeconomic factors
that performs well in explaining the cross-section of average returns on those portfolios.
Lettau and Ludvigson (2001b) find that the scaled consumption CAPM, using aggregate
consumption data, can explain about 70 percent of the cross-sectional variation in average
returns on 25 portfolios provided by Fama and French, which are portfolios of individuals
stocks sorted into five size quantiles and five book-market quantiles (often referred to as the
25 Fama-French portfolios). This result contrasts sharply with the 1 percent explained by the
CAPM and the 16% explained by the standard (unscaled) CCAPM where  =  (1 − ∆ ).
The consumption factors scaled by  are strongly statistically significant. An important
aspect of these results is that the conditional consumption model, scaled by , goes a
long way toward explaining the celebrated “value premium,” that is the well documented
pattern found in average returns that firms with high book-to-market equity ratios have
higher average returns than do firms with low book-to-market ratios.
Similar findings are reported for the other scaled consumption based models. Lustig
and Van Nieuwerburgh (2005) find that, conditional on the housing collateral ratio, the
27

covariance of returns with aggregate risk factors ∆ ln +1 and ∆ ln +1 explains 80 percent
of the cross-sectional variation in annual size and book-to-market portfolio returns. Santos
and Veronesi (2006) find empirically that conditioning market returns on  dramatically
improves the cross-sectional fit of the asset pricing model when confronted with size and
book-market portfolios of stock returns.
These scaled consumption-based models of risk are conceptually quite diﬀerent models of
risk from their unscaled counterparts. Because the pricing kernel is a state-dependent function of consumption growth, assets are risky in these models not because they are more highly
unconditionally correlated with consumption growth (and other fundamental factors), but
because they are more highly correlated with consumption in bad times, when the economy
is doing poorly and risk premia are already high. Lettau and Ludvigson (2001b) provide
direct evidence of this mechanism, by showing that returns of value portfolios are more
highly correlated with consumption growth than are growth portfolios in downturns, when
risk/risk aversion is high (when d
 is high), than in booms, when risk/risk aversion is low

(d
 is low). Because these results are based on estimates of unconditional Euler equation
restrictions, they follow only from state-dependency in the pricing kernel and are illustrated
using empirical restrictions that do not incorporate or depend on conditioning information
in the Euler equation. This is discussed further below.

5.2

Distinguishing Two Types of Conditioning

With reference to scaled consumption-based models, it is important to distinguish two types
of conditioning. One type occurs when we seek to incorporate conditioning information into
the moments  [+1 +1 ] = 1 written
[+1 +1 |x ] = 1
where x is the information set of investors upon which the joint distribution of +1 +1
is based. This form of conditionality, to which Cochrane (1996) refers as “scaling returns,”
captures conditioning information in the Euler equation:
[+1 (+1 ⊗ (1 x )0 )] = 1

28

(22)

Cochrane (1996) refers to the set of returns +1 ⊗ (1 x )0 as scaled, or managed, portfolio
returns (invest more or less in asset  based on the signal in x ). Another form of conditionality, referred to as “scaling factors” f+1 (Cochrane (1996)), captures conditioning information
in the pricing kernel:
+1 = b0 f+1 with b = b0 + b1 z
= b0 (f+1 ⊗ (1 z )0 )
where f+1 is a vector of fundamental factors such as, for example, ∆ ln +1 or ∆ ln +1
and ∆ ln +1 . The specification above embeds the assumption that b are aﬃne functions
of z , but it is straightforward to consider nonlinear functional forms. Scaling returns is
appropriate if conditioning information is used to model time-varying covariances between
+1 and returns. Scaling factors is appropriate if the conditioning information is implied
by preferences +1 , even if the covariances studied are constant over time because they are
based on unconditional expectations [+1 +1 ] = 1.
Unlike the standard model, the scaled consumption-based models discussed above imply that +1 is a state-dependent function of some fundamental factor or factors such as
∆ ln +1 or ∆ ln +1 and ∆ ln +1  This feature comes from preferences, not from timevarying covariances. The scaled consumption-based models discussed above were estimated
and tested on unconditional moments, as obtained from an application of the law of iterated
expectations
[+1 +1 ] = 1
where  [·] refers to the time-invariant unconditional expectation operator. In this case, the
scaled consumption CAPM models turn a single factor model with state-dependent weights
into multifactor model f with constant weights:
+1 = (0 + 1  ) + (0 + 1  ) ∆ ln +1
= 0 + 1  + 0 ∆ ln +1 + 1 ( ∆ ln +1 )
|{z}
| {z }
| {z }
1+1

2+1

3+1

The scaled model has multiple risk factors f0 ≡ (  ∆ ln +1   ∆ ln +1 ). Because returns
are not scaled, scaled consumption models have multiple, constant betas for each factor,
rather than a single time-varying beta for ∆ ln +1 .

29

To see this, we derive the beta-representation for this model. A beta representation
exists only for formulations of the pricing kernel in which it is an aﬃne function of factors.
Let F = (1 f 0 )0 , denote the vector of these multiple factors including a constant and let
 = b0 F, and ignore time indices. From the unconditional Euler equation moments we have
1 = [ ] ⇒

unconditional moments

(23)

= [ F0 ]b
= [ ][F0 ]b + Cov(  F0 )b
Let b denote the coeﬃcients on variable factors f 0 . Then

1 − Cov(  F0 )b
[F0 ]b
1 − Cov(  f 0 )b
=
[F0 ]b
1 − Cov(  f 0 )Cov(f  f 0 )−1 Cov(f  f 0 )b
=
[F0 ]b
=  − 0 β0 Cov(f  f 0 )b

[ ] =

=  − β0 λ
β 0 λ

⇒

multiple, constant betas β

(24)

where
β0 ≡ Cov(  f 0 )Cov(f f 0 )−1 
λ ≡ Cov(f  f 0 )b
This gives rise to an unconditional multifactor, scaled consumption-based model with multiple β  ’s, e.g.,:
+1 =  +  ∆ ∆+1 +  ∆ ∆+1  +    + +1 

30

 = 1  

(25)

where +1 is an expectational error for +1 . The above equation can be re-written as
+1 =  + ( ∆ +  ∆  )∆+1 +    + +1 
|
{z
}

 = 1  

 


where  
 is a time-varying consumption beta that applies specifically to the unconditional,
scaled multifactor model  = b0 F and 1 = [ ] for any traded asset indexed by . I will
refer to  
 as the scaled consumption beta.
It is important to emphasize that the time-varying beta  
 is not the same as the
conditional consumption beta of the classic consumption-CAPM (8). Instead,  
 arises from
an entirely diﬀerent model of preferences in which the pricing kernel is a state-dependent
function of consumption growth. In the standard model there are no scaled factors because
the coeﬃcients in the linear pricing kernel (18) are constant and known functions of preference
parameters. Nevertheless, a conditional consumption beta may be derived for the standard
model from time-variation in the conditional moment  (+1 R+1 ) = 1, where +1 =
 [+1  ]− . Using the linearized form of this model  =  (1 − ∆ ), conditionality in
the Euler equation  (+1 R+1 ) = 1 gives rise to a time-varying beta
  =

Cov (∆   )

Var (∆ )

Movements in the conditional consumption beta   reflect the role of conditioning information in the Euler equation of the standard consumption-based model.   could vary, for
example, if the covariance between consumption growth and returns varies over time. By
contrast, movements in the  
 reflect state-dependency of consumption growth in the pricing
kernel itself, driven, for example, by time-varying risk aversion, or the tightness of borrowing constraints in an incomplete markets setting. Thus  
 and   represent two diﬀerent
models of consumption risk. The former is based on an approximately linear pricing kernel
that is a state-dependent function of consumption growth, whereas the latter is based on
an approximately linear pricing kernel that is a state-independent function of consumption
growth.
The statistic  
 is also not the same as the conditional consumption beta of a scaled
consumption-based model, +1 = b0 F+1  because it is estimated from unconditional Euler
equation moments. In particular, its estimation does not for example use any scaled returns.
A conditional consumption beta may be estimated for models with scaled factors, but this
31

requires explicitly modeling the conditioning information in the Euler equation, or the joint
conditional distribution of +1 and test asset returns:
1 =  [+1 +1 ]
=  [b0 F+1 +1 ] ⇒
 [+1 ] = +1 −  0  

(26)

where  0 now represents the conditional consumption beta of the scaled model.
Whether it is necessary or desirable to include conditioning information in the Euler
equation depends on the empirical application. A necessary condition for estimating and
testing models of  using GMM is that the number of Euler equation moments be at least
as large as the number of parameters to be estimated. This implies that the econometrician’s
information set need not be the same as investors. Indeed, if we have enough test asset returns
the model can be estimated and tested by “conditioning down” all the way to unconditional
moments, as in the studies discussed above. This is possible because GMM theory is based
on the unconditional moments {h (θ w+1 )} = 0. Conditioning information can always
be incorporated by including instruments x observable at time , as in (16), but those are
already imbedded in h (θ w+1 ). Importantly, for the purpose of estimating and testing the
model, there is no need to identify the true conditional mean  [+1 +1 − 1] based on the
information set of investors. (The relevance of this is discussed further below in Section 6.2 in
the context of estimating semiparametric models where, by contrast, the identification of the
conditional mean is required.) But note that this is an asymptotic result: in finite samples,
the estimation and testing of economic models by GMM can, and often does, depend on the
information set chosen. More generally in finite samples the results of GMM estimation can
depend on the choice of moments that form the basis for econometric evaluation.
It is important to distinguish the task of estimating and testing a particular model for
+1 using GMM, (which can be accomplished asymptotically on any set of theoretically
appropriate unconditional moments as long they are suﬃcient to identify the primitive parameters of interest), from other tasks in which we may need an estimate of the conditional
moments themselves, such as for example when we want to form inferences about the behavior of the conditional consumption beta   . In the latter case, we need to identify the true
conditional moment, which depends on the information set of economic agents. This poses
a potential problem. As Cochrane (2005) emphasizes, the conditioning information of eco-

32

nomic agents may not be observable, and one cannot omit it in making inferences about the
behavior of conditional moments. Hansen and Richard (1987) show that the mean-variance
implications of asset pricing models are sensitive to the omission of conditioning information.
The identification of the conditional mean in the Euler equation requires knowing the joint
distribution of +1 and the set of test asset returns Rt+1 . An econometrician may seek to
approximate this conditional joint distribution, but approximating it well typically requires
a large number of instruments that grow with the sample size, and the results can be sensitive to chosen conditioning variables (Harvey (2001)). In practice, researchers are forced in
finite samples to choose among a few conditioning variables because conventional statistical
analyses are quickly overwhelmed by degrees-of-freedom problems as the number rises. If
investors have information not reflected in the chosen conditioning variables, measures of
conditional mean will be misspecified and possibly misleading.3
For this reason is often convenient to focus on empirical restrictions that do not depend
on conditioning information in the Euler equation, as in the tests carried out in the scaled
consumption-based literature that are based on the models’ unconditional Euler equation
implications. Hansen and Richard (1987) show that conditioning down per se does not
prevent the researcher from distinguishing between diﬀerent models of the pricing kernel.
What is required is a model of the pricing kernel +1 . This in turn requires the researcher to
take a stand on the scaling variables in the pricing kernel. In the case of scaled consumptionbased models, theory may provide guidance as to the choice of scaling variables that are
part of the SDF (e.g., housing collateral ratio, or labor share), typically a few observable
instruments that summarize time-varying risk-premia.
Of course, scaling factors is one way to incorporate conditioning information–into the
pricing kernel. Some authors (e.g., Lettau and Ludvigson (2001b)) therefore used the terms
“scaling” and “conditioning” interchangeably when referring to models with scaled factors
even though the models were estimated and tested on unconditional Euler equation moments.
An unfortunate consequence of this “conditional” terminology may have been to create
the mis-impression (discussed below) that scaled consumption-based factor models provided
estimates of the conditional CCAPM beta   even though, unlike  
 , the conditional beta
is always derived from conditional Euler equation moments (scaling returns), whether or not
the pricing kernel includes scaled factors. Mea culpa.4
3

A partial solution is to summarize information in large number of time-series with few estimated dynamic
factors (e.g., Ludvigson and Ng 2007, 2009).
4
On page 1248 of their published paper, Lettau and Ludvigson (2001b) distinguish the two forms of

33

5.3

Debate

Lewellen, Nagel, and Shanken (2010) (LNS) take a skeptical view of the asset pricing tests
of a number of macroeconomic factor models found in several papers, including the scaled
consumption-based models discussed above. Their paper oﬀers a number of specific suggestions, designed to “raise the bar” in the statistical evaluation of asset pricing models.
Several suggestions are sensible checks on the finite sample properties of test statistics, such
as the recommendation to report confidence intervals for test statistics rather than relying
merely on point estimates. Other recommendations include testing models on assets other
than the size and book-market sorted portfolios commonly used, reporting GLS R-squared
statistics, and imposing a more complete set of theoretical restrictions on parameter estimates along the lines suggested by Lewellen and Nagel (2006) (discussed below). Once all
of these recommendations have been implemented, the authors find that none of the many
proposed macroeconomic models of the SDF performs well in explaining a cross-section of
average stock returns.
LNS also find, however, that the same disappointing results apply to the Fama-French
three-factor model, which explains over 90% of the time-variation in size and book-market
portfolio returns and is implicitly treated as the true model in their analysis. Indeed, the
results in Table 1 of LNS show that the Fama-French model performs no better than the other
consumption-based models when confronted with industry returns and evaluated according
to the GLS R-squared statistic. These findings suggest that none of the evaluated models
are free of specification error, including even very well fitting empirical specifications such as
the Fama-French three-factor model. But the findings also provide no way of distinguishing
among models that are all misspecified: an informal ranking of models is hardly changed
by these additional diagnostics. In particular, the findings are not evidence against the
conclusion that incorporating state dependency into the pricing kernel improves the fit of
unscaled factor models.
These issues are all statistical in nature; they pertain to whether a given model is correctly
specified or not. Yet, despite the several statistical checks they recommend, Lewellen, Nagel,
and Shanken (2010) argue that their primary point has nothing to do with statistical error.
Instead, they argue, because the Fama-French three factors explain more than 90% of the
conditionality and emphasize that, because their estimates are based on unconditional Euler equations, they
do not deliver an estimate of the conditional covariance of factors with returns, as required to form inferences
about the conditional consumption beta for the scaled model, or the conditional price of consumption risk
 .

34

time-variation in realized returns on the size and book-market sorted portfolios that are
typically used to evaluate the consumption-based models, any three-factor model with factors
that are correlated with the Fama-French factors (and not with the small idiosyncratic
component of returns that is unrelated to these factors), will explain the data as well as the
Fama-French model according to any statistical metric. This suggestion implies that any
proposed three-factor model with factors weakly correlated with the Fama-French factors
could be observationaly equivalent to the Fama-French model or to any “true” model. But
since they are all observationaly equivalent in this case, the answer to this debate cannot be
settled statistically, but must instead lie with economic theory.
Economic theory implies that the true sources of systematic risk must be macroeconomic
in nature. The Fama-French factors or other return-based factors may be mimicking portfolios for the true underlying sources of risk, but we can’t hope to explain returns in terms
of economic shocks with models of other returns. Economics therefore drives us back to the
importance of evaluating macroeconomic models of risk. To the extent that multiple models
are observationaly equivalent statistically, we are left with only macroeconomic theory as
our guide. Moreover, the observations of Lewellen, Nagel, and Shanken (2010) leave open
the question of why those macroeconomic models that do help explain returns are correlated
with the Fama-French factors. One possibility is that the Fama-French factors are mimicking
portfolios for the true sources of macroeconomic risk. In practice, however, models often can
be distinguished statistically and we know that many macroeconomic models do not explain
the size and book-market returns. Empirical findings such as those in LNS underscore the
need for econometric tests that permit the statistical comparison of multiple competing models, allowing all models to be misspecified. I discussed one such approach to this problem
above, for statistically comparing HJ distances across multiple models.
What of findings in the literature that suggest a number of macroeconomic factor models
may help explain the size and book-market eﬀects in portfolio returns? LNS raise this as a
cause for suspicion, arguing that it oﬀers an embarrassment of riches. But macroeconomic
risk is by nature characterized by common variation among large number of economic time
series, as occurs in business cycles for example. Moreover, only weak theoretical restrictions
are required to obtain a factor structure in large data-sets (Chamberlain and Rothschild
(1983)). Therefore, if economic theory is correct and systematic risk is macroeconomic in
nature, we should expect a factor structure in macroeconomic data, and we should expect a

35

variety of macroeconomic indicators to be correlated with these factors.5 These considerations suggest that we should be neither surprised nor alarmed by the observation that several
macroeconomic models of risk help explain financial market behavior. But perhaps what’s
really at stake here is the idea that there is a single, true model that explains all aspects
of the data to the exclusion of all others. All of the models considered by LNS may have
elements of the truth, and the question is whether we learn anything from knowing that a
specification that is misspecified may still help us interpret important aspects of the data.
Lewellen and Nagel (2006) (LN) present a more specific criticism of the conditional CAPM
based on a novel test that estimates time-varying CAPM betas using high-frequency data
on asset returns and short window regressions. They argue that conditional CAPM betas so
estimated are not volatile enough to explain the large excess returns on size and book-market
sorted portfolios.
These empirical tests cannot be directly applied to the consumption CAPM, because of
the absence of high frequency consumption data. Nevertheless, Lewellen and Nagel (2006)
still argue informally, taking as an example the findings of Lettau and Ludvigson (2001b)
(LL), that estimates of the scaled consumption-based models are unlikely to explain the data
and may violate restrictions implied by the conditional CCAPM.
The argument can be explained as follows. LN begin with a statement of the conditional
CCAPM as6
£  ¤
 +1
=    
cov (∆   )

  ≡
var (∆ )

(27)


where +1
is the stock’s excess return,   is the conditional CCAPM beta and  is the

time  price of consumption beta risk. Note that   in (27) is the conditional beta from
the classic consumption-CAPM (8) model of risk. Take unconditional expectations of (27)
to obtain

¡
£ ¤
¢
£  ¤
=     [ ] + cov     
 +1

(28)

As in (25), the three factor scaled consumption-based model estimated by LL with factors
5

Ludvigson and Ng (2007, 2009) find evidence of a factor structure in large datasets of macroeconomic
variables that are related to bond and stock returns.
6
The timing notation used here diﬀers from that of LN who denote conditional moments for period 
given  − 1 information with a  subscript rather than with a  − 1 subscript, as here.

36

f = [∆  ∆ −1  −1 ]0 and −1 = −1 relates returns to factors over time:
+1 =  +  ∆ ∆+1 +  ∆ ∆+1  +    + +1 

 = 1  

(29)

¤0
£
where the unconditional beta vector β =  ∆   ∆    is obtained from a multiple
regression of returns on factors f :

−1

β0 = cov (f  f0 )

cov (f   ) 

£ ¤
(Note that an unconditional beta is not the mean of the conditional beta, so   6=    )
As above, (29) may be trivially re-written as

+1 =  + ( ∆ +  ∆  )∆+1 +    + +1 
|
{z
}

 = 1  

(30)

 


If we take unconditional expectations on both sides of (29), we obtain a relation between
average returns and betas, where the betas are multiplied by constant coeﬃcients (·) :
 [+1 ] =  +  ∆ ∆ +  ∆ ∆ +    

 = 1  

(31)

The constant  and coeﬃcients (·) may be consistently estimated using a second-stage FamaMacBeth regression (Fama and MacBeth (1973)) of average returns on multiple betas.7
With these features of the LL model in hand, LN seek to derive restrictions on the
parameters of the scaled consumption-based model by using  
 as an estimate for   and
substituting it into the covariance term in (28), thus obtaining
¡
£ ¤
¢
£  ¤


=     [ ] + cov  
 +1


or

£ ¤
£  ¤
=     [ ] +  ∆ cov (   ) 
 +1

(32)

(33)

With this substitution, LN equate (33) and (31). Comparing (33) and (31), LN argue that,
7

The asset pricing model implies that  must be either zero (in the case of excess returns) or equal to
the zero-beta rate (in the case of raw returns). This in turn places restrictions on the time-series intercepts
in (30), as discussed further below.

37

with
∆ =  [ ] 

and

£ ¤
 ∆ ∆ =     [ ] 

(34)

 ∆ ∆ =  ∆ cov (   ) 

(35)

∆ = cov (   ) ≤    

(36)

it may be concluded that

where (·) denotes the standard deviation of the generic argument (·). According to this
reasoning, ∆ is an estimate of cov(   ), which must obey the inequality on the righthand-side of (36) since correlations are less than one in absolute value. LL provide estimates
of ∆ and   with  =  With these estimates, LN argue that the inequality in (36)
places restrictions on the magnitude of   . In particular, given the estimates of ∆ around
0.06% or 0.07% per quarter, and given the estimate of  , they argue that   must be large
(greater than 3.2% quarterly) in order to satisfy the inequality in (36). At the same time
LN note that the reported value of ∆ , which they take to be an estimate of  [ ], is small.
LN claim that the combination of large  and small  [ ] is inconsistent, quantitatively,
with some consumption-based models.
The reasoning behind the calculations above can be challenged on several levels, all of
which pertain to the equating of (33) and (31) from which (34) and (35) follow and from
£ ¤
which the inequality restriction (36) is derived. First,  ∆ 6=    , as required by (34).

The parameter  ∆ is not an estimate of the unconditional consumption beta for the standard
model. Even if it were, it would not in general be equal to the mean of the conditional beta.
Second, (31) contains the additional term    , absent in (33). As a result, if  ∆ and
  are correlated, as is likely, ∆ will be a biased estimate of cov(   )  Third, as noted

above,  
 is not an estimate of the conditional consumption beta   and therefore the
substitution of  
 for   into the covariance term of equation (32) is questionable. The
fundamental diﬃculty in each of these steps is that the parameters from the LL estimation
come from a procedure that delivers multiple, constant betas as in (24), rather than a single,
time-varying beta as required by the LN calculation. In summary, even if it were true that
some consumption-based models are inconsistent with a value for  that is both highly
volatile and low on average, the estimates in LL are not informative on this matter and

38

calculations of the type outlined above cannot be taken as evidence against the approximate
models of risk studied there.
What is the time-varying beta  
 if not a conditional CCAPM beta? The implied
parameter  
 is a statistic useful for illustrating intuitively why conditioning in the pricing
kernel explains return data better than its unscaled counterpart even when the model is
estimated and tested on unconditional Euler equation moments. It is a summary statistic
that helps explain why the presence of, e.g., time-varying risk aversion, or time-varying
risk-sharing, changes the concept of risk, from one involving a state-independent function
of consumption growth to one involving a state-dependent function. Put diﬀerently, the
statistic  
 is a convenient way of summarizing why both ∆+1 and  ∆+1 matter for
risk. But the derivation of  
 follows only from state-dependency in the pricing kernel and
is illustrated using empirical restrictions that do not incorporate or depend on conditioning
information in the Euler equation. For this reason,  
 is not an estimate of    and it
is therefore not useful for illustrating the dynamics of the conditional joint distribution
of consumption and returns in the standard consumption CAPM. It is also not useful for
illustrating the dynamics of the conditional joint distribution of consumption and returns in
the newer scaled consumption-based models because, here also, the conditional consumption
beta must be inferred from an estimation of the conditional time- Euler equation (26),
rather than from the unconditional Euler equation (23). This could be accomplished, for
example, by estimating the scaled factor model on (a suﬃciently large set of) scaled returns,
or managed portfolio returns.8
Of course, none of these observations imply that the scaled consumption based model
is perfectly specified. Indeed, even the original papers that studied these models suggested
that some theoretical restrictions were not satisfied. For example, the implied zero-beta rate
in the estimates of Lettau and Ludvigson (2001b) are implausibly large.
A separate criticism of the empirical tests of scaled consumption-based models points to
the failure of these tests to impose a diﬀerent type of restriction, one involving the time-series
intercepts in the first-pass time-series regression used to estimate betas. In the introduction
of their paper, LN suggest that one reason the conclusions of LL, Jagannathan and Wang
(1996), Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh (2005), and Santos and Veronesi (2006) diﬀer from
8

Alternatively, conditional consumption betas could be inferred from a flexible estimation of the conditional joint distribution of the pricing kernel and all test asset returns using semi-nonparametric techniques,
as in (Gallant and Tauchen (1989)), or from a variety of other approaches to estimating conditional Euler
equation moments, as in Duﬀee (2005), Nagel and Singleton (2010) or Roussanov (2010). These papers are
discussed further below.

39

their own is that these studies focus on cross-sectional regressions and not on time-series
intercept tests. Indeed, the published versions of these studies all evaluate the performance
of their models solely on the basis of cross-sectional regressions. This approach requires an
estimate of the time-series intercept  in first-pass regressions such as (29). But the timeseries intercepts in each of these studies are estimated freely, without imposing restrictions
implied by the theory. Specifically, the restrictions
 = β 0 (λ − (f )),  = 1 2
{z
}
(1)|

(37)

(1)

where  is the number of multiple factors in f of each model, are not imposed. To derive

, the multiple betas of each model are
this restriction, note that, with excess returns, 

estimated from a first pass time-series regression taking the form

=  + β0 f +    = 1 2


(38)


) = β0 λ  = 1 2
(

(39)


(
) =  + β0 E(f  ),  = 1 2

(40)

The asset pricing model is:

Taking expectations of (38),

and equating (39) and (40), we obtain the restriction (37). Notice that the time-series
intercept restrictions (37) are distinct from the presumed inequality restriction (36) upon
which Lewellen and Nagel (2006) focus.
Although ignored in the published studies, the time-series intercept restrictions may be
imposed and tested as follows. Consider the time-series regression of excess returns on
factors:

=  + β0 f +  ;


 = 1 2

Stacking the data on  asset returns and  factors into vectors, the moments for the

40

unrestricted OLS time-series regression are



"(

 ( R − a − β 0
( 1)

(×1)

R − a − β0

(1)

(×1)

f )
()(1)

= 0

⊗ f

= 0

)

f
()(1)

#

(1)

where “ ” denotes the sample mean in a sample of size  . Imposing the restriction (37),
the system becomes:
 (R − β0 (λ − E(f  )) − β0 f  ) = 0

(41)

 [{R − β 0 (λ − E(f  )) − β0 f  } ⊗ f ] = 0

(42)

Equations (41) and (42) can be estimated as a system using GMM along with a set of
moment conditions for estimating the means μ of factors:
 [f − μ] = 0

(43)

As a result of imposing the restrictions (37) the system (41)-(43) is overidentified: there are
a total of  +  ·  +  equations and  ·  + 2 parameters to be estimated in β, λ
and μ, or  −  overidentifying restrictions. These restrictions can be tested using the test
statistic  of Hansen (1982):
 ≡  g(θ; y )0 S−1 g(θ; y ) ∼ 2 ( − )

(44)

where the sample moments g(θ; y ) (see notation in Section 3) are defined for the three
equations (41)-(43) stacked into one system. The overidentifying restrictions are a test
of whether the model is correctly specified when the time-series intercept restrictions are
imposed.
The table below reports the  test statistic for this test and associated -value for the
moment conditions corresponding to the scaled consumption-based model (29), using the
original data employed by Lettau and Ludvigson (2001b) for cross-sections of 6 and 10 size
and book-market portfolio returns.

41

Table 1
Model
Scaled CCAPM
Fama-French

 (6 assets)  (10 assets)
(-value)

(-value)

0.02595

0.08662

(0.99889)

(0.99999)

0.04875

0.06348

(0.99718)

(0.99999)

Table 1 shows that there is no evidence against the restrictions, either for the scaled
CCAPM or the Fama-French three-factor model. The probability of obtaining a  statistic
at least as large as that obtained, assuming that the model is true, is very high. The results
therefore provide no evidence that the success of the scaled models (or the Fama-French
three factor model) is attributable to the failure to impose restrictions on the time-series
intercepts.
There are other ways to evaluate whether the time-series intercept restrictions are satisfied
in scaled consumption-based models. For models of the SDF in which factors are returns, the
estimated intercepts from time-series regressions of test asset returns on the factors should
be jointly zero if the model is correctly specified. Kim (2010) forms maximum correlation
portfolios (MCPs) for each of the multiple factors in the scaled CCAPM models investigated
in Lettau and Ludvigson (2001b), and Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh (2005). By employing
MCP returns that are maximally correlated with the original factors, tests of the models
collapse to evaluating the implication that the time-series intercepts must be jointly zero.
Based on this analysis and the use of size and book-market sorted portfolio returns, Kim
finds that the multifactor scaled CCAPM models have lower average squared pricing errors
than their unscaled counterparts, but that a GRS test (Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989))
almost always rejects the null that the time-series intercepts for each model are jointly zero
for almost all models evaluated, including the Fama-French three factor model. The one
exception is the scaled housing collateral model of Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh (2005).
Duﬀee (2005), Nagel and Singleton (2010) and Roussanov (2010) take another approach
to evaluating scaled consumption-based models: they ask whether the conditional implications of these models are satisfied in the data. In particular, these papers seek to test the
restrictions implied by (7) or (22) for each model, which is a function of conditional moments.
Their objective is to test the conditional, rather than unconditional, Euler equation restric42

tions by evaluating the model on scaled returns. Duﬀee (2005) forms statistical measures
of the conditional covariance between aggregate stock returns and aggregate consumption
growth. He finds, using a few chosen conditioning variables, that this covariance varies over
time. He also finds, however, that the estimated conditional covariance is negatively rather
than positively correlated with his estimate of the conditional expected excess stock market
return, a finding that is inconsistent with consumption-based asset pricing models. Nagel and
Singleton (2010) and Roussanov (2010) also test the conditional implications of scaled models
and make similar points, the former using basis functions of a few conditioning variables to
capture conditional moments that are chosen with the aim of minimizing the variance of the
GMM estimator, the latter using a nonparametric kernel regression to estimate covariances
and a novel approach to estimating risk-prices.9 These researchers conclude that, once the
conditional implications of models with approximately linear but state-dependent pricing
kernels are investigated, the models do not perform well in explaining cross-sectional return
data. These findings suggest that scaled consumption-based models may have more success
satisfying the unconditional Euler equations implied by asset pricing theory than they do
conditional Euler equation restrictions.
As discussed above, the conclusions about the behavior of conditional moments in finite
samples may rely critically on the chosen instruments used to model the conditional moments. In principle, the conditional joint distribution of the pricing kernel and asset returns
depends on every variable in investors’ information sets and every measurable transformation thereof, a potentially very large number. It may therefore be diﬃcult if not impossible
to approximate conditional moments well in finite samples, and in practice the results depend on the conditioning information chosen. As Cochrane (2005) emphasizes, investors’
information sets are unobservable, and “the best we can hope to do is to test implications
conditioned down on variables that we can observe and include in a test.”10 As such, findings like those of Duﬀee (2005), Nagel and Singleton (2010) and Roussanov (2010) certainly
provide no evidence in favor of the consumption-based models, but we cannot conclude that
they provide definitive evidence against the models.
9

Like Nagel and Singleton (2010), Lettau and Ludvigson (2001b) also studied the performance of the
-scaled CCAPM in explaining a set of managed portfolio returns, where the original size and bookmarket sorted test asset returns were scaled by conditioning information in  . In contrast to Nagel and
Singleton, Lettau and Ludvigson found that the scaled, multifactor CCAPM performed well, better than the
Fama-French three factor model, in explaining these scaled returns. A number of factors may explain the
discrepancy in results, including diﬀerent samples and the diﬀerent methodology Nagel and Singleton apply
to select conditioning instruments optimally from a statistical standpoint.
10
Chapter 8, Section 8.3.

43

A final point is worth noting regarding tests of the conditional implications of an asset
pricing model. Tests of the conditional asset pricing moments are tests of whether the
model can explain “managed portfolios,” portfolios formed by taking the original test assets
and scaling the returns of those assets by conditioning variables known at time . Tests
of the conditional Euler equation restrictions are therefore tests of whether the model can
explain a set of asset returns that may be quite diﬀerent from the original (unscaled) test
asset returns. As such, the same points made in Section 3 apply here. By incorporating
conditioning information into the Euler equation, the resulting GMM objective becomes
a test of the model on a re-weighted portfolio of the original test assets. If the original
test assets were carefully chosen to represent interesting economic characteristics, and/or if
the scaled returns do not produce a large spread in average returns, and/or if the scaled
returns imply implausible long and short positions in test assets, tests of the conditional
implications of the model may be less compelling than tests of the unconditional implications
 [+1 R+1 ] = 1.
In summary, the body of evidence in these papers suggests that scaled consumption-based
models are unlikely to be perfectly specified. This does not answer the question of whether
the scaled models explain the data better than their unscaled counterparts, or indeed better
than any relevant benchmark. That is because all of the tests discussed in this section are
tests of correct specification against the alternative of incorrect specification. I have argued
above that what we learn from such tests is limited once we acknowledge that all models are
to some degree misspecified. This leaves us with a need for statistical procedures that permit
comparison of model misspecification across multiple competing frameworks. And while it
is tempting to conclude that such a comparison can be made on the basis of whether or not
tests of the null of correct specification (e.g.,  tests) are rejected for diﬀerent models, as
Section 3 explains, this practice is not valid because the distribution of the test statistic in
these cases depends on a model-specific estimator that rewards stochastic discount factor
volatility and is not comparable across models.

6

Asset Pricing With Recursive Preferences

As consumption-based asset pricing has progressed, there has been a growing interest in
asset pricing models formed from recursive preferences, especially those of the type studied
by Epstein and Zin (1989), Epstein and Zin (1991), and Weil (1989). I will use EZW as short44

hand for this specific form of recursive preferences, defined precisely below. There are at least
two reasons recursive utility is of growing interest. First, the preferences aﬀord a far greater
degree of flexibility as regards attitudes toward risk and intertemporal substitution than does
the standard time-separable power utility model. Second, asset pricing models formed from
such preferences contain an added risk factor for explaining asset returns, above and beyond
the single consumption risk factor found in the standard consumption-based model.
Despite the growing interest in recursive utility models, econometric work aimed at estimating the relevant preference parameters and assessing the model’s fit with the data has
proceeded slowly. The EZW recursive utility function is a constant elasticity of substitution
(CES) aggregator over current consumption and the expected discounted utility of future
consumption. This structure makes estimation of the general model challenging because the
intertemporal marginal rate of substitution is a function of the unobservable continuation
value of the future consumption plan. One approach to this diﬃculty, based on the insight
of Epstein and Zin (1989), is to exploit the relation between the continuation value and the
return on the aggregate wealth portfolio. To the extent that the return on the aggregate
wealth portfolio can be measured or proxied, the unobservable continuation value can be
substituted out of the marginal rate of substitution and estimation can proceed using only
observable variables (e.g., Epstein and Zin (1991), Campbell (1996), Vissing-Jorgensen and
Attanasio (2003)).11 Unfortunately, the aggregate wealth portfolio represents a claim to
future consumption and is itself unobservable. Moreover, given the potential importance of
human capital and other unobservable assets in aggregate wealth, its return may not be well
proxied by observable asset market returns.
These diﬃculties can be overcome in specific cases of the EZW recursive utility model.
For example, if the EIS is restricted to unity and consumption follows a loglinear vector timeseries process, the continuation value has an analytical solution and is a function of observable
consumption data ( e.g., Hansen, Heaton, and Li (2008)). Alternatively, if consumption and
asset returns are assumed to be jointly lognormally distributed and homoskedastic (e.g., Attanasio and Weber (1989)), or if a second-order linearization is applied to the Euler equation,
the risk premium of any asset can be expressed as a function of covariances of the asset’s
11

Epstein and Zin (1991) use an aggregate stock market return to proxy for the aggregate wealth return.
Campbell (1996) assumes that the aggregate wealth return is a portfolio weighted average of a human capital
return and a financial return, and obtains an estimable expression for an approximate loglinear formulation
of the model by assuming that expected returns on human wealth are equal to expected returns on financial
wealth. Vissing-Jorgensen and Attanasio (2003) follow Campbell’s approach to estimate the model using
household level consumption data.

45

return with current consumption growth and with news about future consumption growth
(e.g., Restoy and Weil (1998), Campbell (2003)). With these assumptions, the model’s crosssectional asset pricing implications can be evaluated using only observable consumption data
and a model for expectations of future consumption.
While the study of these specific cases has yielded a number of important insights, there
are several reasons why it may be desirable in estimation to allow for more general representations of the model, free from tight parametric or distributional assumptions. First, an
EIS of unity implies that the consumption-wealth ratio is constant, contradicting statistical
evidence that it varies over time.12 Even first-order expansions of the EZW model around an
EIS of unity may not capture the magnitude of variability of the consumption-wealth ratio
(Hansen, Heaton, Roussanov, and Lee (2007)). Second, although aggregate consumption
growth in isolation appears to be well described by a lognormal process in quarterly U.S.
times-series data, empirical evidence suggests that the joint distribution of consumption
and asset returns exhibits significant departures from lognormality (Lettau and Ludvigson
(2009)). Third, Kocherlakota (1990) points out that joint lognormality is inconsistent with
an individual maximizing a utility function that satisfies the recursive representation used
by Epstein and Zin (1989, 1991) and Weil (1989).
In this section, I discuss two possible ways of estimating the general EZW utility function,
while overcoming the challenges discussed above and without requiring the simplifying assumptions made elsewhere. One approach, taken in Chen, Favilukis, and Ludvigson (2007),
is to employ a semiparametric technique to conduct estimation and testing of the EZW asset pricing model without the need to find a proxy for the unobservable aggregate wealth
return, without linearizing the model, and without placing tight parametric restrictions on
either the law of motion or joint distribution of consumption and asset returns, or on the
value of key preference parameters such as the EIS. This approach is appropriate when the
researcher wants to estimate the asset pricing model but leave the law of motion of the data
unrestricted.
A second approach, taken in Bansal, Gallant, and Tauchen (2007), is a model-simulation
approach. This approach is useful when the researcher seeks to estimate and evaluate a
complete asset pricing model, including a specification for cash-flow dynamics. An example of
12

Lettau and Ludvigson (2001a) argue that a cointegrating residual for log consumption, log asset wealth,
and log labor income should be correlated with the unobservable log consumption-aggregate wealth ratio,
and find evidence that this residual varies considerably over time and forecasts future stock market returns.
See also recent evidence on the consumption-wealth ratio in Hansen, Heaton, Roussanov, and Lee (2007)
and Lustig, Van Nieuwerburgh, and Verdelhan (2007).

46

such a model is one with long-run consumption risk, as exemplified by the work of Bansal and
Yaron (2004). Bansal, Gallant, and Tauchen (2007) is an important application of simulation
methods to estimate a model based on EZW preferences and long-run consumption risk. I
discuss both of these approaches in this section as well as empirical results. A number of other
papers have estimated and tested various properties of models with long-run consumption
risk (defined below); those are also discussed.

6.1

EZW Recursive Preferences

The asset pricing literature has focused on a specific form of recursive preferences studied in
Epstein and Zin (1989), Epstein and Zin (1991), Weil (1989). I will refer to these as “EZW”
preferences hereafter.
Let {F }∞
=0 denote the sequence of increasing conditioning information sets available to
a representative agent at dates  = 0 1 . Adapted to this sequence are a consumption
∞
sequence { }∞
=0 and a corresponding sequence of continuation values { }=0 . The date

 consumption  and continuation value  are in the date  information set F (but are
typically not in the date  − 1 information set F−1 ). I will often use  [·] to denote [·|F ],
the conditional expectation with respect to information set at date . The EZW recursive
utility function takes the form
£
¤ 1
 = (1 − ) 1− + R (+1 )1− 1−

(45)

1
¡ £ 1− ¤¢ 1−
|F

R (+1 ) =  +1

where +1 is the continuation value of the future consumption plan,  is the coeﬃcient of
relative risk aversion (RRA), 1 is the elasticity of intertemporal substitution in consumption (EIS.) When  = , the utility function can be solved forward to yield the familiar
time-separable, constant relative risk aversion (CRRA) power utility model
#
1−

+
|F 

 = 
1
−

=0
"∞
X

where  ≡ 1− 
The estimation methodologies discussed here require stationary variables. To apply these
methodologies to the model here, the recursive utility function (45) must be rescaled and

47

expressed as a function of stationary variables, as in Hansen, Heaton, and Li (2008):
1
"
µ
¶1− # 1−
+1 +1

= (1 − ) + R

+1 

(46)

The intertemporal marginal rate of substitution (MRS) in consumption is given by

+1 = 

µ

+1


¶−

⎛
⎝
|

+1 +1
+1 

R

³

+1 +1
+1 

{z

⎞−

´⎠

added risk factor



(47)

}

The MRS is a function of R (·), a nonlinear function of the continuation value-to-consumption
ratio,

+1

+1

where the latter is referred to hereafter as the continuation value ratio. I will

refer to the stochastic discount factor in (47) as the EZW stochastic discount factor. When
 = , the pricing kernel collapses to the standard power utility pricing kernel, but otherwise
the EZW preferences contain an added risk factor, relative to the standard consumptionbased model, given the multiplicative term on the right-hand-side of (47) that varies with
the continuation value ratio.
A challenge in estimating this model is that +1 is a function of the unobservable
continuation value ratio and also embeds R (·) which contains the expectation of a nonlinear
function of that ratio. Epstein and Zin (1991) approach this diﬃculty by exploiting an
alternative representation of +1 given by

+1

1−
( µ
¶− ) 1−
½
¾ −
1−
1
+1
= 

+1

(48)

where  is the return to aggregate wealth, which represents a claim to future consumption.
Specifically,  appears in an intertemporal budget constraint linking consumption and
aggregate wealth
+1 =  ( −  ) 
Thus  is the gross return on the portfolio of all invested wealth. The intertemporal
budget constraint for a representative agent implies that consumption  is the dividend on
the portfolio of all invested wealth.
The return  is in general unobservable. Epstein and Zin (1991) have undertaken
empirical work using an aggregate stock market return as a proxy for  . To do so, they
48

substitute a stock market index return for  into (48) and estimate the Euler equations
by GMM, something made possible as a result of this substitution since the resulting Euler
equations then contain only observable variables. A diﬃculty with this approach is that
+1 represents a claim to consumption, and itself is not observable. Moreover, it may not
be well proxied by observable asset market returns, especially if human wealth and other
nontradable assets are quantitatively important fractions of aggregate wealth. Next I discuss
two ways to handle this problem, the first based on unrestricted dynamics for the data and
distribution-free estimation, and the second based on restricted dynamics and estimation of
fully structural model for cash-flows.

6.2

EZW Preferences with Unrestricted Dynamics: DistributionFree Estimation

This section describes the approach of Chen, Favilukis, and Ludvigson (2007) (CFL hereafter) to estimate the EZW model of the pricing kernel. The objective is do so without
requiring the researcher to find a proxy for +1 using an observable return, and without
placing parametric restrictions on the law of motion for the data or on the joint distribution
of  and asset returns  . Estimation and inference are conducted by applying a profile
Sieve Minimum Distance (SMD) procedure to a set of Euler equations corresponding to the
EZW utility model. The SMD method is a distribution-free minimum distance procedure,
where the conditional moments associated with the Euler equations are directly estimated
nonparametrically as functions of conditioning variables. The “sieve” part of the SMD
procedure requires that the unknown function embedded in the Euler equations (here the
continuation value function) be approximated by a sequence of flexible parametric functions,
with the number of parameters expanding as the sample size grows (Grenander (1981)). The
approach allows for possible model misspecification in the sense that the Euler equation may
not hold exactly.
Consider the first order conditions for optimal consumption choice when there are  =
1   tradeable assets:
⎡

⎢
 ⎣

µ

+1


¶−

⎛
⎝

+1 +1
+1 

R

³

+1 +1
+1 

⎞−

´⎠

⎤

⎥
+1 − 1⎦ = 0

 = 1  

(49)

Estimation of the moment restrictions (49) is complicated by two factors. The first is that
49

the conditional mean in (49) is taken over a highly nonlinear function of the conditionally
³
´
+1
. The second complicating
expected value of discounted continuation utility, R +1
+1 

factor is that (49) depends on the unobservable continuation value ratio

+1

+1

The first complication may be addressed by noting that both the rescaled utility function
(46) and the Euler equations (49) depend on R . As a result, equation (46) can be solved
for R , and the solution plugged into (49). Doing so, CFL obtain the following expression,

for any observed sequence of traded asset returns {+1 }
=1 :
⎡

⎛

⎞−

+1 +1
⎢ µ  ¶− ⎜
⎟
⎢
⎜
⎟
+1 
+1
 ⎢
⎜½ ∙
1 ⎟
¸¾
³ ´1−

⎣
⎝
1− ⎠
1

−
(1
−
)



⎤

⎥
⎥
+1 − 1⎥ = 0
⎦

 = 1  

(50)

The second complicating factor may be addressed by explicitly estimating the unobservable
function

+1
+1

using semi-parametric methods, as described below. The moment restrictions

(50) form the basis of the empirical investigation in CFL. (50) is a cross—sectional asset
pricing model.
To estimate the function


,


we need to know the arguments over which it is defined.

CFL assume that consumption growth falls within a general class of stationary, dynamic
models, thereby allowing the identification of the state variables over which the function




is defined. Several examples of this approach are given in Hansen, Heaton, and Li (2008).
CFL assume that consumption growth is a possibly nonlinear function of a hidden first-order
Markov process  that summarizes information about future consumption growth:
+1 −  =  ( ) + +1
+1 =  ( ) + +1 

(51)
(52)

where  ( ) and  ( ) are not necessarily linear functions of the state variable  , and +1
and +1 are i.i.d. random variables that may be correlated with one another. The specification (51)-(52) nests a number of stationary univariate representations for consumption
growth, including a first-order autoregression, first-order moving average representation, a
first-order autoregressive-moving average process, and .
Given the first-order Markov structure, expected future consumption growth is summarized by the single state variable   implying that  also summarizes the state space over

50

which the function




is defined.

There are two remaining complications that must be addressed before estimation can
proceed. First, without placing tight parametric restrictions on the model, the continuation
value ratio is an unknown function of the relevant state variables. We must therefore estimate the function




nonparametrically. Second, the state variable  that is taken as the

input of the unknown function is itself unobservable and must be inferred from observable
consumption data. CFL provide assumptions under which the first-order Markov structure
(51)-(52) implies that the information contained in  is summarized by the lagged continuation value ratio

−1
−1



−1

and current consumption growth

This implies that




may be

modeled as an unknown function  : R2 → R of the lagged continuation value ratio and
consumption growth:

=


µ

−1 

−1 −1

¶

(53)



Note that the Markov assumption only provides a motivation for the arguments of  (·);
the econometric methodology itself leaves the law of motion for the consumption growth
unspecified. Misspecification of the dynamic model for consumption growth could lead to
misspecification of the asset pricing model, but this is allowed for in the estimation procedure.
To summarize, the asset pricing model consists of the conditional moment restrictions
(50), subject to the nonparametric specification of (53). The empirical model is semiparametric in the sense that it contains both finite dimensional parameters   and , as well
as the infinite dimensional unknown function  that must be estimated nonparametrically.
Let δ ≡ (  )0 denote any vector of finite dimensional parameters in D, a compact

subset in R3 , and let  : R2 → R denote any real-valued Lipschitz continuous functions in V,
a compact subset in the space of square integrable functions. For each  = 1  , denote

  (z+1  δ  ) ≡ 

µ

+1


⎛

³

´

⎞−

+1
¶− ⎜
⎟
   +1


⎜
⎟
⎜½ ∙
1 ⎟
¸¾
n ³
´o1−
⎝
1− ⎠
−1
1



−
(1
−
)

−1 −1

+1 − 1
(54)

where z+1 is a vector containing all the strictly stationary observations, including consumption growth rate and return data. Define δ  ≡ (      )0 ∈ D and  ≡  (z ; δ  ) ≡
 (·; δ ) ∈ V as the true parameter values which are the solutions to the minimum distance

51

problem:

 (·; δ) = arg inf 
 ∈V

δ  = arg min 
∈D

"
X

#

=1

( {  (z+1  δ  )|F })2 

=1

( {  (z+1  δ  (·; δ))|F })2 

"
X

(55)
#

(56)

We say that the model (49) and (53) is correctly specified if the Euler equations hold exactly:
 {  (z+1  δ    (· δ  ))|F } = 0

 = 1  

(57)

Let w ⊆ F , a subset of F observed by econometricians. Equation (57) implies
 {  (z+1      (·   ))|w } = 0

 = 1  

The methodology is based on minimum distance estimation of the conditional moment
restrictions (57). The intuition behind minimum distance procedure can be developed by
noting that asset pricing theory implies that the conditional mean  ,
 ≡  {  (z+1      (·   ))|w } = 0

 = 1  

(58)

Since  = 0 for all ,  must have zero variance, and zero mean. It follows that we
can find estimates of the true parameters     by minimizing variance or quadratic norm,
b  .)
min [( )2 ] (We don’t observe   therefore in practice we will need an estimate 
Since (58) is a conditional mean, it must hold for each observation, . Because the number of

observations exceeds the number of parameters to be estimated, we need a way to weight each
observation. Using the sample mean is one way to do so, which leads us to the minimization
min  [( )2 ], where “ ” denotes the sample mean in a sample of size  . In practice

we need the  × 1 vector of all conditional moments,  , so we apply the minimization
min  [0  ], which leads to the sums over all  moment conditions as in (55) and (56).

The minimum distance procedure is useful for distribution-free estimation involving conditional moments. Note that the identification of the conditional moments is crucial in
the semi-parametric context because variation in the conditional mean is what identifies
the unknown function  (see equation (65) below). In this procedure, we choose parameters to make the mean of the square of conditional moments as close to zero as possible:
52

min  [( )2 ]. To see how this diﬀers from GMM, recall that GMM is an appropriate
estimation procedure for unconditional moments
{h (θ w+1 )} = 0

(59)

Conditioning information can always be incorporated by including instruments x observable
at time , but those are already imbedded in h (θ w+1 ), and GMM is carried out on the
unconditional moment (59). For example, in (16) we had
∙
½
− ¾¸
+1
⊗ x 
h (θ w+1 ) = 1 −  (1 + <+1 ) −

which embeds conditioning information x in the Euler equation of a representative household
with time-separable power utility preferences. Nevertheless, the moments that form the basis
for estimation are unconditional and there is no need to identify the true conditional mean
in order to estimate and test the economic model.
Since the moments to be estimated in GMM are unconditional, we take the sample counP
terpart to population mean (59) g(θ; y ) = (1 ) =1 h (θ w ), then choose parameters θ

to min g0 W g . That is, with GMM we average and then square. With the minimum

distance estimation described above, we square and then average.
Denote
(w  δ  ) ≡ {(z+1  δ  )|w }

(60)

(z+1  δ  ) ≡ ( 1 (z+1  δ  )    (z+1  δ  ))0 

(61)

The true parameters δ and  (· δ ) solve:
min inf  [(w    )0 (w    )] 
∈D  ∈V

(62)

For any candidate value δ ≡ (  )0 ∈ D, define  ∗ ≡  ∗ (z  δ) ≡  ∗ (· δ) ∈ V as the
solution to
 ∗ (· ) = arg inf  [(w    )0 (w    )] 
 ∈V

It is clear that  (z    ) =  ∗ (z   ) 

53

6.2.1

Two-Step Procedure

The procedure has two steps. In the first step, for any candidate  ∈ , an initial estimate

of  ∗ (· ) is obtained using the SMD procedure that itself consists of two parts. Part

one replaces the conditional expectation (58) with a consistent, nonparametric estimator
(specified later) 
b  . Part two approximates the unknown function  by a sequence of

finite dimensional unknown parameters (sieves) and denoted  . The approximation error
decreases as  increases with the sample size  . In the second step, estimates of the finite
dimensional parameters   are obtained by solving a sample minimum distance problem such
as GMM.
6.2.2

First-step

In the first-step SMD estimation of  ∗ we approximate




=

ate sieve  (· δ) taking the form



X

≈  (· δ) = 0 (δ) +
 (δ)

=1

µ

³

−1
  ; δ
−1 −1

−1 

−1 −1

´

with a bivari-

¶

The sieve coeﬃcients {0  1    } depend on δ, but the basis functions { (· ·) :  =
1   } have known functional forms independent of δ (e.g., polynomials or splines). To
implement this approximation, initial values for




at time  = 0 denoted

0
,
0

must be

obtained. They may be taken to be an unknown scalar parameter to be estimated. Given
o
n


0

,
{
}
,
{
}
and
data
on
consumption
, one can use the approximate
 =1
 =1
0
−1
n o =1
. These then can be plugged into
function  to recursively generate a sequence 
=1

(54) so that the moment condition (57) is now a function of observable sequences. The
first-step SMD estimate b (·) of  ∗ (·) is then based on the sample analog to the population
minimum distance problem (62):

1
b (· δ) = arg min




X
=1

(w
b   δ  (· δ))0 (w
b   δ  (· δ))

(63)

where (w
b     (· δ)) is any nonparametric estimator of . This minimization is performed for a three dimensional grid of values of the finite dimensional parameters δ =
(  )0 . This gives an entire set of candidate estimates b (· δ) as a function of δ
54

An example of a nonparametric estimator of  is a least-squares estimator. Let
{0 (w )  = 1 2   } 

 → 

be instruments, which are known basis functions of observable conditioning variables. Denote
¡
¢0
the vector  (·) ≡ (01 (·)   0 (·))0  Define the  × matrix  ≡  (w1 )    (w ) .

Then a sieve least-squares estimator for the conditional mean  is:
(w
b
δ  ) =

Ã 
X

!

(z+1  δ  ) (w )0 (P0 P)−1  (w)

=1

This procedure equivalent to regressing each   on instruments 0 (w ) and taking the fitted
values as estimate of conditional mean. An attractive feature of this estimator for  is that
the estimator of b (· ) in (63) can then be implemented as an instance of GMM, with a
specific weighting matrix:

¤0
¤
£
−1 £
b (· δ) = arg min g (δ ; y ) {I ⊗ (P0 P) } g (δ ; y ) 
{z
}
|
 ∈V

(64)

W

¡
¢0
where   = z0 +1  z02  w0  w10 denotes vector of all observations, including instruments,
and


1X
(z+1  δ )⊗ (w ) 
g (δ ; y ) =
 =1


(65)

The weighting matrix W in (64) gives greater weight to moments that are more highly
correlated with instruments  (·). This weighting scheme can be understood intuitively by
noting that variation in conditional mean (  δ  ) is what identifies the unknown function
 ∗ (· δ).
6.2.3

Second Step

The second step in the procedure is to estimate the finite dimensional parameters, δ  . This
can be implemented by GMM. Given a value for  ∗ (· δ), we no longer need to rely on
variation in the conditional moment to identify the unknown function. Thus, we can rely
on unconditional moments to estimate the finite dimensional parameters. Under the correct

55

specification, δ  satisfies the following unconditional population moments:
 {  (z+1  δ    ∗ (· δ )) ⊗ x } = 0

 = 1  

The sample moments are denoted

1X

b
(+1  δ b (· δ)) ⊗ x 
g (δ  (· δ) ;  ) ≡
 =1

Whether the model is correctly or incorrectly specified, δ can be estimated by minimizing a
GMM objective:
h
h
i0
i
b
δ = arg min g (δ b (· δ) ; y ) W g (δ b (· δ) ; y )

(66)

∈D

Examples of the weighting matrix in this step could be W = I, W = G−1
 . As discussed
above, we would not use the GMM optimal weighting matrix if we are interested in model
comparison. Notice that b (· δ) is not held fixed in this step, but instead depends on δ. The

procedure is to choose δ and the corresponding b (· δ) that minimize the GMM criterion

(66).

Why estimate in two steps? In principal, all the parameters of the model (including the

finite dimensional preference parameters), could be estimated in one step by minimizing the
sample SMD criterion:

1X
(w
b   δ  )0 (w
b   δ  )
min
∈D 
=1

But the two-step profile procedure has several advantages for the asset pricing application
at hand. One is that we want estimates of standard preference parameters such as risk
aversion and the EIS to reflect values required to match unconditional moments commonly
emphasized in the asset pricing literature, those associated with unconditional risk premia.
This is not possible when estimates of δ and  (·) are obtained in one step, since the weighting
scheme inherent in the SMD procedure (64) emphasizes conditional moments rather than
unconditional moments. Second, both the weighting scheme inherent in the SMD procedure
(64) and the use of instruments  (·) eﬀectively change the set of test assets, implying
that key preference parameters are estimated on linear combinations of the original portfolio

56

returns. As discussed above, such linear combinations may bear little relation to the original
test asset returns upon which much of the asset pricing literature has focused. They may also
imply implausible long and short positions in the original test assets and do not necessarily
deliver a large spread in unconditional mean returns. It follows that, while we need to
exploit movements in the conditional moments to identify the unknown continuation-value
function, once we have an estimate of that, we can then move to the second step in which
we can choose the finite dimensional parameters and conduct specification tests and model
comparison on economically interesting returns of interest to the asset pricing literature, e.g.,
those associated with the equity premium, value and size puzzles.
The procedure discussed in this section allows for model misspecification in the sense
that the Euler equations need not hold with equality. In this event, the procedure delivers
pseudo-true parameter estimates. As discussed above, we can compare models by their
relative magnitude of misspecification, rather than asking whether each model individually
fits data perfectly (given sampling error). This may be accomplished by using W = G−1
 in
second step, an computing HJ distances to compare across models both economically and
statistically, as discussed in Section 3.
6.2.4

Econometric Findings

CFL estimate two versions of the model. The first is a representative agent formulation, in
which the utility function is defined over per capita aggregate consumption. The second is a
representative stockholder formulation, in which utility is defined over per capita consumption of stockholders. The definition of stockholder status, the consumption measure, and
the sample selection follow Vissing-Jorgensen (2002), which uses the Consumer Expenditure
Survey (CEX). Since CEX data are limited to the period 1982 to 2002 at the time of CFL
writing, and since household-level consumption data are known to contain significant measurement error, CFL follow Malloy, Moskowitz, and Vissing-Jorgensen (2009) and generate
a longer time-series of data by constructing consumption mimicking factors for aggregate
stockholder consumption growth.
Once estimates of the continuation value function have been obtained, it is possible to
investigate the model’s implications for the aggregate wealth return. This return is in general
unobservable but can be inferred from our estimates of   by equating the marginal rate
n
³ ´o
b
b
of substitution (47), evaluated at the estimated parameter values δ · b
δ , with its

theoretical representation based on consumption growth and the return to aggregate wealth
57

(48):


µ

+1


¶−

⎛
⎝

+1 +1
+1 

R

³

+1 +1
+1 

⎞−

´⎠

1−
( µ
¶− ) 1−
½
¾ −
1−
1
+1
= 


+1

If, in addition, we follow Campbell (1996) and assume that the return to aggregate wealth
is a portfolio weighted average of the unobservable return to human wealth and the return
to financial wealth, the estimated model also delivers implications for the return to human
wealth.
Using quarterly data on consumption growth, assets returns and instruments, CFL find
that the estimated relative risk aversion parameter ranges from 17-60, with the higher values
obtained for the representative agent version of the model and the lower values obtained for
the representative stockholder version. The estimated elasticity of intertemporal substitution
is above one, and diﬀers considerably from the inverse of the coeﬃcient of relative risk
aversion. The EIS is estimated to be between 1.667 and 2 in the representative agent version
of the model, and between 1.11 and 2.22 in the representative stockholder version of the
model. This estimate is of special interest because the value of the EIS has important
consequences for the asset pricing implications of models with EZW recursive utility. (This is
discussed further below in the context of long-run risk models.) For example, if consumption
growth is normally distributed, it can be shown analytically that the price-consumption ratio
implied by EZW recursive utility is increasing in expected consumption growth only if the
EIS is greater than one. In addition, when relative risk aversion exceeds unity, the priceconsumption ratio will be decreasing in the volatility of consumption growth only if the EIS
exceeds unity.
CFL also find that the estimated aggregate wealth return +1 is weakly correlated
with the CRSP value-weighted stock market return and much less volatile, implying that
the return to human capital is negatively correlated with the aggregate stock market return,
consistent with results in Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh (2008) who follow Campbell (1996)
and investigate a loglinear version of the EZW recursive utility model under the assumption
that asset returns and consumption are jointly lognormal and homoskedastic. Finally, CFL
find that an SMD estimated EZW recursive utility model can explain a cross-section of size
and book-market sorted portfolio equity returns better than the time-separable, constant
relative risk aversion power utility model and better than the Lettau and Ludvigson (2001b)
-scaled consumption CAPM model, but not as well as empirical models based on financial
factors such as the Fama and French (1993) three-factor model.
58

6.3

EZW Preferences With Restricted Dynamics: Long-Run Risk

So far we have been discussing the estimation of asset pricing models that employ EZW
preferences, without placing restrictions on the law of motion for the data. A growing body
of work in consumption-based asset pricing seeks to explain return data by combining the
EZW preference assumption for a representative consumer with a specific model of cashflow dynamics characterized by long-run cash-flow risk. This combination of preferences
and cash-flow assumptions potentially has important asset pricing implications because,
with recursive utility, investors are not indiﬀerent to the intertemporal composition of risk,
implying that the relative exposure of the agent’s consumption to short- versus long-run
risks has a non-trivial influence on risk premia.
The idea that long-run cash flow risk can have important aﬀects on asset prices is exemplified by the work of Bansal and Yaron (2004), who argue that a small but persistent common
component in the time-series processes of consumption and dividend growth is capable of
explaining the large risk premia and high Sharpe ratios observed in U.S. data. Campbell
(2003) also noted that when the EZW utility function is specified so that the coeﬃcient of
relative risk aversion is greater than the inverse of the EIS, a predictable component in consumption growth can help rationalize these observations. Important subsequent work on this
topic is conducted in Parker and Julliard (2004), Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron (2007a,b, 2009),
Bansal, Gallant, and Tauchen (2007), Hansen, Heaton, and Li (2008), Bansal, Dittmar, and
Lundblad (2005), and Malloy, Moskowitz, and Vissing-Jorgensen (2009), discussed below.13
These papers study an asset pricing model in which a representative agent has the EZW
utility function specified above, combined with specifications for cash-flow dynamics which
assume that consumption and dividend growth rates contain a single, common predictable
component with an autoregressive structure. These assumptions give rise to the following
dynamic system:
∆+1 =  +  +   +1
|{z}
| {z }
LR risk

SR risk

∆+1 =  +   +    +1 +     +1

13

(67)

 = −1 +     
¡
¢
 2+1 =  2 +   2 −  2 +  +1

(68)
(69)
(70)

See also Parker (2001); Colacito and Croce (2004); Bansal, Dittmar, and Kiku (2009); Kiku (2005);
Hansen and Sargent (2006).

59

+1  +1     ∼  (0 1) 

(71)

The persistent component  is referred to as long-run risk, while the i.i.d. innovation +1
is referred to as short-run risk. In Bansal and Yaron (2004) the parameter  = 0, but in
much of the rest of the literature it is allowed to be non-zero. The parameter   1, and is
referred to as a “leverage” parameter. Note that the conditional mean of dividend growth
is proportional to the conditional mean of consumption growth, a specification that follows
much of the long-run risk literature. Bansal and Yaron (2004) refer to the presence of 
in the dividend and consumption growth processes as long-run risk (LRR). Finally, there is
persistent variation in the volatility of consumption growth, given by  .
A crucial aspect of the long-run risk theory is that the small persistent component in
consumption growth  can account for only a small fraction of its short-run variability .
Otherwise, the model-implied annualized volatility of consumption and dividend growth is
implausibly large. By definition, therefore, it must be diﬃcult to detect empirically.
Despite this diﬃculty, a common assumption in the literature is that investors can directly observe this small persistent component and distinguish its innovations from transitory shocks to consumption and dividend growth. Croce, Lettau, and Ludvigson (2010)
refer to this latter assumption as “full information” and explore an alternative assumption
of “limited information” in which the true data generating process is given by (67)-(70) but
market participants can observe only the history of dividend and consumption growth, not
the individual components of those growth rates. Some consequences of these information
assumptions are discussed further below. We begin the next section with a discussion of
methodologies for structural estimation of models with long-run consumption risk under the
typical assumption of full information.
Structural Estimation of Long-Run Risk Models A central challenge to estimating
the LRR model is that the model’s state variables  and  are latent. One approach, taken
by Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron (2007b), is to form an estimate 
b from the fitted projection

b can be obtained as
of consumption growth on a vector of observable variables  , while 
b )2 on  . Bansal, Kiku,
the fitted value from a regression of squared residuals (∆+1 − 
and Yaron (2007b) note that the state variables in the LRR model are functions of the

risk-free rate and the price-dividend ratio, and therefore use empirical measures of these

variables in  . Although these variables are sensible from the perspective of the theory, in
practice estimates of the conditional moments could be sensitive to the choice of variables
60

in  (Harvey (2001)).
An alternative that avoids this possibility is to use simulation methods to identify the fully
structural LRR model. In this section I discuss one application of an important simulation
estimation methodology employed in by Bansal, Gallant, and Tauchen (2007) (BGT) to estimate the model of Bansal and Yaron (2004). The estimation strategy is based on simulated
method of moments and has important precursors in the work of Anthony Smith (1993),
Gallant and Tauchen (1996), Gallant, Hsieh, and Tauchen (1997) and Tauchen (1997).
BGT estimate a representative agent asset pricing model characterized by the EZW
stochastic discount factor (47), while restricting to specific law of motion for cash flows.
Compared to the cash-flow model (67)-(71), BGT alter the cash-flow process to allow for
cointegration between dividends and consumption:
∆+1 =  +  +   +1

(72)

∆+1 =  +   +   +     +1
|{z}

(73)

LR risk

 = −1 +     

 2 =  2 + ( 2−1 −  2 ) +   

(74)
(75)

 = ( −  ) +  − 

(76)

+1  +1     ∼  (0 1) 

(77)

The variable  is a cointegrating residual for log dividends  and log consumption  . Notice
that the cointegrating coeﬃcient is restricted to unity. Dividend growth now depends on the
cointegrating residual  rather than on the short-run consumption growth shock +1 .
The simulation based procedure for estimating the model consists of the following steps.
First, the model is solved over grid of values for the deep parameters of the asset pricing
model. Denote the deep parameters  :
 = (                     )0 
For each value of  on the grid, the model is solved and a long simulation of length  of
the model is undertaken. The simulation step consists of taking Monte Carlo draws from
the Normal distribution for primitive shocks +1  +1     and inserting these into the
model solutions for policy functions and next-period state variables.
61

The next step is to choose an observation subvector  of strictly stationary data generated
by the model from simulations and also available in historical data. BGT choose a vector
consisting of the log dividend-consumption ratio, consumption growth, the log price-dividend
ratio, and the log stock market return, denoted  here:
 = ( −    − −1   −    )0 
These variables are chosen at the discretion of the econometrician. BGT motivate their
choice by arguing that these variables are closely related to the asset pricing implications
they wish to study. The idea is to choose the deep parameters  so that moments of the
distribution of simulated and historical data “match” as closely as possible (where “match”
is made precise below).
Let {b
 }
=1 denote the model-simulated data. These will be a function of the deep

parameters so we will often write b ( ). Let {̃ }=1 denote historical data on same variables.

The estimation requires an auxiliary model for the historical data, with specified density
( |−  −1  ), where  are parameters of the conditional density. This law of motion
for the data is referred to as the  -model. In principal,  can be any model that is rich
enough to describe the data well, for example, a vector autoregression (VAR), as chosen by
BGT. In this case the vector of conditional density parameters  consists of coeﬃcients on
the lagged endogenous variables and elements of the VAR error covariance matrix. Both
the law of motion for the data and its presumed distribution are important choices. The
law of motion must be rich enough to identify the deep parameters and the reduced form
specification must be that which best describes the historical data in order for MLE eﬃciency
to be achieved. BGT experiment with a range of models for the law of motion and its density
before settling on a VAR with normally distributed shocks.
Denote the score function of the  -model:
 (−    ) ≡


ln[( |−   −1  )]


The quasi-maximum likelihood (QMLE) estimator of the auxiliary model on historical data
is
̃ = arg max ( {̃ }=1 )


62

where  ( {̃ }=1 ) is the sample mean log likelihood function given by
 ( {̃ }=1 ) =


1 X
ln (̃ |̃−   ̃−1  )
 =+1

The QMLE first-order-condition is

 (̃ {̃ }=1 ) = 0

or


1 X
 (̃−   ̃  ̃) = 0
 =+1

This procedure can be motivated by noting that, if the auxiliary model is true, then on
the observed data the score function is zero. It follows that a structural model that fits
the historical data well should also have a score function that is approximately zero when
confronted with the same conditional density. Thus, a good estimator for  is one that sets

1 X
 (b
− ( )  b ( ) ̃) ≈ 0
 =+1

(78)

with the average now taken over the simulated realizations of length . Notice that the
mean of the scores in (78) is evaluated at the simulated observations b using conditional

density parameters ̃ from the QMLE estimation on historical data.

For equation (78) to hold, the number of conditional density parameters must be exactly

equal to the number of deep parameters. If, as is typical, dim() dim( ), the method calls
for GMM. Define:

1 X
 (b
 ( )|b
− ( )  b−1 ( ) ̃)

b (  ) =
|  {z } 
=+1
dim()×1

The GMM estimator is

b  (  ̃)0 Ĩ −1 
b  (  ̃)}
b
 = arg min{

(79)



where Ĩ −1 is a weighting matrix. BGT set the weighting matrix to be the inverse of the

63

variance of the score, where it is data determined from  -model:
¾½
¾0
 ½
X


ln[ (̃ |̃−   ̃−1  ̃)]
ln[ (̃ |̃−   ̃−1  ̃)] 
Ĩ =

̃

̃
=1
The simulated data {b
}
=1 follow a stationary density (−    | ). There is no
closed-form solution for (·| ). Nevertheless it can be shown that the procedure above is


asymptotically justified because 
b  (  ) → (  ) as  → ∞, where
(  ) =

Z

···

Z

(−     )(−    | )− · · ·  

(80)

This implies that, if we can compute long simulations of length , we can use Monte Carlo
to compute the expectation of (·) under (·| ) without having to observe it directly. Intuitively, if  = , (80) is the mean of the scores, which should be zero given the first-order
condition for the QMLE estimator. Thus, if historical data really do follow the structural
model (·| ), then setting (   ) = 0, allows one to estimate parameters and also forms
the basis of a specification test. BGT show that the estimates are consistent and asymptotically normally distributed with
³ ¡
√
¢−1 ´


 (b
 − 0 ) → N 0 0 I −1 


where, 0 is the true value of  ,  =  (0  ) 0 , Ĩ → I, and  is a pseudo-true vector

of conditional density -model parameters.14

This methodology may be summarized as follows. First solve the model for many values
of  . For each value, store long simulations of the model of length . Do a one-time
estimation of auxiliary  -model. Choose  to minimize GMM criterion, as specified in (79).
Why use score functions as moments? The primary advantage is computational: unlike
the approach of e.g., Anthony Smith (1993), the methodology used in BGT requires only
a one-time estimation of structural model.15 Although this computational advantage is not
important for the application here, which uses a VAR for the -model, more generally it
is important if the  -model is nonlinear. Moreover, if the  -model is a good description of
14

If the  -model is misspecified, in the sense that there is no value of  such that  ( |−  −1  ) =
(−    |0 ), the estimator described above produces pseudo-true estimates that satisfy a binding function. See Tauchen (1997).
15
In the methodology of Anthony Smith (1993), the auxiliary model’s likelihood function needs to be
re-evaluated in every simulation, at the QMLE parameters estimated from the log likelihood function of
simulated data.

64

data, then MLE eﬃciency is obtained. Thus as long as dim() dim( ), the score-based
SMM estimator is consistent, asymptotically normal, and asymptotically eﬃcient. All of
this requires that the auxiliary model is rich enough to identify non-linear structural model.
Suﬃcient conditions for identification are in general unknown and must be implicitly assumed
to obtain theoretical limiting results.
While the methodology tells us which moments are the most important from a statistical
perspective, at issue is whether the score moments are the most interesting economically.
This regards both the choice of moments, and the weighting function. The same points
discussed above with regard to non-optimal weighting in GMM apply here: the statistically
most informative moments may not be the most interesting from an economic perspective.
6.3.1

Econometric Findings on Long-Run Risk

Using the methodology just described, BGT estimate the model on annual data. They use
nondurables and services expenditure from the National Income and Product accounts to
measure consumption. Return and dividend data are taken from the NYSE and AMEX
stock exchanges; they also use a short-term Treasury bill rate as the risk-free rate. The
authors found that they could not identify the full set of deep parameters, so they calibrated
some parameters such as the EIS. The estimated objective function is flat in the region of
 = 05 or an EIS of 2. They therefore fix  = 05 Several other parameters governing the
volatility of consumption growth were also calibrated. Conditional on these calibrations, the
results provide evidence of the importance of long-run consumption risk in explaining the
observation subvector: the estimated values of  and  are both close to unity, suggesting
persistent processes for  and  2 . Moreover, the model produces a precisely estimated value
for risk aversion of b
 = 7, whereas a restricted specification that has no long-run risk (the
 = 99 The reason for this diﬀerence is that, in the LRR model,
 process is zero) delivers b
shocks to  aﬀect dividend growth through the estimated parameter  (estimated to be

about 3.5). Because   1, there is a preference for early resolution of uncertainty. The
exposure of dividends to the long-run risk component of consumption makes the dividend

stream riskier than in the restricted specification and so the LRR model can explain the
high empirical risk premium with a lower value of  A caveat with this finding is that the
standard error for  is extremely large. Finally, BGT find that the LRR model is formally
rejected according to a Chi-squared specification test, but they note that such tests are
known to over-reject.
65

Researchers have also examined the role of long-run risk in explaining the cross-section
of average returns. Some studies focus on the cross-sectional characteristics of portfolios
of stocks. Parker and Julliard (2004) measure risk by the covariance of an asset’s return
and consumption growth cumulated over many quarters following the return. They find
that, although one-period consumption risk explains only a small fraction of the variation
in average returns across 25 portfolios sorted on the basis of size and book-market,16 their
measure of long-horizon consumption risk at a horizon of three years explains a large fraction
of this variation.
Hansen, Heaton, and Li (2008) (HHL) examine how cash flows of value portfolios, growth
portfolios and an aggregate stock market portfolio are diﬀerentially exposed to long-run
macroeconomic uncertainty, such as long-run consumption fluctuations. HHL use the representative agent EZW preference specification when  is equal to or approximately equal to
unity to derive equilibrium predictions for the expected returns at various horizons and show
how those returns are a function of the exposure of the portfolio’s cash-flows to macroeconomic shocks at diﬀerent horizons. Malloy, Moskowitz, and Vissing-Jorgensen (2009) use the
structural framework of HHL to study how returns of value and growth portfolios are diﬀerentially exposed to long-run consumption growth of stockholders and compare these results
to those obtained using aggregate consumption and the consumption of nonstockholders. I
discuss these two papers in more detail next.
HHL assume that the state of the economy is given by a vector  that evolves according
to
+1 =  + +1 

(81)

where  and  are parameters to be estimated. Further, consumption growth is assumed
to be a linear function of the state vector:
∆+1 =  +   + 0 +1 

(82)

When  = 1, the log of the SDF, denoted   is then linked to the state vector according to
a linear relation
+1 =  +   +  0 +1 
where ,  , and  0 are parameters that are functions of the state vector parameters (81),
16

See Kenneth French’s web site for a description of these portfolios. They are comprised of stocks sorted
into five size (market capitalization) categories and five book-market equity ratio categories.

66

the consumption process parameters (82), and the deep parameters of the EZW preference
specification. As explained in Section 2, risk-premia  (+1 − +1 ) on an asset  are
determined by the covariance between exp (+1 ) and +1 − +1 ,
 (+1 − +1 ) =

−Cov (exp (+1 )  +1 − +1 )

 (exp (+1 ))

To investigate how these assumptions aﬀect risk-premia in the more general case where
 6= 1, a solution for +1 as a function of the model parameters and state variables is
required. HHL and Malloy, Moskowitz, and Vissing-Jorgensen (2009) (MMV) pursue an
approximate solution developed in Kogan and Uppal (2000), which works by substituting a
guess for the value function into the first-order condition for optimal consumption choice and
expanding the resulting expression around  = 1 This solution will be accurate for values
of  close to one. The resulting approximate expression for risk-premia is a complicated
function of the underlying parameters and state variables (see the appendix in HHL and
MMV for exact expressions based on VAR dynamics). For the purposes of this chapter, it
is useful to consider an alternative approximation that delivers simpler expressions.
This alternative approximation, employed by Campbell (2003), is based on an loglinear
expansion of the consumption-wealth ratio around its unconditional mean. This solution will
be accurate provided that the consumption-wealth ratio is not too volatile around its unconditional mean.17 It delivers a simple relation, for any value of  for the log risk-premium
on asset  under the assumption that asset returns and the SDF are jointly lognormal and
homoskedastic:
 (+1 − +1 ) +

2
=   + ( − )   
2

(83)

where
 ≡ Cov (+1 −  +1  ∆+1 −  ∆+1 )
!
Ã
∞
X
 ≡ Cov +1 −  +1  (+1 −  )
 ∆+1+ 
=1

17

A question arises as to the relative accuracy of the diﬀerent approximations. Campbell (1993) provides
simulation evidence based on a model with only a single asset. He finds that the approximation error based
on approximation of the value function around  = 1 can be many times larger than the error produced
by the loglinear method, even for values of  close to log utility. This is because a value of  = 1 implies
that the consumption-wealth ratio is constant, and the consumption-wealth ratio is highly sensitive to the
parameters of the utility function.

67

and where  ≡ 1 − exp ( −  )  Campbell and Viceira (2001) show that the solution used
by HHL can be viewed as a special case of (83) when  = 1.
Notice that the term   in (83) implies that revisions to expectations of consumption
growth over long-horizons are an important determinant of the risk premium when  6= 
This is where long-run risk is important for determining risk-premia. Given (81) and (82),
revisions in expectations of future consumption growth can be obtained by iterating one-step
ahead linear projections from a vector autoregression. HHL estimate a VAR system based on
the log of aggregate consumption (nondurables and services expenditure), the log of corporate
earnings and the log of dividends for the aggregate market and for five portfolios sorted on
the basis of book-market ratio. Consumption and earnings are modeled as cointegrated in
the VAR.
HHL develop operators for computing the contribution of cash-flows in the distant future
to the one-period return. They find that the cash-flow growth of value portfolios has a positive correlation with consumption growth over long-horizons, while that of growth portfolios
has a negligible correlation. These diﬀerences are only important quantitatively if risk aversion is high, in excess of  = 20. HHL focus on the representative agent version of the model
when consumption and returns are homoskedastic, so all variables in the VAR are aggregate
quantities.
Using the same empirical model but diﬀerent data, MMV estimate the relationship between risk premia  +1 − +1 for various portfolios of stocks and the covariance term
 for these same portfolios. Instead of using measures of aggregate consumption, however,
they focus on the consumption of stockholders.18 Most of their analysis focuses on the case
of  = 1 It is instructive to consider what their  = 1 estimates imply based on the approximation in (83), which is exact in the case of  = 1. Notice that relation (83) can be estimated
via GMM as a cross-sectional regression, given empirical estimates for the moments on the
left and right hand side. With  = 1 the cross-sectional regression is:
b2
b (+1 − +1 ) + 
= b
 + ( − 1) 
b +  

2

(84)

where “hats” indicate estimated values. MMV estimate this cross-sectional regression and
in doing so obtain estimates of risk aversion  through estimates of the coeﬃcients.
MMV find that the consumption of stockholders covaries more with long-run consump18

The data on stockholder consumption used in this study is available on Annette Vissing-Jorgensen’s web

site.

68

tion growth than does the consumption of nonstockholders or aggregate consumption. This
finding suggests that there is a larger role for long-run consumption risk in the consumption
of stockholders than of nonstockholders. If the LRR model is true, this finding should imply
that the same equity risk premium can be justified with lower risk-aversion by restricting
attention to stockholders. For example, MMV find that the 16-quarter consumption growth
rate of stockholders is about three times as sensitive to movements in the 16-quarter aggregate consumption growth rate as that of nonstockholders and has a higher covariance with
the excess return of stocks over Treasury bills, of small stocks over large stocks, of value
stocks over growth stocks, and of long-maturity bonds over short-maturity bonds. That is,

b is largest for stockholders and even larger for the wealthiest stockholders. As a conse-

quence, a much lower level of risk aversion is required to match the cross-sectional variation
in average returns on the left-hand-side of (83) for stockholders than for nonstockholders or
aggregate consumption. Using the 25 Fama-French portfolios sorted on the basis of size and
book-market ratio, they find that risk-aversion of stockholders is estimated to be about 15,
whereas it is between 50 and 100 for aggregate consumption or nonstockholders.19 These differences in the estimates of risk-aversion for stockholders versus aggregate consumption are
similar to those obtained in the structural estimation of the EZW model by Chen, Favilukis,
and Ludvigson (2007).
Bansal, Dittmar, and Lundblad (2005) examine portfolios sorted on the basis of size,
book-market ratio, and momentum and argue that the dividend growth rates of high average
return portfolios (portfolios of small stocks, high book-market stocks, and past winner stocks)
are more highly correlated with measures of long-run or persistent movements in expected
consumption than are the dividend growth rates of portfolios of low average return assets
(portfolios of large stocks, low book-market stocks and past loser stocks). These correlations
(or scaled versions of them) are referred to as “cash-flow betas.”
19

MMV drop the   term in (83) arguing that it is not highly correlated with returns. Because they
assume  = 1 for much of their analysis, the coeﬃcient on the   term in (83) is ( − 1). To explore results
for  6= 1, MMV employ the approximation of the value function around  = 1 discussed above. If we reinterpret their findings according to the alternative approximate analytical solution in (83) which holds for
arbitrary values of , we find similar results. For example, suppose the original MMV estimation where  = 1
is assumed produces an estimated coeﬃcient on   equal to 14. Equation (84) would imply risk aversion
 = 15 If instead, the EIS were actually 0.5 (or  = 2), the approximation (83) implies that  = 16 rather
than 15 And if the EIS were in fact 2 ( = 5) (83) implies  = 145 rather than 15. These adjustments
are consistent with the reported findings in MMV that an EIS a little lower than unity implies (based on
their approximation around  = 1) risk-aversion a little higher than the  = 1 case, while an EIS a little
higher than unity implies risk-aversion a little lower than the  = 1 case. This also serves to reinforce their
argument that the precise value of the EIS is unlikely to have a large eﬀect on the risk-aversion estimate.

69

Bansal, Dittmar, and Lundblad (2005) measure cash-flow betas in two ways. The first is
as the regression coeﬃcient  from a regression of the log diﬀerence in dividends for firm 
on a measure of long-run consumption growth  :
∆+1 =   +   + +1 
where  is measured as a trailing eight quarter moving average of past consumption growth
(log diﬀerences) and  +1 is a regression residual. The second is as the stochastically detrended cointegrating coeﬃcient  in a dynamic least squares regression of the level of log
dividends on contemporaneous log consumption (controlling for leads and lags of consumption):
∗+1

=  +

 ∗

+


X

 ∆− +  +1 

=−

where the “*” superscripts indicate that a deterministic trend has been removed from the
level of the variable, and where  +1 is a regression residual.
It is a prediction of the long-run risk paradigm that high average return assets have
high cash-flow betas while low average return assets have low cash-flow betas. Thus the
evidence in Bansal, Dittmar, and Lundblad (2005) is consistent with this prediction of the
long-run risk paradigm. One issue is that the cash-flow betas are measured with considerable
statistical error, so much so that there is no diﬀerence statistically between the cash-flow
betas of the diﬀerent asset classes they study. Bansal, Dittmar, and Lundblad (2005) point
out that, despite this, the cash-flow betas themselves are strongly statistically related to
expected returns, in the manner predicted by theory. Hansen, Heaton, and Li (2008) report
similar findings using vector-autoregressive techniques, with the result that the dividend
growth rates of high return value portfolios (portfolios of high book-market stocks) exhibit
positive comovement in the long run with macroeconomic shocks, whereas low return growth
portfolios (portfolios of low book-market stocks) exhibit little comovement with those shocks.
While these findings suggest that value portfolios are more exposed to long-run economic
shocks than are growth portfolios, there is also evidence that value portfolios are substantially
more exposed to shorter term, business cycle frequency economic shocks than are growth
portfolios, especially in bad times. Koijen, Lustig, and Van Nieuwerburgh (2010) document
that during the average recession, dividends on value portfolios fall 21% while dividends on
growth portfolios rise by 2%. These findings provide evidence that value stocks dispropor-

70

tionately suﬀer from bad cash-flow shocks in bad times, a pattern that is consistent with the
scaled consumption-based models of risk discussed above.
So far, we have been discussing the cash-flow characteristics of portfolios of stocks. A
second strand of literature has focused on the cash-flow characteristics of individual firms,
rather than portfolios. Empirical evidence suggests that individual stocks with high expected
returns have shorter duration in their cash flows than do stocks with low expected returns
(Cornell (1999, 2000); Dechow, Sloan, and Soliman (2004); Da (2005); van Binsbergen,
Brandt, and Koijen (2010)).20 Duration here refers to the timing of expected future cash
flows. Shorter duration means that the timing of a stock’s expected cash flow payouts is
weighted more toward the near future than toward the far future, whereas the opposite is
true for a longer duration security. Thus the evidence on firm cash-flows suggests a negative
relation between the expected return of a firm’s equity and its cash-flow duration.
Consistent with these results, van Binsbergen, Brandt, and Koijen (2010) find evidence
that the term structure of aggregate equity is downward sloping. The term structure of
aggregate equity may be computed by recognizing that an aggregate equity index claim is a
portfolio of zero-coupon dividend claims (strips) with diﬀerent maturities. van Binsbergen,
Brandt, and Koijen (2010) use options data to compute the prices of strips for the aggregate
stock market and find that the expected returns on strips that pay dividends in the near
future are higher than those that pay dividends in the far future. These findings are consistent
with those showing that short duration individual stocks that make up the equity index have
higher expected returns than long duration individual stocks.
In order to isolate the endogenous relation between cash-flow duration at the firm level
and risk premia in models with long-run consumption risk, several papers have studied an asset pricing model’s implications for equity strips, and for heterogeneous firms that diﬀer only
in the timing of their cash flows (Menzly, Santos, and Veronesi (2004), Santos and Veronesi
(2004), Santos and Veronesi (2010), Lynch (2003), Lettau and Wachter (2007), Croce, Lettau, and Ludvigson (2010)). As explained above, this is accomplished by recognizing that
any equity claim is a portfolio of zero-coupon dividend claims with diﬀerent maturities. Thus,
long-duration assets (firms) can be modeled as equity with a high weight on long-maturity
dividend claims relative to short-maturity dividend claims. With the exception of Croce,
Lettau, and Ludvigson (2010), all of these studies use preference specifications and/or as20

All of the empirical measures of duration in these papers are measures that diﬀer across asset classes
solely because of diﬀerences in the timing of expected future cash flows and not because of diﬀerences in
discount rates, which are held fixed across asset classes.

71

sumptions about cash-flow dynamics that are outside of the long-run risk paradigm. Croce,
Lettau, and Ludvigson (2010) (CLL) study the eﬀects of heterogeneity in firm cash-flow duration in a long-run risk setting, combing EZW preferences with the a homoskedastic version
of the cash-flow dynamics in (67)-(69). It is instructive to use this analysis to examine the
long-run risk model’s implications for the term structure of aggregate equity.
To form a model of firms that diﬀer in terms of the timing of their cash-flows, CLL
(following Lettau and Wachter (2007)) consider a life-cycle model of firm cash-flows. Consider
a sequence of  = 1   firms. The th firm pays a share, +1  of the aggregate dividend
+1 at time  + 1, where the aggregate dividend follows the process given in (67)-(69).
The share process is deterministic, with  the lowest share of a firm in the economy. Firms
experience a life-cycle in which this share grows deterministically at a rate  until reaching
a peak 2+1 = (1 +  )2 , when it shrinks deterministically at rate  until reaching
+1 = . The cycle then repeats. Thus, firms are identical except that their life-cycles are
out-of-phase, i.e.., firm 1 starts at , firm 2 at (1 +  ) , and so on. Shares are such that  ≥
P
0 and 
=1  = 1 for all . Firms with the lowest current share in the aggregate dividend
are those with the longest duration in their cash-flows because most of their dividends will
be paid out in the far future, while firms with the highest current share are those with the
shortest duration because most of their dividends are paid out now and in the very near
future.21 Although this is a highly stylized model of firm cash-flows and abstracts from
some aspects of reality, it allows the researcher to isolate the endogenous relation between
cash-flow duration and risk premia in models with long-run consumption risk.
In standard “full information” long-run risk models with cash-flows following the law
of motion given in (67)-(69), firms with long duration in their cash-flows will endogenously
pay high equity risk premia, while those with short-duration will endogenously pay low risk
premia (Croce, Lettau, and Ludvigson (2010)). This implication is the opposite of that
found in the historical data described above. Moreover, the aggregate equity term structure
slopes up rather than down, implying that the relation between cash flow duration and
risk premia goes the wrong way.22 It is important to emphasize that this latter result on
21

In this model, the same ranking of firms in terms of duration is obtained if an alternative definition of
duration is employed based on the Macaulay formula. According to this formula, cash-flow duration for firm
 is given by
P∞
 ·  [+ + ]

 = =1

where + ≡ +1 · +2 · · · +
22
Lettau and Wachter (2007) and van Binsbergen, Brandt, and Koijen (2010) show that the CampbellCochrane habit model also produces an upward sloping term structure of equity.

72

the slope of the term structure of aggregate equity is obtained only from the LRR model
for aggregate cash-flows (67)-(69) and does not depend on any particular model of firm
cash-flows.23 The intuition for this result is straightforward. When investors can observe
the long-run component in cash flows  —in which a small shock today can have a large
impact on long-run growth rates—the long-run is correctly inferred to be more risky than
the short-run, implying that long-duration assets must in equilibrium command high risk
premia, whereas short-duration assets command low risk premia.
It is possible to reverse this result if one is willing to enrich the perceived dynamics
for aggregate dividend growth given in (67)-(69) of the LRR model. CLL show that if
market participants are faced with a signal extraction problem and can observe the change
in consumption and dividends each period but not the individual components of that change
(the shocks +1  +1   ), the long-run risk model can be made consistent with the
evidence on firm-level cash-flow duration: stocks that pay dividends in the far future have
low risk premia, while those that pay dividends in the near future have high risk premia.
Moreover, under this “limited information” version of the model, the term structure of
aggregate equity slopes down, as in the data. Note that this result depends crucially on
the presence of a long-run component in consumption growth, despite the fact that the
optimal signal extraction solution gives greater weight to short-run consumption shocks in
the computation of risk-premia than does the full information specification. It is this greater
emphasis on short-term shocks inherent in the signal extraction process that allows the
long-run risk model to match a downward sloping term structure for aggregate equity.
As an alternative, one could enrich the aggregate dividend process by directly modeling
the cash-flow processes of individual firms, while keeping the other elements of the LRR
model in place (EZW preferences, and a long-run shock to aggregate consumption growth).
Ai, Croce, and Li (2010) consider a production economy in which firms accumulate both
tangible and intangible capital. In their economy, growth firms are option intensive, while
value firms are assets-in-place intensive. Investment options are intangible assets, therefore
they are embodied into market evaluation but they are excluded from book value. An
option intensive firm, hence, has low book-market ratio and is classified as a growth firm
when forming portfolios. Furthermore, the cash-flow of an investment option is future-loaded
23

Of course, given a model for firm cash-flows (like the share model above), the two results will be related
in equilibrium, since the returns of individual equities must sum up to the aggregate index return. In the
full information LRR model, an upward sloping term structure for aggregate equity goes hand-in-hand with
a positive relation between expected returns and the duration of firm-level cash-flows, where firms diﬀer
according to the timing of their cash-flows.

73

since an option does not pay any dividend until it is exercised and transformed into new
assets in place. As a result, growth firms have longer duration than value firms. Ai, Croce,
and Li (2010) also assume that firms that are assets-in-place intensive are positively exposed
to long-run consumption risk, while firms that are options-intensive are slightly negatively
exposed (consistent with Bansal, Dittmar, and Lundblad (2005) and HHL). As a result, their
model predicts a negative relation between the duration of firm cash flows and expected
returns, and a downward sloping term structure for aggregate equity, as in the data. Of
course, the resulting aggregate dividend growth process implied by this economy (once all
firms are aggregated) will look quite diﬀerent from the one assumed in (68), since we have
already seen that the process (68) implies an upward sloping term structure of aggregate
equity.
It is important to emphasize that the firm-level evidence on cash-flow duration is not
necessarily inconsistent with the portfolio-level evidence on cash-flow betas. Although it
is tempting to draw inferences about firm-level cash-flows from the cash-flow properties of
portfolios of stocks, or from the cash-flow properties of dynamic trading strategies based on
those portfolios, such inferences are not valid because the rebalancing required to maintain
the investment strategy means that portfolio cash-flows can behave quite diﬀerently from the
individual firm cash-flows that make up the portfolio. For example, in the model explored
by CLL, there is significant heterogeneity in firm cash-flow growth rates, which are specified
to follow a life cycle pattern. By contrast, there is no heterogeneity in the cash-flow growth
rates of portfolios of firms sorted on price-dividend ratios. The cross-sectional diﬀerences
in life-cycle cash flows that drive the risk premia in that model wash out once firms are
sorted into portfolios that are subject to rebalancing. This distinction is also emphasized
by Campbell, Polk, and Voulteenaho (2005), who propose a methodology for assessing the
influence of rebalancing on portfolio cash-flows using a “three-dimensional” procedure that
follows portfolios for a number of years after portfolio formation while keeping composition
constant.
A trivial example illustrates how firms with higher average returns can have shorter
duration in their cash-flows than do firms with lower average returns even though portfolios
of firms with higher average returns (e.g., value portfolios) have greater correlation with
long-run consumption growth than do portfolios of firms with lower average returns (e.g.,
growth portfolios). Consider the share model described above for the simple case of two
firms,  and , and two periods  = 1 2. Suppose firm  pays a share 1 = 0 of the
74

aggregate dividend in period 1, while firm  pays a share 1 = 1. Then according to the
life-cycle model above, in period  = 2, firm  pays a share 2 = 1, while firm  pays
2 = 0. In the limited information specification of CLL, firm  will endogenously have the
higher (of the two firms) price-dividend ratio and correspondingly lower average return when
it is a long-duration asset in period  = 1, but it will have the lower price-dividend ratio
and higher average return in period  = 2, when it is a short-duration asset. The opposite
will be true for firm . This follows because the term-structure of equity slopes down under
the limited information specification. But notice that the individual firms move in and out
of portfolios sorted on price-dividend ratio. In  = 1 the high (low) price-dividend portfolio
consists only of firm  () whereas in  = 2 it consists only of firm  () As a result,
the high price-dividend “growth” portfolio will always pay zero dividends and therefore will
have a cash-flow beta of zero. By contrast, the low price-dividend “value” portfolio always
pays the aggregate dividend in (67)-(69) and therefore has a positive cash-flow beta.
This trivial example makes a simple point: portfolios of low price-dividend (value) firms
can be more highly correlated with the long-run component of consumption growth than are
portfolios of high price-dividend ratio (growth) firms even in the presence of a downward sloping aggregate equity term structure, implying that individual firms with low price-dividend
ratios (value firms) are short duration assets while individual firms with high price-dividend
ratios (growth firms) are long duration assets.24 This example is meant only to be illustrative
of this point. More empirical work is needed to study this issue, and in particular to assess
the eﬀect of rebalancing on the properties of portfolio cash-flows.

6.4

Debate

Some authors have questioned the key mechanism of the long-run risk framework, namely
that return risk-premia are closely related to long-horizon consumption growth (Bui (2007),
Garcia, Meddahi, and Tedongap (2008), Campbell and Beeler (2009)). Campbell and Beeler
(2009) provide the most detailed criticism along these lines. They investigate the implications
of the calibrated models in Bansal and Yaron (2004), and the alternative calibration in
Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron (2007a) (BKYa) that places greater emphasis on stochastic volatility
in driving consumption growth and less emphasis on long-run risk in expected consumption
24

In this simple example value portfolios are more highly correlated with any component of consumption
growth than are growth portfolios, including the short-run component. A less simple example with two
aggregate dividend “trees” that diﬀer only in the loadings  could be constructed to make the correlation
diﬀer only with regard to the long-run component.

75

growth than the original BY calibration.
Campbell and Beeler argue that the LRR model using either calibration greatly understates the volatility of the price-dividend ratio and over-states the first-order autocorrelation
of consumption growth. They point out that, in the data, the log price-dividend ratio predicts
excess stock returns strongly, especially over long-horizons, while it has little predictability
for long-horizon consumption growth. By contrast, the BY and BKYa calibrated models
have the opposite pattern, with little predictability of excess returns and lots of predictability of consumption growth over longer horizons. For example, Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron
(2009) (BKYb) report that the empirical -squared statistic from a univariate regression of
the return on an aggregate stock market index in excess of a Treasury-bill rate on the log
dividend-price ratio in historical data is 31% at a five year horizon. The corresponding squared implied by the long-run risk model under the BKYa calibration is 4% in population
and 5% at the median value of a large number of finite sample simulations.
Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron (2009) have responded to the first point by noting that consumption growth appears more highly predictable in the data, in a manner similar to their
model, if one employs a VAR to forecast rather than relying on univariate regressions of longhorizon consumption growth on the dividend-price ratio, as in Campbell and Beeler (2009).
They point out that a univariate regression is unlikely to account for all the predictability of
consumption growth because, if the model is true, the dynamics of consumption and asset
returns are driven by two state variables,  and    which are unlikely to be captured
by a single predictor variable. This is an important observation, but it does not address
the criticism that the LRR model still implies more univariate predictability of long-horizon
consumption growth by the dividend-price ratio than appears in the data, even if the multivariate evidence is more in line with the model implications.
Regarding predictability of long-horizon excess returns, Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron (2009)
concede that their model implies less predictability than in the data, but note that the sample
estimate -squared statistics are inside the model-based 95% confidence bands. They also
argue that adjusting the dividend-price ratio by subtracting the risk-free rate and using this
adjusted value as a predictor variable produces much less forecastability of returns. This
could be because, as Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron (2009) suggest, the strong forecastability of
excess returns by the unadjusted dividend-price ratio in historical data may be a spurious
result of its high (near unit root) persistence. (The dividend-price ratio less the risk-free
rate is less persistent than the dividend-price ratio itself.) It is diﬃcult to evaluate this
76

possibility because the suggested adjustment does more than potentially remove a stochastic
trend from the price-dividend ratio: it creates a new forecasting variable altogether.
Lettau and Van Nieuwerburgh (2008) use formal econometric techniques to remove the
non-stationary component of the dividend-price ratio by estimating a structural break model
of its mean. Once this ratio is adjusted for structural shifts in its mean, the resulting
adjusted process is far less persistent than the original series (and by definition statistically
stationary in sample). To the extent that this adjusted ratio is related to future returns, it
cannot be the spurious result of non-stationary data. Rather than having weaker forecasting
power for returns, Lettau and Van Nieuwerburgh (2008) find that the adjusted ratio has
stronger forecasting power than the unadjusted series, with the adjusted dividend-price ratio
displaying highly statistically significant and stable predictive power for future excess equity
market returns. Of course, this approach leaves open the question of why there are breaks
in the mean of the dividend-price ratio, something that should be addressed in future work
if we are to glean an understanding of what these regimes represent.
Constantinides and Ghosh (2010b), building oﬀ of work in Constantinides and Ghosh
(2009), also argue that allowing for regime shifts in model parameters strengthens the evidence for predictability in both the equity premium and dividend growth. They estimate
a structural model with EZW preferences but assume that the cash-flow process takes the
form
∆+1 =  +  +  (+1 ) +1
∆+1 =  +   +    (+1 ) +1
 =  (+1 ) −1 +     
where +1 is a latent state variable that switches randomly between one of two regimes.
They show that the state variables in this model are  and  , the probability at time
 of being in regime 1. The equity premium, dividend, and consumption growth rates are
nonlinear functions of these state variables. Their findings suggest the presence of two
distinct regimes, one in which consumption and dividend growth rates are more persistent
and less volatile (regime 2), and the other in which growth rates are much less persistent
and have higher volatility (regime 1). Thus, when the probability of being in the first
regime exceeds 50%, the one-year ahead excess stock market return is highly predictable
by the lagged log price-dividend ratio, while one-year ahead dividend growth displays little

77

predictability. By contrast, in the second regime excess returns display little predictability
and dividend growth is highly predictable.
There are other methods for dealing with structural instabilities in forecasting exercises.
Recent research on dynamic factor models finds that the information in a large number of
economic time series can be eﬀectively summarized by a relatively small number of estimated
factors, aﬀording the opportunity to exploit a much richer information base than is common
in predictive regressions on a few observable variables such as the dividend-price ratio. An
added benefit of this approach is that the use of common factors can provide robustness
against the structural instability that plagues low-dimensional forecasting regressions. Stock
and Watson (2002) provide both theoretical arguments and empirical evidence that the
principal components factor estimates are consistent even in the face of temporal instability
in the individual time series used to construct the factors. The reason is that such instabilities
may “average out” in the construction of common factors if the instability is suﬃciently
dissimilar from one series to the next. Ludvigson and Ng (2007, 2009) use the methodology
of dynamic factor analysis for large datasets to forecast excess stock and bond returns and
find that the factor-augmented forecasting specifications predict an unusual 16-20 percent of
the one-quarter ahead variation in excess stock market returns, 26 percent of the one-yearahead variation in excess bond market returns, and exhibit stable and strongly statistically
significant out-of-sample forecasting power.
More generally, the question of how forecastable are stock market returns has been a
matter of some debate.25 Cochrane (2008) argues that there is little if any predictability of
dividend-growth by the dividend-price ratio. If this imposed econometrically, the evidence
for forecastability of stock market returns by the (unadjusted) dividend-price ratio becomes
much stronger. Lettau and Ludvigson (2010) survey a large number of studies that address
the forecastability of excess returns, employing both in-sample and out-of-sample tests, and
find that the preponderance of evidence suggests that excess stock market returns are forecastable over medium and long-horizons but that variables other than the dividend-price
ratio (with lower persistence) display stronger predictive power, both statistically and economically. Lettau and Ludvigson (2005) explain why variables other than the dividend-price
ratio may have stronger forecasting power for future returns (and dividend growth rates),
if expected returns and expected dividend growth are positively correlated, as suggested by
25

See, for example, Nelson and Kim (1993); Stambaugh (1999); Valkanov (2003); Campbell and Thompson
(2005); Goyal and Welch (2003); Ang and Bekaert (2007).

78

empirical evidence.
Campbell and Beeler also emphasize that the empirical success of the long-run risk model
depends critically on the presence of an EIS greater than unity. They question this aspect of
the calibration, citing evidence in Hansen and Singleton (1983), Hall (1988), and Campbell
and Mankiw (1989) which find lower values for the EIS. Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron (2009)
point out that the estimates in these studies are based on loglinear approximations of the
Euler equation and are biased down in the presence of stochastic volatility. There appears
to be little agreement about the magnitude of the bias in practice (see Campbell and Beeler
(2009) and Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron (2009)). Campbell and Beeler acknowledge that some
estimates based on disaggregated consumption data have found evidence for larger values of
the EIS (Attanasio and Weber (1989), Beaudry and van Wincoop (1996), Vissing-Jorgensen
(2002), Vissing-Jorgensen and Attanasio (2003)), but argue that these estimates do not confirm the long-run risk model because that model is a representative agent specification that
applies only to aggregate data. This observation overlooks the evidence in Chen, Favilukis,
and Ludvigson (2007), which finds point estimates for the EIS that are greater than unity
when the fully non-linear EZW Euler equation is estimated on aggregate consumption data.
The distribution free estimation procedure used in Chen, Favilukis, and Ludvigson (2007)
leaves the law of motion for consumption growth unspecified and therefore allows for the possibility of a variety of forms of heteroskedasticty in consumption growth (including stochastic
volatility) that may be omitted in estimates based on loglinear regressions.
Constantinides and Ghosh (2010a) take a diﬀerent approach to testing the LRR model.
They note that the model’s latent state variables,  and  are in fact observable because,
under the model assumptions, both the price-dividend ratio and the risk-free rate are aﬃne
functions of only those two state variables. Hence the aﬃne system can be inverted to
express the state variables as functions of observable variables. Indeed, according to the LRR
model, the expected market return, equity premium, and expected dividend and consumption
growth rates are all aﬃne functions of the log price-dividend ratio and the risk-free rate, as
is the pricing kernel.
In essence, Constantinides and Ghosh (2010a) argue that the state variables  and  
in the LRR model do not need to be estimated at all because they are known functions of
the log price-dividend ratio and the risk-free rate with no residual. This implies that the
model can be tested by estimating the Euler equations via GMM where the Euler equations
can be expressed as a function of only observable variables. In particular, since the Euler
79

equations for any asset denoted  can be expressed as
 [exp (+1 + +1 )] = 1

(85)

and since  and  are aﬃne functions of  −  and  :
 = 0 + 1  + 2 ( −  )
 2 =  0 +  1  +  2 ( −  ) 

(86)
(87)

where the  and  parameters are known functions of the model’s primitive parameters, the
log pricing kernel can be expressed as a function of only observable variables as well:
+1

µ
¶
µ µ ¶
µ ¶¶

1 
1
−

= 1 + 2 ∆+1 + 3 +1 −  + 4 ln
1

1 

(88)

where again the coeﬃcients   = 1  4 are known functions of the model’s primitive
parameters. As a consequence, (88) may be plugged into (85) and the model can be estimated
and tested using GMM. The model’s parameters can also be estimated by inserting (86)
and (87) into the system (67)-(70) or its cointegrated variant (72)-(76) and using GMM to
match moments of consumption and dividend growth without reference to Euler equations
or returns. Constantinides and Ghosh pursue both approaches.
Constantinides and Ghosh find that the estimated persistence parameter  for  is 0.32
when the model is estimated by matching moments of consumption and dividend growth,
while it is 0.7 when it is estimated using Euler equations and return data. This suggests that
the LRR model requires higher predictability of consumption growth to explain return data
than is warranted from consumption data alone. Moreover they find, even when return data
are used and the model is estimated via GMM on the Euler equations, it is rejected according
to overidentification tests. Finally, they document that the model produces large estimated
pricing errors for the stock market return, risk-free rate, small-cap and growth portfolios and
that the postulated state variables as aﬃne functions of observable variables perform poorly
in linear regressions forecasting consumption growth, in contrast to the model implications.
They conclude that the model may be missing a state variable or that a richer model that
relies more on nonlinearities in the state-space system may be required.26
26
In principle, the loglinear approximation of the model could be inaccurate, but because the LRR model
is close to loglinear, this is not the case here, as pointed out by Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron (2007b).

80

In summary, the results discussed in this section and the debate surrounding it suggests
that the LRR model, like the scaled models discussed above, is unlikely to be perfectly
specified even if some of its central insights are valid and important features of the data.
Methods for computing the degree of misspecification across models can be employed to
move away from the common emphasis on testing perfectly correct specification against the
alternative of (any degree of) incorrect specification.

7

Stochastic Consumption Volatility

There is a growing interest in the role of stochastic volatility in consumption growth as a
mechanism for explaining the predictability of stock returns.27 For example, in the LRR
model with its representative agent formulation and constant relative risk-aversion specification, persistent variation in the volatility of consumption growth is the only mechanism for
generating time-varying risk-premia and therefore predictability in the equilibrium stock return in excess of a risk-free rate. If instead, the variance of consumption growth is constant,
risk-premia in that model are constant, contradicting a large body of empirical evidence that
suggests they are time-varying.28
The importance of stochastic consumption volatility in the LRR model is highlighted
by the recent calibration of the model in BKYa, which somewhat increases the size and
greatly increases the persistence of shocks to consumption volatility relative to the original
calibration in BY. (The persistence of the conditional variance of consumption growth is
calibrated to be 0.987 in BY, and 0.999 in BKYa.) An open question for these models
concerns the extent to which this magnitude of stochastic consumption volatility is warranted
from consumption data.
Simulation methods such as those employed by BGT provide model-based estimates of
stochastic volatility parameters. Such estimates reveal what the parameters of the volatility
process must be in order for the model to fit the data to the best of its ability. But the
data used in simulation methods also include the return data that the model is trying to
explain. We already know from moment-matching calibration exercises what the parameters
of the volatility process must be in order to explain return data. In particular, we know
27

Notice that stochastic volatility in consumption diﬀers from other time-varying volatility models such
as GARCH in that the shock to volatility is independent of the consumption innovation.
28
For recent surveys of this evidence, along with a discussion of statistical issues, see Koijen and Van
Nieuwerburgh (2010) and Lettau and Ludvigson (2010).

81

that suﬃciently persistent stochastic volatility in consumption growth is required for models
with EZW preferences to generate excess return forecastability. Simulation-based estimation
methods are more eﬃcient than calibration, and they allow for the computation of standard
errors. But they do not tell us whether the empirical consumption dynamics alone–which
are exogenous inputs into the model–are consistent with what would be required to explain
the return behavior we observe.29 It is therefore of interest to investigate the extent to
which there is evidence for stochastic volatility in consumption data, without reference to
return data. A natural follow-up step would then be to assess the model’s implications for
time-varying risk premia when it is evaluated at the resulting empirical estimates of the
consumption volatility process.
Unfortunately, obtaining reliable estimates of a stochastic consumption volatility process
is not simple, since the presence of multiplicative stochastic volatility requires the solution
to a nonlinear filtering problem. The likelihood is unavailable in closed-form and diﬃcult to
approximate (Creal (2009)). Recently Bayesian estimation of nonlinear state space systems
has been developed by Andrieu, Doucet, and Holenstein (2010) using a Particle Marginal
Metropolis Hastings algorithm. Bidder and Smith (2010) apply this algorithm to estimate a
process for stochastic consumption volatility in quarterly post-war data and report obtaining
accurate and stable estimates of the parameters of the stochastic volatility process. In
this section I show what the Bidder-Smith estimates imply for the consumption volatility
processes typically used in the LRR paradigm and elsewhere.
Bidder and Smith (2010) (BS hereafter) estimate a process for consumption growth in
quarterly data that takes the form30
∆+1 =  +  exp (+1 ) +1
+1 =  +  +1
+1   ∼  (0 1) 

(89)
(90)
(91)

In (89)-(91),  denotes a quarter. The distributional assumption (91) is required to carry
29

Simulations methods can also be used to test the model with stochastic volatility as a feature, as in
BGT. But such tests often reject the model (e.g., Bansal, Gallant, and Tauchen (2007)).
30
Clark (2009) uses a similar methodology to estimate a system like (89)-(91), but he restricts  to unity,
implying a unit root in volatility and a non-stationary consumption growth process. For asset pricing applications, this restriction is less useful because many asset pricing puzzles are trivially resolved if consumption
growth is non-stationary and there is a unit root in volatility. For example, in this case the standard
consumption based model can explain any value for the equity premium with negligible risk aversion.

82

out the particle filter. Based on a likelihood ratio test, BS find strong evidence against
a nested homoskedastic variant of the model, in favor of a specification with stochastic
volatility. They also report significant movement in the estimated conditional volatility
sequence. The Bayesian methodology produces estimates of the parameters in (89)-(91)
as moments from the posterior distribution. Using data from 1948:2 to 2009:4, BS find
that the mean of the posterior distribution for the vector of parameters ( , , ,  ) =
(00047 00047 08732 01981).
What do these parameter estimates imply for consumption-based models that rely on
stochastic volatility to generate time-varying risk-premia? Recall the consumption process
assumed in much of the LRR literature (ignoring the dividend process, which plays no role)
takes the form
∆+1 =  +  +   +1

(92)

 = −1 +     
¡
¢
 2+1 =  2 +   2 −  2 +  +1

(93)

+1     ∼  (0 1) 

(95)

(94)

This process diﬀers in several ways from (89)-(91). First, the process above is typically
calibrated under the assumption that the household’s decision interval is a month (e.g.,
Bansal and Yaron (2004)), hence  denotes a month in (92)-(94), whereas the estimates of
(89)-(91) are from quarterly data. Second, the functional form of the stochastic volatility
process diﬀers, with the innovation in (89) multiplied by the exponential of an autoregressive
random variable to insure positivity of the volatility process. The specification for conditional
variance in (94) does not insure positivity, a matter discussed further below. Third, the
specification in (89)-(91) assumes a constant expected growth rate rather than a time-varying
one as in (93).
It is unclear how the allowance for a time-varying expected growth rate in (89) might
influence the parameter estimates reported by BS, if at all. Future work is needed to investigate this question. Given these estimates, however, it is straightforward to use them to
infer parameter values for the monthly stochastic volatility process in (93)-(94).
To do so, we first derive a quarterly process for the conditional variance of consumption
growth from the monthly specification in (92)-(94). In this specification,  denotes a month.
(With some abuse of notation, I will use  to denote a month when referring to (92)-(94),
83

and use  to denote a quarter when referring to (89)-(91).) Given monthly decision intervals
assumed in (92)-(94), quarterly consumption growth for this model obeys
ln(+3  ) = ln[(+3 +2 )(+2 +1 )(+1  )]
= ∆+3 + ∆+2 + ∆+1
2
2
X
X
= 3 +
+ +
 + ++1 
=0

=0

The conditional variance of quarterly consumption growth for the monthly specification
(92)-(94) is therefore

var (ln(+3  )) = var

Ã 2
X

+ +

=0

2
X

 + ++1

=0

!

¡
¢
= var [1 +  + 2 ] + [1 + ]   +1 +    +1 +2 +   +1 +  +1 +2 +  +2 +3
= ([1 + ]    )2 +  2  ( 2+1 ) +  2 +  ( 2+1 ) +  ( 2+2 )

= (1 + [1 + ]2  2 )  2 + [1 +  2 ][̄ 2 + ( 2 − ̄ 2 )] + ̄2 +  2 ( 2 − ̄ 2 )
= (1 + [1 + ]2  2 + [1 +  2 ] +  2 ) 2 + ([1 +  2 ][1 − ] + 1 −  2 )̄ 2 

(96)

By repeated substitution on (94) we have
 2 = ̄2 +  3 ( 2−3 − ̄ 2 ) +   [ + −1 +  2 −2 ]
Substituting this into (96) yields:
var (ln(+3  )) = (1 + [1 + ]2  2 + [1 +  2 ] +  2 )(̄ 2 +  3 ( 2−3 − ̄ 2 )
+ [ + −1 +  2 −2 ]) + ([1 +  2 ][1 − ] + 1 −  2 )̄ 2 
or
var (ln(+3  )) =  +  3 [(1 + [1 + ]2  2 + [1 +  2 ] +  2 ) 2−3 + ([1 +  2 ][1 − ] + 1 −  2 )̄ 2 ]
{z
}
|
=var−3 (ln( −3 ))

+(1 + [1 +

]2  2

+ [1 +

 2 ]

+  2 )  [ + −1 +  2 −2 ]

where
 = ̄2 (1 −  3 )[2 + 3 + [1 + ]2  2 ]
84

The above is an autoregressive process for the volatility of quarterly consumption growth
taking the form
var [ln(+3  )] =  + var−3 [ln( −3 )] +  

(97)

where
 = 3
  = (1 + [1 + ]2  2 + [1 +  2 ] +  2 )  [ + −1 +  2 −2 ]
and

p
std () = [(1 + [1 + ]2  2 + [1 +  2 ] +  2 )  ] (1 +  2 +  4 )

In the empirical model estimated by BS, where  denotes a quarter, the conditional
variance of quarterly consumption growth is
var (∆+1 ) = var ( exp(+1 )+1 )
=  2  ([exp(+1 )+1 ]2 )
= 2  (exp(+1 )2 ) = 2 exp(2 + 2 2 )

(98)

With the BS estimates of ( , , ,  ) in hand, we can use Monte Carlo simulations on  to
generate a long time-series of observations on (98), thereby generating quarterly observations
on var (∆+1 ) Denote these observations var
 (∆+1 ). Armed with a long simulation, we
can then run the quarterly regression

var
 (∆+1 ) =  +   var−1 [∆ ] + +1 

(99)

The parameters of the monthly specification (92)-(94) are directly comparable to those from
(97). It follows that parameters of the stochastic volatility process in the LRR model can
be inferred by equating the estimated parameters from (99) with those from (97):

b =  = ̄2 (1 −  3 )[2 + 3 + [1 + ]2  2 ]

p
c (+1 ) = std () = [(1 + [1 + ]2  2 + [1 +  2 ] +  2 )  ] (1 +  2 +  4 )
std


b
 = 3 

The above is three equations in five unknowns ̄      and    We therefore calibrate
85

  and  to the values used in BKYa,  = 0975 and   = 0038, and solve the above for
the remaining three parameters of the volatility process, , ̄ and   . Doing so provides
empirical estimates of the volatility parameters at monthly frequency for the LRR model
(92)-(94).
Table 2 below compares the estimated parameters from the simulated BS data to those in
the calibrated model of BKYa. There are two columns. The first gives the estimates obtained
when we use the BS values for ( , , ,  ) that correspond to the mean of their estimated
posterior distribution. The second column gives the calibration of these parameters in BKYa.
Table 2
Estimation Calibration (BKYa)


0.945

0.999



0.003

0.007



0.0000029

0.0000028



–

0.975

2

–

0.038

We can see that although the estimated parameters are generally of the same order
of magnitude (and the implied volatility of volatility is almost identical), the persistence
parameter estimated is much smaller than that of the BKYa calibration. To see what these
parameter estimates imply for the predictability of long-horizon returns by the price-dividend
ratio in the LRR model, we plug the inferred stochastic volatility parameters   and  
in column 1 of Table 2 above into the LRR model and solve it using the same approximate
loglinearization approach used in BKYa, keeping all other parameters fixed at their BKYa
parameter values. We then undertake simulations of the model.
Tables 3 and 4 report the results of these simulations. To form a basis for comparison,
we first report, in Table 3, the results of simulations of the BKYa model, where all of
the model’s parameters–including the stochastic volatility parameters–are chosen as in
BKYa and BKYb (these papers use the same calibration). Thus, in Table 3, the stochastic
volatility parameters   and  are those in column 2 of Table 2. Results are reported for
the percentiles of a large number of finite-sample simulations equal to the size of the sample
investigated by BKYb, in addition to the population values of predictive 2 statistics and
predictive slopes.
86

Table 3
Predictive 20 
Data

LRR Model

Estimate Median

2.5%

5%

95%

97.5% Population

1 year

0.04

0.011

0.000 0.000 0.081

0.103

0.009

3 year

0.19

0.033

0.000 0.000 0.226

0.279

0.026

5 year

0.31

0.053

0.000 0.001 0.343

0.428

0.040

Predictive Slopes (̂ 1 )
Data

LRR Model

Estimate Median

2.5%

5%

95%

97.5% Population

1 year

-0.09

-0.113

-0.492 -0.413 0.135

0.188

-0.078

3 year

-0.27

-0.312

-1.403 -1.199 0.226

0.616

-0.229

5 year

-0.43

-0.478

-2.261 -1.924 0.823

1.097

-0.370

Notes: The table reports results from regressions:

P

=1

(+ − + ) =  0 + 1 ( − ) + +   = 1  2 

where + and + are the (annualized) log equity and risk-free returns between year  +  − 1 and
 +  and  − is the log price dividend ratio at the beginning of year . The data are compounded
continuously from monthly data and the regression is on data with non-overlapping periods. Statistics
for historical data from 1930-2008 are taken from BKYa and reported under the column headed “Data.”
Statistics implied by the BKYa model using model-simulated data are reported in other columns. For
each set of parameters, 10,000 simulations with a sample size of 77 years each are run. The percentiles
of the 2 statistic and parameter  1 across the 10,000 simulations are reported in the columns headed
“Median....97.5%.” The population values of the model, computed from one long simulation of 1.2 million
years are reported under the column headed “Population.”

The table reports the results of forecasting regressions of long-horizon equity returns on
the log price-dividend ratio using model-simulated data. The first column reports the results
of these same regressions on historical data. The numbers in Table 3 are very close to those
reported in BKYb, and illustrate the modest degree of predictability of excess returns implied
by that calibration of the LRR model. This degree of predictability is considerably less than
that implied by the data (column 1), especially at long-horizons, but it does imply that there
exists some time-variation of the equity risk-premium: the population 2 statistics are above
zero.
Table 4 shows the same results when the parameters   and   are set according to the
87

inferred values from the BS estimation, given in column 1 of Table 2. All other parameters
of the LRR model are set according to their values in BKYa.
Table 4
Predictive 20 
Data

LRR Model

Estimate Median

2.5%

5%

95%

97.5% Population

1 year

0.04

0.007

0.000 0.000 0.054

0.069

0.000

3 year

0.19

0.020

0.000 0.000 0.158

0.202

0.000

5 year

0.31

0.036

0.000 0.000 0.267

0.333

0.000

Predictive Slopes (̂ 1 )
Data

LRR Model

Estimate Median

2.5%

5%

95%

97.5% Population

1 year

-0.09

-0.044

-0.594 -0.506 0.341

0.423

-0.004

3 year

-0.27

-0.108

-1.729 -1.426 1.120

1.359

0.002

5 year

-0.43

-0.135

-2.831 -2.372 1.957

2.412

0.016

Notes: See Table 3. The results reported in this table are for the same regressions as described in the
notes to Table 3, except that the BKYa model estimates now use the three parameters of the volatility
process calibrated to match the estimates reported in column 1 of Table 2. All other parameters are held at
the values calibrated in BKYa.

Table 4 shows that this version of the LRR model implies that excess returns are essentially unforecastable when the model is calibrated to the stochastic volatility parameters
warranted by consumption data. Indeed, the population 2 statistics are zero under this
calibration, and the population predictive slopes switch sign as the return horizon increases,
implying that high price-dividend ratios forecast higher future returns rather than lower.
The only predictability evident from the model evaluated at these parameters arises from
small-sample bias, as indicated by the finite-sample percentile results.
It is important to bear in mind that the BS estimates insure positivity of the conditional
variance of consumption growth, whereas the system (92)-(94) does not. The particular parameter combination for stochastic volatility employed in the BKYa,b cannot be the outcome
of an estimation process that insures positivity of the volatility process, since that calibration produces occasional negative values for volatility in model simulations.31 BKYa,b deal
31

BKYb report negative realizations averaging about 0.6% of the draws. Campbell and Beeler report

88

with this by discarding negative realizations and replacing them with small positive numbers. But when we instead infer the volatility parameters from the BS estimates rather than
calibrating them, we find that the persistence of the (inferred) monthly volatility process
in (92)-(94) can only be so high, for a given mean and volatility of the volatility process,
as a result of the requirement that volatility always be positive. Specifically, if we look at
the diﬀerent percentiles of the posterior distribution for the parameters (89)-(91) reported
by BS (not shown), none of the estimated parameter combinations at any percentile deliver
the combination of   and  assumed in the BKYa,b calibration. Since those parameters
imply negative realizations and since the estimated values rule out negative realizations, this
is not possible.
Before concluding this section, it is worth making two further observations about the
evidence for changing volatility in consumption growth. First, there appears to be evidence
for large but highly infrequent shifts in the volatility of consumption growth, a phenomenon
that can have significant implications for the unconditional equity premium (Lettau, Ludvigson, and Wachter (2008)). Econometric models of changing volatility such as stochastic
volatility and GARCH-related processes are useful for describing higher frequency, stationary fluctuations in variance, but may be less appropriate for describing very infrequent,
prolonged shifts to a period of moderated volatility like that observed at the end of the last
century (the so-called Great Moderation). For example, GARCH models do not generate
the observed magnitude of volatility decline during the Great Moderation. Intuitively, these
models do a reasonable job of modelling changes in volatility within regimes, once those have
been identified by other procedures, but may not adequately capture infrequent movements
in volatility across regimes.
Second, the estimates of stochastic volatility obtained by Bidder and Smith were conducted on post-war data, whereas most of the calibrations in the LRR literature are designed
to match data that include the pre-war period. The data sampling period is likely to play a
role in volatility estimates because pre-war consumption data are more volatile than post-war
data. While some of this diﬀerence may be attributable to a genuine diﬀerence in the volatility of fundamentals across the two periods, we also know that pre-war data are measured
with substantially more error than are post-war data, a fact that adds to the standard deviation of measured consumption growth in samples that include pre-war data. Data collection
finding negative realizations 1.3% of the time using the same calibration, implying that when simulating 77
year paths for volatility using the BKYa,b calibration, over half go negative at some point.

89

methodologies changed discretely at the beginning of the post-war period, and Romer (1989)
finds that prewar GDP estimates significantly exaggerate the size of cyclical fluctuations in
the pre-war era. These considerations suggest that it may be prudent to restrict estimates
of consumption volatility to data from the post-war period, as Bidder and Smith do. On the
other hand, it is worth noting that the inferred parameter value governing the volatility of
volatility from the Bidder-Smith estimation (  , in the first column of Table 2) is roughly
the same and if anything slightly larger than the calibrated value for this parameter in BKYa
and BKYb. This may be because the Bidder-Smith data include the recession of 2008-2010,
a time of unusually high consumption growth volatility in the post-war period.
In summary, the results in this section suggest that although there is evidence for a sizable
degree of stochastic volatility in aggregate consumption data, the magnitude of stochastic
volatility appears to be too small to be consistent with a non-negligible degree of timevariation in the equity risk premium of currently calibrated LRR models. To the extent that
we seek to explain this aspect of the data, more work is needed to assess how the model can
be modified to generate an equity risk premium that is not only high on average, but also
significantly time-varying.

8

Asset Pricing with Habits

A prominent competing explanation for aggregate stock market behavior implies that assets
are priced as if there were a representative investor whose utility is a power function of the
diﬀerence between aggregate consumption and a habit level.32 In all of these theories, the
habit function is central part to the definition of risk, but there is substantial divergence
across models in how the habit stock is specified to vary with aggregate consumption. Some
work specifies the habit stock as a linear function of past consumption (e.g., Sundaresan
(1989); Constantinides (1990); Heaton (1995); Jermann (1998); Boldrin, Christiano, and
Fisher (2001)). More recent theoretical work often takes as a starting point the particular
nonlinear habit specification that includes current consumption developed in Campbell and
Cochrane (1999) (e.g., Campbell and Cochrane (2000); Li (2001); Wachter (2006); and Men32

See Sundaresan (1989), Constantinides (1990), Ferson and Harvey (1992), Heaton (1995), Jermann
(1998), Campbell and Cochrane (1999), Campbell and Cochrane (2000); Boldrin, Christiano, and Fisher
(2001), Li (2001), Shore and White (2002); Dai (2003); Menzly, Santos, and Veronesi (2004); Wachter
(2006). Habit formation has also become an important feature of many dynamic macroeconomic models
as in An and Schorfheide (2007), Del Negro, Schorfheide, Smets, and Wouters (2007), Fernández-Villaverde
and Rubio-Ramírez (2007).

90

zly, Santos, and Veronesi (2004)). Moreover, there is no theoretical reason why other forms
of nonlinearities could not be entertained. Disagreement over the appropriate functional
form for the habit complicates estimation and testing of habit-based asset pricing models
because it implies that the functional form of the habit should be treated, not as known, but
rather as part and parcel of the estimation procedure.
There are at least three possible approaches to estimating and testing these models econometrically, akin to those discussed above for estimating models with recursive preferences.
One is to estimate an explicit parametric model of the habit function, while leaving the
law of motion for consumption and other variables unspecified. Important early applications of this approach include Ferson and Constantinides (1991) and Heaton (1995) who use
distribution-free estimation procedures such as GMM to estimate habit- and durability-based
asset pricing models, where the habit is restricted to have a linear functional form. A second
approach is to estimate an entire parametric asset pricing model that embeds habit-formation
preferences. This parametric model includes not only a specification for the habit function,
but also a law of motion for the driving variables such as consumption and dividends. This
is done in BGT who use the same simulated method of moments approach discussed above
to estimate the Campbell and Cochrane (1999) habit model. A third approach is to evaluate
a general class of habit-based asset pricing models, placing as few restrictions as possible on
the specification of the habit function and no parametric restrictions on the law of motion
for consumption. This approach is taken in Chen and Ludvigson (2009), who treat the functional form of the habit as unknown, and to estimate it nonparametrically along with the
rest of the model’s finite dimensional parameters.
An important distinction in this literature concerns the diﬀerence between “internal”
and “external” habit formation. About half of the theoretical studies cited at the beginning
of this section investigate models of internal habit formation, in which the habit is a function of the agent’s own past consumption. The other studies investigate models of external
habit formation, in which the habit depends on the consumption of some exterior reference
group, typically per capita aggregate consumption. Abel (1990) calls external habit formation “catching up with the Joneses.” Determining which form of habit formation is more
empirically plausible is important because the two specifications can have dramatically different implications for optimal tax policy and welfare analysis (Ljungqvist and Uhlig (2000)),
and for whether habit models can explain long-standing asset-allocation puzzles in the international finance literature (Shore and White (2002)). Empirical tests allow us to assess
91

which variant of habit-formation is more likely to explain the data. I now describe how such
models may be estimated.
Consider a model of investor behavior in which utility is a power function of the diﬀerence
between aggregate consumption and the habit. Here I do not consider models in which utility
is a power function of the ratio of consumption to the habit stock, as in Abel (1990) and
Abel (1999). Ratio models of external habit formation imply that relative risk-aversion is
constant, hence they have diﬃculty accounting for the predictability of excess stock returns
documented in the empirical asset pricing literature. By contrast, diﬀerence models can
generate time-variation in the equilibrium risk-premium because relative risk aversion varies
countercyclically in these specifications.
Most approaches assume that identical agents maximize a utility function taking the
form
 =

∞
X



−  )1− − 1

1−

 (

=0

(100)

Here  is the level of the habit, and  is the subjective time discount factor.  is assumed
to be a function (known to the agent but unknown to the econometrician) of current and
past consumption
 =  (  −1   − ) 
such that      ≥ 0 The function is quite general: the maximum lag length  could
be infinity. This specification allows the habit to potentially depend on contemporaneous as
well as past consumption, a modeling choice that is a feature of several habit models in the
recent theoretical literature (e.g., Campbell and Cochrane (1999)).
When the habit is internal, the agent takes into account the impact of today’s consumption decisions on future habit levels. In this case the intertemporal marginal rate of
substitution in consumption is given by
+1 = 
where

+1



" 
#
X


+
−
−

= ( −  ) − 
 (+ − + )
 =


=0

(101)

(102)

When the habit is external, agents maximize (100) but ignore the impact of today’s
consumption on tomorrow’s habits. In this case, the habit merely plays the role of an

92

externality and only the first term on the right-hand-side of (102) is part of marginal utility:
 =


= ( −  )− 


In equilibrium, identical individuals choose the same consumption, so that regardless of
whether the habit is external or internal, individual consumption,  , is equal to aggregate
per capita consumption,  , which is simply denoted  from now on.

8.1

Structural Estimation of Campbell-Cochrane Habit

BGT estimate the Campbell and Cochrane (1999) (CC) habit model, using the same simulation approach discussed above to estimate the LRR model. An important aspect of their
approach is that the same moments and same observation equation that were used to evaluate
the LRR model are used to evaluate the Campbell-Cochrane model. BGT follow Campbell
and Cochrane’s model exactly except that they impose cointegration between consumption
and dividends. This changes the estimation only in so far as it changes the specification
of the model for the pricing kernel  and for cash-flow dynamics. In particular, the CC
specification for cash-flows is assumed to be
∆+1 =  + +1

(103)

∆+1 =  +   + +1

(104)

 = ( −  ) +  − 

(105)

+1  +1 ∼  (0 1) 

(106)

Notice that the specification contains no long-run risk component in consumption growth,
  or stochastic consumption volatility.
The external habit preferences imply a stochastic discount factor taking the form
+1


µ

+1 +1
= 
 
 − 
≡



¶−

where  is referred to as the “surplus consumption ratio”. BGT follow CC and specify a

93

process for ln  =  as heteroskedastic and persistent:
+1 = (1 −  )  +   +  ( ) +1 
where  and  are primitive parameters and where

 ( ) =

½

1


0

q
¡
¢
1 − 2  − 

 ≤ max

  max



The remaining parameters are defined by the Campbell-Cochrane model as

1 − 
¡ ¢2 i
1h

1− 
≡ +
2

 ≡  
max

r

Campbell and Cochrane (1999) provide a detailed explanation of the motivation behind
this specification. In particular, it delivers a slow moving habit that drives risk-premia and
long-horizon predictability of excess stock returns while maintaining a constant risk-free rate.
With this specification for +1 and cash-flow dynamics, the BGT procedure can be applied
in the same manner as described above for the LRR model. Notice that the procedure is
again fully structural in that it imposes a specific functional form for the habit function, as
well as a specification of the law of motion for the driving variables (103)-(106). I discuss
results below.

8.2

Flexible Estimation of Habit Preferences with Unrestricted
Dynamics

Another approach to estimating more general classes of habit models is to employ procedures
that place as few restrictions as possible on the specification of the habit function and no
parametric restrictions on the law of motion for consumption. This is reasonable if we want
to evaluate the idea that habits may be important, even if the specific functional forms
assumed in particular models are incorrect.
This section discusses Chen and Ludvigson (2009) who take this type of approach by
letting the data dictate the functional form of the habit function while employing an estimation procedure that leaves the law of motion for the data unspecified. The objective is to

94

evaluates a general class of habit-based asset pricing models, placing as few restrictions as
possible on the specification of the habit and no parametric restrictions on the law of motion
for consumption. As in the application of EZW utility discussed above (Chen, Favilukis, and
Ludvigson (2007)), estimation and testing are conducted by applying the Sieve Minimum
Distance procedure to a set of Euler equations corresponding to the habit-based framework.
In this case the sieve part of the SMD procedure requires that the unknown function embedded in the Euler equations (here the habit function) be approximated by a sequence of
flexible parametric functions.
Using stationary quarterly data on consumption growth, assets returns and instruments,
Chen and Ludvigson (CL) apply the SMD procedure to estimate all the unknown parameters of interest in the Euler equations underlying the optimal consumption choice of an
investor with access to  asset payoﬀs. In addition to being robust to misspecification of
the functional form of the habit and the law of motion for the underlying fundamentals, the
SMD procedure estimates the unknown habit function consistently at some nonparametric
rate. The procedure also provides estimates of the finite dimensional parameters, here the
curvature of the power utility function and the subjective time-discount factor; these esti√
mates converge at rate  (where  is the sample size) and are asymptotically normally
distributed.
The asset pricing model estimated by CL comes from the first-order conditions for optimal
consumption choice for an investor with access to  asset returns:
∙
¸
+1
+1 = 1
 


 = 1  

(107)

Referring back to (102), we see that the resulting  equations yield a set of conditional
moment restrictions containing a vector of unknown parameters, ( )0 , and a single unknown
habit function  =  (  −1   − ).
Since consumption is trending over time, it is necessary to transform the model to use
stationary observations on consumption growth. CL address this problem by assuming that
the unknown habit function  =  (  −1   − ) can be written as
 =  

µ

−1
−
 



¶



(108)

where  : R → R is an unknown function of the gross growth rates of consumption, with
domain space reduced by one dimension relative to . Note that  now replaces  as the
95

unknown function to be estimated along with ( ) using the Euler equations (107) and
the SMD procedure. As shown below, this assumption allows one to express the stochastic discount factor, +1 , as a function of gross growth rates in consumption, which are
plausibly stationary. One way to motivate (108) is to presume that the original function
 =  (  −1   − ) is homogeneous of degree one, which allows the function to be
re-written as

¶
µ
−1
−

 
 =   1



(109)

and redefined as in (108). The homogeneous of degree one assumption is consistent with
the habit models studied in the asset pricing literature cited above, including the nonlinear
habit specification investigated in Campbell and Cochrane (1999).
When the habit stock is a homogeneous of degree one function of current and past
consumption, marginal utility,  , takes the form


µ
µ
¶¶−
−1
−
1−
=
 
(110)


" 
#
µ
¶− µ
µ
¶¶−
X




+
+−1
+−
+

1−

 
−− 

+
+

=0
−

where,
⎧ ³
´
+−
+−1
⎪
⎪



⎪
+
⎨  +

+
=
⎪
´ P
³
´
³

⎪
⎪
⎩  −1   − −   −1   − −
=1






∀ 6= 0
(111)
=0

In the expression directly above,  denotes the derivative of  with respect to its −th
argument.
To obtain an estimable expression for the unknown parameters of interest α = (  )0 ,
the Euler equations (107) must be rearranged so that the conditional expectation  (·) appears only on the outside of the conditional moment restrictions. Their are several equivalent
expressions of this form; here I present one. Denote the true values of the parameters with
an “” subscript: α = (       )0 . Combining (110) and (107), and rearranging terms, we
find a set of  conditional moment conditions:


(Ã



µ

+1


¶− 

!

z+1 +1 − 1 Φ+1
96

)

= 0

 = 1  

(112)

where

z+1

⎛ ³
³
´´− 

1 −  +1
  +1−
+1
⎜
∙
³
´´− 
≡⎝
P  ³ +1+ ´−  ³
++1−
+
1
−

−



 +1+
=0 
+1
+1+
Φ+1

+1+
+1

⎛ ³
³
´´− 
−
−1
1 −     
⎜
∙
³
´´− 
≡⎝
P  ³ + ´−  ³
+−
+−1
1
−

−




=0 

+
+

We may write (112) more compactly as

 { (z+1         )|w∗ } = 0

 = 1  

+


⎞

¸ ⎟ Φ 
⎠ +1
⎞

¸ ⎟
⎠

(113)

where z+1 is a vector containing all observations used to estimate the conditional moment
(112) at time ,  is defined as
 (z+1         ) ≡

Ã



µ

+1


¶− 

!

z+1 +1 − 1 Φ+1 

and the conditional expectation in (57) is taken with respect to agents’ information set at
time , denoted w∗ .
Let w be a  × 1 observable subset of w∗ that does not contain a constant. Equation
(57) implies
 { (z+1         )|w } = 0

 = 1  

(114)

Given the theoretical restrictions implied by (114), the rest of the procedure is similar
to that described above for the EZW estimation in CFL. The econometric model is again
semiparametric, in the sense that it contains both finite and infinite dimensional parameters
to be estimated.

8.3

Econometric Findings

BGT apply the simulated method of moments procedure to estimate and test the CC model
using the same observation equation and moments (defined by score functions) used to
evaluate the LRR model. An advantage of this approach is that the Chi-Squared specification
tests are comparable across models. BGT find that the Campbell-Cochrane specification is
not rejected, according to this 2 criterion. The persistence of the log surplus consumption
97

ratio,   is close to unity, as in the Campbell and Cochrane (1999) calibration, and the
curvature parameter  is precisely estimated and close to 0.84, somewhat lower than the
value of  = 2 in their calibration. BGT conduct a number of other tests in order to
contrast their estimated versions of the LRR model and the CC habit model.
For most of these tests, BGT find that the estimated CC habit model and the estimated
LRR model have very similar implications. They both imply about the same fraction of
variability in the price-dividend ratio that is attributable to expected returns versus expected
dividend growth rates. They find about the same degree of forecastability of consumption
growth and dividend growth by the consumption-wealth ratios of each estimated model.
And they find about the same degree of forecastability of the long-horizon stock return by
the log dividend-price ratio. On one dimension they find clearer diﬀerences: estimates of a
consumption beta (formed from regressions of returns on consumption growth) model are
high in the habit model, about 4.19, whereas they are much lower, equal to 0.52, in the
LRR model. These values are computed from simulations of each model at the estimated
parameter values. The same consumption beta parameter estimated from the data is 0.79.
Turning to the semiparametric approach, CL estimate all the unknown parameters of
the flexible habit asset pricing model, and conduct statistical tests of hypotheses regarding
the functional form of the unknown habit as well as statistical tests for whether an internal
habit versus external habit specification better describes the data. The empirical results
suggest that the habit is a substantial fraction of current consumption—about 97 percent on
average—echoing the specification of Campbell and Cochrane (1999) in which the steady-state
habit-consumption ratio exceeds 94 percent.
CL find that the SMD estimated habit function is concave and generates positive intertemporal marginal rate of substitution in consumption. The SMD estimated subjective
time-discount factor about 0.99. The estimated power utility curvature parameter is estimated to be about 0.80 for three diﬀerent combinations of instruments and asset returns, a
value that is remarkably similar to that found by BGT in the estimation of the CampbellCochrane model. CL also develop a statistical test of the hypothesis of linearity and find
that the functional form of the habit is better described as nonlinear rather than linear. To
address the issue of external versus internal habit, CL derive a conditional moment restriction that nests the internal and external nonlinear habit function, under the assumption that
both functions are specified over current and lagged consumption with the same finite lag
length. The empirical results indicate that the data are better described by internal habit
98

formation than external habit formation.
Finally, CL compare the estimated habit model’s ability to fit a cross-section of equity
returns with that of other asset pricing models, both quantitatively and in formal statistical terms using the White reality check method discussed above. CL evaluate the SMDestimated habit model and several competing asset pricing models by employing the model
comparison distance metrics recommended in Hansen and Jagannathan (1997) (the so-called
HJ distance and the HJ+ distance), where all the models are treated as SDF proxies to the
unknown truth. In particular, the SMD-estimated internal habit model is compared to (i)
the SMD-estimated external habit model, (ii) the three-factor asset pricing model of Fama
and French (1993), (iii) the “scaled” consumption Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) of
Lettau and Ludvigson (2001b), (iv) the classic CAPM of Sharpe (1964) and Lintner (1965),
and (v) the classic consumption CAPM of Breeden (1979) and Breeden and Litzenberger
(1978). Doing so, they find that a SMD-estimated internal habit model can better explain
a cross-section of size and book-market sorted equity returns, both economically and in a
statistically significant way, than the other five competing models.

8.4

Debate

BGT and BKYb provide evidence directly challenging the Campbell Cochrane habit model.
As noted above, BGT estimate consumption betas for both the CC habit model and the
LRR model and find that the beta of the latter is much closer to the beta in the data. The
reason for this diﬀerence is that the compensation for short-term consumption risk is small in
the LRR model, because most of the risk premium is generated by the long-run component
 . This leads to a small consumption beta, more in line with the data.
BKYb further argue that the data provide little evidence of forecastability of pricedividend ratios by contemporaneous consumption growth, consistent with the LRR model.
This is because the LRR model’s state variables are expectations of future consumption
growth and volatility. They emphasize that the Campbell-Cochrane habit model generates a
backward looking state variable for asset prices that implies strong forecastability of future
price-dividend ratios by current consumption growth rates. BGT report a similar finding:
in the estimated Campbell-Cochrane habit model the log price-dividend ratio is related to
both current and lagged consumption growth, whereas there is little such relation in the data.
These results suggest that the Campbell-Cochrane habit model implies too much correlation
between asset prices and past consumption values.
99

Brunnermeier and Nagel (2008) question habit formation from a diﬀerent perspective.
They note that those habit formation models that generate time-varying risk aversion imply
that, as liquid wealth increases, agents become less risk averse and therefore should invest
proportionally more in risky assets such as stocks. Using data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, they study how households’ portfolio allocation decisions change with liquid
wealth. They find little relation between the two for households who already participate in
the stock market. This evidence is important because it is directed at the key channel for
generating time-varying risk-premia in habit models: fluctuations in risk-aversion, which in
turn generate fluctuations in the demand for risky securities. The household data studied
by Brunnermeier and Nagel (2008) apparently provides little support for this mechanism.

9

Asset Pricing With Heterogeneous Consumers and
Limited Stock Market Participation

So far we have been studying theories in which the pricing kernel is specified as a function
of the consumption of a representative agent for some group, typically all households in
the economy. In these models agents are either identical or any heterogeneous risks are
perfectly insurable, so that assets can be priced as if there were a representative investor
who consumed the per capita aggregate expenditure level.
A separate strand of the literature has argued that asset prices are determined by the behavior of heterogeneous agents, and that this heterogeneity plays a role in the pricing kernel.
Constantinides and Duﬃe (1996) demonstrate a set of theoretical propositions showing that,
when markets are incomplete (so that heterogeneous shocks are not perfectly insurable), any
observed joint process of aggregate consumption and returns can be an equilibrium outcome
if the second moments of the cross-sectional distribution of consumption growth and asset
returns covary in the right way. In particular, the model can explain a higher equity premium
and Sharpe ratio with lower risk aversion than the complete markets (representative agent)
counterpart if the cross-sectional variance of consumption is countercyclical and negatively
related to aggregate consumption growth.33 Others have emphasized that not everyone owns
stocks, and that stock prices are determined by stockholders. Researchers have explored the
role of limited stock market participation in explaining stock return data (Mankiw and Zeldes
(1991), Vissing-Jorgensen (2002), Guvenen (2003)).
33

Mankiw (1986) makes the same point in a simpler theoretical model.

100

Because the estimation and testing of incomplete markets and/or limited participation
models requires disaggregated, household-level data that often has a short time-series dimension and is subject to significant measurement error, the literature has progressed slowly
in evaluating these models empirically relative to the representative agent formulations discussed above. I discuss the findings of a few studies here, and note the importance of future
research as more and better data are amassed.
Using household level income data, Storesletten, Telmer, and Yaron (2004) found strong
evidence of countercyclical variation in idiosyncratic income risk. Because households’ can
save, this is not the same as countercyclical variation in individual consumption risk, something required by heterogeneous-agent models if they are to improve upon the asset pricing
implications of their representative agent counterparts. For example, in the heterogeneous
agent model of (Constantinides and Duﬃe (1996)), in order to explain the equity premium
with lower risk aversion than its representative agent counterpart, the conditional variance
of idiosyncratic consumption risk must vary inversely with the aggregate stock market, so
that equities are an unattractive form of precautionary wealth.
To investigate the importance of heterogeneity in driving asset prices, several studies have
estimated models on household-level consumption data using the Consumer Expenditure
Survey (CEX). Because this survey has a limited panel element, researchers have instead
focused on the cross-sectional implications of the model.
Brav, Constantinides, and Geczy (2002), Cogley (2002) and Vissing-Jorgensen (2002)
derive representations of the model that rely only on cross-sectional moments of consumption
growth. To see how this may be accomplished, consider  households indexed by . Let
 denote the log growth rate in household ’s consumption,  :
 ≡ log ( −1 ) 
Denote also the intertemporal marginal rate of substitution (MRS) in consumption as
 =  ( ) 
With power utility, the MRS is
 ( ) =  exp (− ) 

101

>From the first-order condition for optimal consumption choice, the Euler equation holds
for each household 
 [ (+1 ) (+1 )] = 1

 = 1  ;  = 1  

(115)

This implies that the MRS of any household is a valid stochastic discount factor. Since
any household’s MRS is a valid stochastic discount factor, so is the average MRS across
households. Thus, we may take cross-sectional average of (115), to derive no-arbitrage
restrictions for the th traded asset return taking the form



"Ã

#
!

1 X
 (+1 ) +1 = 1
 =1

(116)

Using the law of iterated expectations, (116) holds unconditionally



"Ã

!
#

1 X
 (+1 ) (1 + +1 ) = 1
 =1

(117)

The formulations in (116) or (117) are useful because they allow for the use of repeated
cross-sections when empirically evaluating the model. This is important if the household
level data have, as they do, a limited panel dimension with a short time-series element.
Brav, Constantinides, and Geczy (2002) point out that (116) and (117) are still subject
P
to measurement error because, under power utility, each term in the sum 1 
=1  (+1 )

is  (+1  )−  These terms are raised to a large power if the coeﬃcient  is high,
implying that a small amount of measurement error in  can lead to a large amount of
specification error in the econometric asset pricing model. It is therefore useful to consider
a Taylor series expansion of the pricing kernel in (116). Brav, Constantinides, and Geczy
(2002), and Cogley (2002) approximate  ( ) with a third-order polynomial in  . Let
 denote the cross-sectional mean consumption growth at time 

1 X
 
 ≡
 =1

Expanding around  delivers
 ( ) ≈  ( )+ 0 ( ) ( −  )+(12)  00 ( ) ( −  )2 +(16)  000 ( ) ( −  )3 
102

Taking the cross-sectional average of this expanded pricing kernel at each date leads to

1 X
 (+1 ) ≈  ( ) + (12)  00 ( ) 2 + (16)  000 ( ) 3 
 =1

where 2 and 3 denote the second and third cross-sectional moments of consumption
growth, respectively:

2


1 X
=
( −  )2 
 =1

3 =


1 X
( −  )3 
 =1

Under complete markets, agents equate their intertemporal marginal rates of substitution
in consumption state-by-state, so that higher order cross-sectional moments other than the
first do not enter the pricing kernel and do not matter for asset prices.
Brav, Constantinides, and Geczy (2002), Cogley (2002) and Vissing-Jorgensen (2002)
focus on specifications with power utility,
 ( ) =  exp (− ) 
implying

£
¡
¢
¡
¢
¤
1 X
 ( ) ≈  exp (− ) 1 +  2 2 2 −  3 6 3 
 =1

f :
Denote the third-order expanded pricing kernel based on (118) as 

£
¡
¢
¡
¢
¤
f+1 ≡  exp (− ) 1 +  2 2 2 −  3 6 3 


(118)

(119)

Risk-premia in this model depend on cov(
e +1  +1 )  which equals

¢£
¡
¤¢
¢
¡ ¡
¡
¢
¡
¢
cov (
e +1  +1 ) = cov log  exp −+1 1 +  2 2 2+1 −  3 6 3+1  +1 

(120)

e +1  +1 )  0 and it provides insurance when cov (
e +1  +1 ) 
An asset is risky when cov (
0. Equation (120) implies assets that covary positively with cross-sectional consumption

variance (across groups) and/or negatively with cross-sectional skewness will have lower
risk-premia than assets that covary negatively (or less positively) with cross-sectional con103

sumption variance and/or positively (or less negatively) with skewness. Intuitively, returns
that covary negatively with cross-sectional consumption inequality are risky because they
unattractive as a store of precautionary balances: they pay oﬀ poorly when idiosyncratic
consumption risk is high.
Brav, Constantinides, and Geczy (2002), Cogley (2002) estimate nonlinear Euler equations  [+1 +1 ] = 1 using estimates of (119) from the CEX along with data on aggregate
equity returns. Their objective is to assess whether the models are able to account for the
observed equity premium, at lower levels of risk aversion, than the complete markets counterpart where the higher-order cross-sectional moments play no role in the pricing kernel.
Vissing-Jorgensen (2002) estimates a log-linearized version of the conditional Euler equation,
conditional on time  information. She focuses on estimating the parameter .
Vissing-Jorgensen (2002) reports findings for  −1 , which she interprets as an estimate only
of the EIS, rather than the inverse of risk-aversion. She points out that if preferences are
not of the power utility form but are instead of the EZW form, estimation of the conditional
log-linearized Euler equation, which involves a regression of consumption growth onto log
asset returns, provides an estimate of the EIS but is not informative about risk-aversion. She
notes that the Euler equation should hold for a given household only if that household holds a
nonzero position in the asset so that including the consumption of non-asset holders in Euler
equation estimates will lead to inconsistent estimates of the EIS, which will be downward
biased when the consumption growth of nonasset holders does not covary with predictable
return movements at all. Distinguishing between assetholders and non-assetholders using the
CEX, she finds estimates of the EIS that are larger than those obtained in some estimates
using aggregate data, equal to 0.3-0.4 for stockholders and 0.08-1.0 for bondholders. But she
also finds that her results are largely unchanged using a pricing kernel comprised of per-capita
average consumption of stockholders, suggesting that what matters most for her findings is
the stockholder status distinction, rather than the higher-order cross-sectional moments of
consumption that are a feature of the pricing kernel when markets are incomplete.
Brav, Constantinides, and Geczy (2002), and Cogley (2002) investigate the same data
but reach diﬀerent conclusions. Brav, Constantinides, and Geczy (2002) find that both the
average MRS across households, as appears in (116), as well as a third-order expansion of this
average, as appears in (119), are valid pricing kernels (the Euler equation restrictions are not
rejected using these kernels), and both kernels are able to explain all of the observed equity
premium with a coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion  of three or four. By contrast, Cogley
104

(2002) finds that the pricing kernel based on the third-order expansion can only explain about
a third of the observed equity premium when the coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion is less
than 5. In a separate result, Brav, Constantinides, and Geczy (2002) explore representative
stockholder versions of the pricing kernel, where the SDF is expressed in terms of the per
capita average growth rate for stockholders who report a certain threshold of assets owned.
This is diﬀerent from the approach described above because the pricing kernel here depends
on the growth in mean consumption for anyone classified as an assetholder, rather than mean
of consumption growth across all households. They find that, for threshold-wealth values
between $20,000 and $40,000, the representative stockholder version of the model explains
the equity premium for values of RRA between 10 and 15.
It is unclear what the reasons are for the diﬀerence in results reported in Brav, Constantinides, and Geczy (2002), and Cogley (2002), but there are at least two possibilities. First,
the two studies use diﬀerent samples. Brav, Constantinides, and Geczy (2002) use a sample
that covers the period from the first quarter of 1982 to the first quarter of 1996. Cogley
(2002) uses a sample that runs from the second quarter of 1980 through the fourth quarter of
1994. Second, the papers employ diﬀerent ways of dealing with measurement error. In particular, Brav, Constantinides, and Geczy (2002) assume multiplicative measurement error in
the level of consumption and trim the sample of outliers in household consumption growth.
Cogley (2002) assumes additive measurement error in the growth of consumption and makes
an analytical adjustment to the equity premium estimates to account for this error, but does
not trim the sample. Brav, Constantinides, and Geczy (2002) attempt to mitigate measurement error by deleting a household’s consumption growth if the increase in this growth
from one quarter to the next is greater than a certain threshold (if  −1  12 and
+1   2), and they delete any consumption growth if it is greater than five. Both
studies delete households for which there is no information in consecutive quarters about
consumption. These considerations suggest that results may be sensitive to the treatment
of measurement error.
To mitigate measurement error, a number of recent papers have sought diﬀerent approaches to aggregating the Euler equations of individual households. For example, instead
of taking cross-sectional averages of (115), which results in a pricing kernel that is the equally

105

weighted average of household marginal rates of substitution

+1

¶−
µ

1 X
+1
=


 =1


(121)

one could take cross-sectional averages of both sides of
£ −
¤
+1 
( )− =  +1
resulting in

"

1 =  

P

1

1


−
=1 +1
+1
P
−


=1

#

and implying a pricing kernel taking the form
=1 = 

P

1

1


−
=1 +1

P
−
=1 

(122)

The kernel above is the ratio of average marginal utilities rather than the average of the
ratio of marginal utilities. Balduzzi and Yao (2007), Kocherlakota and Pistaferri (2009), and
Semenov (2010) use pricing kernels of this form.
Kocherlakota and Pistaferri (2009) argue that (122) is less subject to measurement error
than (121) because, if there is stationary multiplicative measurement error  in the level of
∗
= exp ( )   then (121) is equal to the
consumption, so that measured consumption 

true average MRS discount factor multiplied times a constant, whereas (122) is unaﬀected
by this form of measurement error as long as  is stationary and exp (− )  ∞.34 Notice
however, that measurement error of this form cannot explain the conflicting results in Brav,
Constantinides, and Geczy (2002) and (Cogley (2002)), because the kernel (121) used in
these papers diﬀers from the true average only by a constant. It is therefore still a valid
pricing kernel for return diﬀerentials like the equity premium even if it is invalid for the level
of returns.
Balduzzi and Yao (2007) use the CEX and find that a pricing kernel of the form (122)
can reduce the (annualized) unexplained equity premium to zero when  = 10 whereas a
representative agent pricing kernel (equal to the MRS of per capita, aggregate CEX con34

Kocherlakota and Pistaferri (2009) show that the measured version of (122) is the same as its theoretical
counterpart multiplied by the ratio  (exp (−+1 ))  (exp (− ))  Given stationarity of  , this ratio is
a finite constant as long as  (exp (− )) is finite.

106

sumption) implies an unexplained premium of between 8% and 10% for the same level of
risk aversion. An RRA coeﬃcient of 10 is higher than the values of 3 or 4 that Brav, Constantinides, and Geczy (2002) found was required to explain the equity premium using the
third-order approximation to (121) as a pricing kernel. By contrast, Kocherlakota and Pistaferri (2009) find that a representative agent pricing kernel can explain all of the observed
equity premium if  is around 58, but not if it is smaller, while there is no value of  (positive
or negative) for which the pricing kernel (122) using CEX data is capable of explaining the
equity premium. It is again not clear why these results seem to diﬀer so much, except to
note the diﬀerent CEX samples used: Balduzzi and Yao (2007) study the period 1982-1995,
while Kocherlakota and Pistaferri (2009) study the period 1980-2004.
Kocherlakota and Pistaferri (2009) also study a diﬀerent pricing kernel based on the idea
that the incomplete markets pricing kernel (122) may be too restrictive if in fact agents
have access to forms of insurance (such as government or informal social networks) against
idiosyncratic productivity shocks. They develop a pricing kernel that is valid in models
where agents have private information about their labor eﬀort but a government provides
Pareto optimal allocations. This kernel diﬀers from both the representative agent and the
incomplete markets kernel (122) and equals  times the th moment of the cross-sectional
distribution of consumption at time  to that at time  + 1. They find that, for  = 5, this
pricing kernel (estimated on CEX data) is able to explain all of the equity premium.
Finally, Semenov (2010) uses the CEX data to study a pricing kernel based on (122).
Instead of employing (122) directly, he takes a -th order Taylor expansion of the numerator
and denominator around average consumption. He uses the ratio of these linear expansions
as a pricing kernel and motivates its use by giving an empirical example under which the
resulting kernel is less subject to measurement error than is (122). He finds that this alternative kernel can explain the observed equity premium with a value for  of three or lower,
especially as he restricts attention to households with higher wealth thresholds.
One aspect of these data that is not typically addressed is that the diﬀerent sub-groups of
households, which diﬀer according to whether a household is classified as a stockholder or not,
or by diﬀerent wealth-threshold levels, contain diﬀerent numbers of observations. They are
therefore subject to diﬀerent degrees of measurement error. For example, there are far more
nonstockholders, according to any of the several methods for identifying stockholder status
typically employed, than there are stockholders in the CEX sample. This implies that the
consumption of stockholders (once aggregated) will be more subject to measurement error
107

than will be the consumption of nonstockholders and especially more subject to measurement
error than the per capita consumption of all households. For that reason alone, stockholder
consumption will be more volatile than nonstockholder consumption. It follows that, without
some adjustment for the heterogeneity in measurement error caused by diﬀerent sample sizes,
the cross-sectional moments of consumption are not comparable across sub-groups.
To the best of my knowledge this has been addressed in only one paper, namely the
working paper version of Malloy, Moskowitz, and Vissing-Jorgensen (2009). These authors
provide a procedure for adjusting the consumption moments of diﬀerent sub-groups for differences in the size of the cross-section of each group. The adjustments matter substantially.
For example, without adjustments, the standard deviation of quarterly consumption growth
of stockholders is 0.034, or 4.9 times as volatile as quarterly aggregate consumption growth.
With adjustments, the standard deviation of quarterly stockholder consumption growth is
0.018, or 2.6 times as volatile as aggregate consumption. Future empirical work should
explicitly account for the diﬀerences in the size of the cross-section of each group when
comparing asset pricing results for diﬀerent pricing kernels defined over the consumption of
diﬀerent groups.
It is diﬃcult to draw general conclusions from the results in this section. The mixed
results seem to depend sensitively on a number of factors, including the sample, the empirical design, on the method for handling and modeling measurement error, the form of
cross-sectional aggregation of Euler equations across heterogeneous agents, and the implementation, if any, of linear approximation of the pricing kernel. A tedious but productive
task for future work will be to carefully control for all of these factors in a single empirical
study, so that researchers may better assess whether the household consumption heterogeneity we can measure in the data has the characteristics needed to explain asset return
data.

10

Conclusion

We have learned much from the progress made over the last 15 years in consumption-based
asset pricing. In contrast to the standard consumption-based model derived from a representative agent with power utility preferences, we now have several reasonable frameworks
for understanding the high and time-varying equity market risk premium, the excess volatility of stock markets, and for better understanding the cross-sectional dispersion in average
108

returns. These findings and others have reinvigorated interest in consumption-based asset
pricing, spawning a new generation of leading consumption-based asset pricing theories.
As the large and growing body of empirical work summarized here indicates, none of
the models in this newer generation are likely to explain all features of the data. Tests of
scaled multifactor consumption-based models suggest that a pricing kernel that is an approximately linear but state-dependent function of consumption growth performs substantially
better than a state-independent counterpart, but other results suggest that some theoretical
restrictions implied by these models may not be satisfied. Models with habits show promise
in explaining the dynamics of the equity premium and, in some studies, the cross-section
of average returns, but they also seem to imply too much correlation between stock market
valuation ratios and current and past consumption. Models with recursive preferences, when
combined with long-run consumption risk, do a better job of matching asset return data than
a counterpart without long-run risk and/or with power utility, but they also have diﬃculty
generating significant time-variation in the equity risk-premium, especially when parameters
of the stochastic consumption volatility process are calibrated to estimates warranted from
consumption data. Heterogeneity in stock market participation and in idiosyncratic risk
produces a far richer array of asset pricing implications than does the standard model, but
direct empirical tests of these models often lead to conflicting results. Finally, despite the
important progress these models represent, leading consumption-based theories (including
those based on habits, long-run risk, and/or limited stock market participation), often fail
to explain the mispricing of the standard model. This result implies that these models are
still missing an important feature of the data involving the joint dynamics of consumption
and asset returns.
For the most part, empirical analysis of these models has adhered to the long-standing
convention of employing statistical tests of the null of correct specification against the alternative of incorrect specification. I have argued here that asking whether a model is perfectly
specified is the wrong question, or at least not the only relevant question. All models are
abstractions of reality and the data we use to test them are measured with error. Misspecified models may still oﬀer central insights that help us interpret important aspects of the
data even if they don’t explain all aspects. How shall we judge models when we are prepared
to accept the premise that none are perfectly specified? One approach to this problem is to
focus on quantifying specification error and comparing this error across competing specifications, rather than focusing exclusively or primarily on testing whether individual models
109

are free of any specification error. This chapter discussed one such test that can be applied
across a range of asset pricing applications. More work is needed to develop procedures for
uncovering superior specifications that potentially combine elements from several models.
This chapter did not have space to cover the burgeoning literature on rare consumption
disasters as an explanation of stock market behavior. The formal empirical analysis of this
paradigm is in its infancy, if for no other reason that it is hard to make precise statistical
inferences from the very few (if any) data points in our sample that by definition represent
rare disasters. As a consequence, most recent work in this area is purely theoretical, in which
the probability of a disaster is calibrated to match certain features of asset return data, without being informed by evidence on disasters in consumption data.35 An exception is Barro
(2006), who argues that it is possible to explain the equity premium in the standard model
with low risk aversion, once the probability of a disaster is calibrated to match international
data on large economic declines. Subsequent empirical studies have questioned the role of
rare events in explaining the equity premium, especially if agents are restricted to have low
risk-aversion.36
In the future researchers will almost certainly find increasingly creative ways to econometrically test the validity and performance of models with rare disasters as a primary feature.
However this empirical evidence turns out, the allowance for disasters in standard models of
risk provides an example of how superior specifications may potentially be obtained by combining elements of several consumption-based models. An example of this approach can be
found in the work of Wachter (2010), who combines recursive preferences with a time-varying
probability of disaster. Time-varying disaster probabilities produce time-varying discount
rates, and therefore generate empirically plausible forecastability of the equity premium and
excess volatility of the stock market. The time-varying disaster probability thereby enhances
the ability of models with recursive preferences to explain these features of the data relative to the specifications discussed above. An important unresolved question is whether the
time-varying disaster probabilities we can measure empirically from consumption data have
35

See for example Longstaﬀ and Piazzesi (2004), Gourio (2008), Martin (2008), Gabaix (2009) and Wachter
(2010).
36
Backus, Chernov, and Martin (2010) use a macro-finance model to impute the distribution of consumption growth from the observed behavior of options prices, which contain information about how market
participants view extreme events. They find smaller probabilities of extreme outcomes than what is estimated from the Barro international data. Julliard and Ghosh (2010) estimate the consumption Euler
equations of the standard model allowing explicitly for the probabilities attached to diﬀerent states to diﬀer
from their sample frequencies. They find the model is still rejected and requires a high level of risk aversion
to explain the equity premium.

110

the characteristics needed to explain these features of asset markets, and more.

111

References
Abel, A. B. (1990): “Asset Prices Under Habit Formation and Catching Up With the
Jones,” American Economic Review, 80, 38—42.
(1999): “Risk Premia and Term Premia in General Equilibrium,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 43, 3—33.
Ai, C., and X. Chen (2007): “Estimation of Possibly Misspecified Semiparametric Conditional Moment Restriction Models with Diﬀerent Conditioning Variables,” Journal of
Econometrics, 141, 5—43.
Ai, H., M. M. Croce, and K. Li (2010): “Toward a Quantitative General Equilibrium
Asset Pricing Model with Intangible Capital,” Unpublished paper, UNC Kenan-Flagler
Business School.
Altonji, J. G., and L. M. Segal (1996): “Small-Sample Bias in GMM Estimation of
Covariance Structures,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 14, 353—66.
An, S., and F. Schorfheide (2007): “Bayesian Analysis of DSGE Models,” Econometric
Reviews, 26(2-4), 113—172.
Andrieu, C., A. Doucet, and R. Holenstein (2010): “Particle Markov Chain Monet
Carlo with Discussion,” Journal of Royal Statistical Society Series B, 72, 269—342.
Ang, A., and G. Bekaert (2007): “Stock Return Predictability: Is it There?,” Review of
Financial Studies, 20(3), 651—707.
Anthony Smith, J. (1993): “Estimating Nonlinear Time-Series Models Using Simulated
Vector Autoregressions,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 8, S63—S84.
Attanasio, O., and G. Weber (1989): “Intertemporal Substitution, Risk Aversion and
the Euler Equation for Consumption,” The Economic Journal, 99, 59—73.
Backus, D., M. Chernov, and I. Martin (2010): “Disasters Implied By Equity Index
Options,” Unpublished paper, New York University.

112

Balduzzi, P., and T. Yao (2007): “Testing Heterogeneous-agent Models: An Alternative
Aggregation Approach,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54, 369—412.
Bansal, R., R. F. Dittmar, and D. Kiku (2009): “Cointegration and Consumption Risk
in Equity Returns,” Review of Financial Studies, 22, 1343—1375.
Bansal, R., R. F. Dittmar, and C. T. Lundblad (2005): “Consumption, Dividends,
and the Cross-Section of Equity Returns,” Journal of Finance, 60(4), 1639—1672.
Bansal, R., A. R. Gallant, and G. Tauchen (2007): “Rational Pessimism, Rational
Exuberance, and Asset Pricing Models,” Review of Economic Studies, 74, 1005—1033.
Bansal, R., D. Kiku, and A. Yaron (2007a): “A Note on the Economics and Statistics
of Predictability,” Unpublished paper, Fuqua School, Duke University.
(2007b): “Risks for the Long-Run: Estimation and Inference,” Unpublished paper,
Fuqua School, Duke University.
(2009): “Empirical Evaluation of the Long-Run Risks Model for Asset Prices,”
Unpublished paper, Fuqua School, Duke University.
Bansal, R., and A. Yaron (2004): “Risks for the Long-Run: A Potential Resolution of
Asset Pricing Puzzles,” Journal of Finance, 59(4), 1481—1509.
Barro, R. (2006): “Rare Disasters and Asset Markets in the Twentieth Century,” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, pp. 823—866.
Beaudry, P., and E. van Wincoop (1996): “The Intertemporal Elasticity of Sustitution:
An Exploration Using a U.S. Panel of States,” Economica, 63(251), 495—512.
Bidder, R., and M. E. Smith (2010): “Doubts and Variability,” Unpublished working
paper, New York University.
Boldrin, M., L. J. Christiano, and J. D. M. Fisher (2001): “Habit Persistence, Asset
Returns and the Business Cycle,” American Economic Review, 91(1), 149—166.
Brav, A., G. M. Constantinides, and C. C. Geczy (2002): “Asset Pricing with Heterogeneous Consumers and Limited Participation: Empirical Evidence,” Journal of Political
Economy, 110(4), 793—824.

113

Breeden, D. (1979): “An Intertemporal Asset Pricing Model with Stochastic Consumption
and Investment Opportunities,” Journal of Financial Economics, 7, 265—296.
Breeden, D., M. Gibbons, and R. Litzenberger (1989): “Empirical Tests of the
Consumption-Oriented CAPM,” Journal of Finance, 44, 231—262.
Breeden, D., and R. Litzenberger (1978): “Prices of State-Contingent Claims Implicit
in Option Prices,” Journal of Business, 51, 621—651.
Brunnermeier, M., and S. Nagel (2008): “Do Wealth Fluctuations Generate TimeVarying Risk Aversion? Micro-Evidence on Individuals’ Asset Allocation,” American
Economic Review, 98(3), 713—736.
Bui, M. P. (2007): “Long-run Risks and Long-run Predictability: A Comment,” Unpublished paper, Harvard University.
Campbell, J. Y. (1993): “Intertemporal Asset Pricing Without Consumption Data,”
American Economic Review, 83, 487—512.
(1996): “Understanding Risk and Return,” Journal of Political Economy, 104(2),
298—345.
(2003): “Consumption-Based Asset Pricing,” in Handbook of the Economics of
Finance Vol. I-B, ed. by G. Constantinides, M. Harris, and R. Stulz, pp. 803—887. Elsevier
Science B.V., North Holland, Amsterdam.
Campbell, J. Y., and J. Beeler (2009): “The Long-Run Risks Model and Aggregate
Asset Prices: An Empirical Assessment,” Unpublished paper, Harvard University.
Campbell, J. Y., and J. H. Cochrane (1999): “By Force of Habit: A ConsumptionBased Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy,
107, 205—251.
(2000): “Explaining the Poor Performance of Consumption-Based Asset Pricing
Models,” Journal of Finance, 55(6), 2863—2878.
Campbell, J. Y., A. W. Lo, and C. MacKinlay (1997): The Econometrics of Financial
Markets. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

114

Campbell, J. Y., and G. Mankiw (1989): “Consumption, Income, and Interest Rates:
Reinterpreting the Time Series Evidence,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual: 1989, ed.
by O. Blanchard, and S. Fischer, pp. 185—216. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Campbell, J. Y., C. Polk, and T. Voulteenaho (2005): “Growth or Glamour? Fundamentals and Systematic Risk in Stock Returns,” NBER Working Paper No. 11389.
Campbell, J. Y., and S. Thompson (2005): “Predicting the Equity Premium Out of
Sample: Can Anything Beat the Historical Average?,” NBER working paper No. 11468.
Campbell, J. Y., and L. Viceira (2001): Strategic Asset Allocation: Portfolio Choice for
Long-Term Investors. Oxford Univeristy Press, London, UK.
Chamberlain, G., and M. Rothschild (1983): “Arbitrage, Factor Structure, and MeanVariance Analysis on Large Asset Markets,” Econometrica, 51, 1281—1304.
Chen, X., J. Favilukis, and S. C. Ludvigson (2007): “An Estimation of Economic
Models with Recursive Preferences,” Unpublished paper, New York University.
Chen, X., and S. C. Ludvigson (2009): “Land of Addicts? An Empirical Investigation of
Habit-Based Asset Pricing Models,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 24(7), 1057—1093.
Clark, T. (2009): “Is the Great Moderation Over? An Empirical Investigation,” Economic
Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp. 5—42.
Cochrane, J. H. (1996): “A Cross-Sectional Test of an Investment-Base Asset Pricing
Model,” Journal of Political Economy, 104, 572—621.
(2005): Asset Pricing, Revised Edition. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
(2008): “The Dog That Did Not Bark: A Defense of Return Predictability,” Review
of Financial Studies, 21(4), 1533—1575.
Cogley, T. (2002): “Idiosyncratic Risk And The Equity Premium: Evidence From The
Consumer Expenditure Survey,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 49, 309—334.
Colacito, R., and M. M. Croce (2004): “Risks for the Long Run and the Real Exchange
Rate,” Unpublished paper, New York University.

115

Constantinides, G. M. (1990): “Habit-formation: A Resolution of the Equity Premium
Puzzle,” Journal of Political Economy, 98, 519—543.
Constantinides, G. M., and D. Duffie (1996): “Asset Pricing With Heterogeneous
Consumers,” Journal of Political Economy, 104, 219—40.
Constantinides, G. M., and A. Ghosh (2009): “The Cross-Section of Returns with
Regime Shifts in Consumption and Dividend Growth,” Unpublished paepr, University of
Chicago.
(2010a): “Asset Pricing Tests with Long-Run Risks in Consumption Growth,”
Unpublished paepr, University of Chicago.
(2010b): “The Predictability of Returns with Regime Shifts in Consumption and
Dividend Growth,” Unpublished paepr, University of Chicago.
Cornell, B. (1999): “Risk, Duration, and Capital Budgeting: New Evidence on Some Old
Questions,” The Journal of Business, 72, 183—200.
(2000): “Equity Duration, Growth Options and Asset Pricing,” The Journal of
Portfolio Management, 26, 105—111.
Creal, D. (2009): “A Survey of Sequential Monte Carlo Methods for Economics and Finance,” Unpublished paper, Booth School, University of Chicago.
Croce, M. M., M. Lettau, and S. C. Ludvigson (2010): “Investor Information, LongRun Risk and the Duration of Risky Cash Flows,” Unpublished paper, New York University.
Da, Z. (2005): “Cash Flow, Consumption Risk, and the Cross-Section of Stock Returns,”
Unpublished paper, Norwestern University.
Dai, Q. (2003): “Term Structure Dynamics in a Model with Stochastic Internal Habit,”
Unpublished paper, Stern School of Business, New York University.
Dechow, P. M., R. G. Sloan, and M. T. Soliman (2004): “Implied Equity Duration:
A New Measure of Equity Risk,” Review of Accounting Studies, 9, 197—228.
Del Negro, M., F. Schorfheide, F. Smets, and R. Wouters (2007): “On the Fit of
New Keynesian Models,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 25(2), 123—162.
116

Duffee, G. R. (2005): “Time Variation in the Covariances Between Stock Returns and
Consumption Growth,” Journal of Finance, 60(4), 1673—1712.
Epstein, L., and S. Zin (1989): “Substitution Risk Aversion and the Temporal Behavior of
Consumption and Asset Returns: A Theoretical Framework,” Econometrica, 57, 937—968.
(1991): “Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal Behavior of Consumption
and Asset Returns: An Empirical Investigation,” Journal of Political Economy, 99, 555—
576.
Fama, E. F., and K. R. French (1992): “The Cross-Section of Expected Returns,”
Journal of Finance, 47, 427—465.
(1993): “Common Risk Factors in the Returns on Stocks and Bonds,” Journal of
Financial Economics, 33, 3—56.
Fama, E. F., and J. MacBeth (1973): “Risk, Return and Equilibrium: Empirical Tests,”
Journal of Political Economy, 81, 607—636.
Fernández-Villaverde, J., and J. F. Rubio-Ramírez (2007): “How Structural Are
Structural Parameters?,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual: 2007, ed. by D. Acemoglu,
K. Rogoﬀ, and M. Woodford, vol. 22. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Ferson, W. E., and G. M. Constantinides (1991): “Habit Persistence and Durability
in Aggregate Consumption,” Journal of Financial Economics, 29, 199—240.
Ferson, W. E., and C. R. Harvey (1992): “Seasonality and Consumption-Based Asset
Pricing,” Journal of Finance, 47, 511—552.
Gabaix, X. (2009): “A Simple, Unified, Exactly Solved Framework For Ten Puzzles in
Macro-finance,” Unpublished paper, New York University.
Gallant, A. R., and G. Tauchen (1989): “Seminonparametric Estimation of Conditionally Constrained Heterogeneous Processes: Asset Pricing Applications,” Econometrica,
57(5), 1091—1120.
Gallant, R. A., D. Hsieh, and G. Tauchen (1997): “Estimation of Stochastic Volatility
Models with Diagnostics,” Journal of Econometrics, 81, 159—182.

117

Gallant, R. A., and G. Tauchen (1996): “Which Moments to Match?,” Econometric
Theory, 12, 657—681.
Garcia, R., N. Meddahi, and R. Tedongap (2008): “an Analytical Framework for
Assessing Asset Pricing Models and Predictability,” Unpublished paper, Edhec Business
School, Imperial College London.
Gibbons, M. R., S. A. Ross, and J. Shanken (1989): “A test of the Eﬃciency of a
Given Portfolio,” Econometrica, 57(5), 1121—1152.
Gourio, F. (2008): “Time-Series Predictability in a Disaster Model,” Unpublished paper,
Boston University.
Goyal, A., and I. Welch (2003): “Predicting the Equity Premium with Dividend Ratios,”
Management Science, 49(5), 639—654.
Grenander, U. (1981): Abstract Inference. Wiley Series, New York, NY.
Grossman, S. J., and R. J. Shiller (1981): “The Determinants of the Variability of
Stock Market Prices,” American Economic Review, 71, 222—227.
Guvenen, M. F. (2003): “A Parsimonious Macroeconomic Model for Asset Pricing: Habit
Formation or Cross-sectional Heterogeneity?,” Rochester Center for Economic Research
Working Paper No. 499.
Hall, R. E. (1988): “Intertemporal Substitution in Consumption,” Journal of Political
Economy, 96, 221—273.
Hansen, L. P. (1982): “Large Sample Properties of Generalized Methods of Moments
Estimators,” Econometrica, 50, 1029—54.
Hansen, L. P., J. Heaton, and N. Li (2008): “Consumption Strikes Back?: Measuring
Long-run Risk,” Journal of Political Economy, 116(2), 260—302.
Hansen, L. P., J. Heaton, and E. G. Luttmer (1995): “Econometric Evaluation of
Asset Pricing Models,” The Review of Financial Studies, 8(2), 238—274.
Hansen, L. P., J. Heaton, N. Roussanov, and J. Lee (2007): “Intertemporal Substitution and Risk Aversion,” in Handbook of Econometrics, ed. by J. Heckman, and E. Leamer,
vol. 6B. North Holland, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
118

Hansen, L. P., and R. Jagannathan (1991): “Restrictions on Intertemporal Marginal
Rates of Substitution Implied by Asset Returns,” Journal of Political Economy, 99, 225—
262.
(1997): “Assessing Specification Errors in Stochastic Discount Factor Models,”
Journal of Finance, 52, 557—590.
Hansen, L. P., and S. F. Richard (1987): “The Role of Condioning Information in
Deducing Testable Restrictions Implied by Dynamic Asset Pricing Models,” Econometrica,
55, 587—614.
Hansen, L. P., and T. J. Sargent (2006): “Fragile Beliefs and the Price of Model
Uncertainty,” Unpublished Paper, New York University.
Hansen, L. P., and K. Singleton (1982): “Generalized Instrumental Variables Estimation of Nonlinear Rational Expectations Models,” Econometrica, 50(5), 1269—86.
(1983): “Stochastic Consumption, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal Behavior of
Asset Returns,” Journal of Political Economy, 91, 249—65.
Harvey, C. R. (2001): “The Specification of Conditional Expectations,” Journal of Empirical Finance, 8(5), 573—638.
Heaton, J. (1995): “An Empirical Investigation of Asset Pricing with Temporally Dependent Preference Specifications,” Econometrica, 63, 681—717.
Hodrick, R., D. Ng, and P. Sengmueller (1998): “An International Dynamic Asset
Pricing Model,” Unpublished paper, Columbia University.
Jagannathan, R., and Z. Wang (1996): “The Conditional CAPM and the Cross-Section
of Expected Returns,” Journal of Finance, 51, 3—54.
Jermann, U. (1998): “Asset Pricing in Production Economies,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 41(2), 257—275.
Julliard, C., and A. Ghosh (2010): “Can Rare Events Explain the Equity Premium
Puzzle?,” Unpublished paper, London School of Economics.
Kan, R., and C. Robotti (2008): “Model Comparison Using the Hansen-Jagannathan
Distance,” Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
119

Kiku, D. (2005): “Is the Value Premium a Puzzle?,” Unpublished paper, Duke University.
Kim, J. (2010): “Evaluating Time-Series Restrictions for Cross-Sections of Expected Returns: Multifactor CCAPMs,” KAIST Business School Working Paper Series No. 2010006. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1635652.
Kocherlakota, N. R. (1990): “Disentangling the Coeﬃcient of Relative Risk Aversion
from the Elasticity of Intertemporal Substitution: An Irrelevance Result,” Journal of
Finance, 45(1), 175—190.
(1996): “The Equity Premium: It’s Still A Puzzle,” Journal of Economic Literature,
34, 42—68.
Kocherlakota, N. R., and L. Pistaferri (2009): “Asset Pricing Implications of Pareto
Optimality with Private Information,” Journal of Political Economy, 117(3), 555—590.
Kogan, L., and R. Uppal (2000): “Risk Aversion and Optimal Portfolio Policies in Partial
and General Equilibrium Economies,” Unpublished Paper, Sloan School of Management,
MIT.
Koijen, R. S. J., H. Lustig, and S. Van Nieuwerburgh (2010): “The Cross-Section
and Time-Series of Stock and Bond Returns,” Unpublished paper, New York Univeristy.
Koijen, R. S. J., and S. Van Nieuwerburgh (2010): “Predictability of Returns and
Cash Flows,” Unpublished paper, New York Univeristy.
Lettau, M., and S. C. Ludvigson (2001a): “Consumption, Aggregate Wealth and Expected Stock Returns,” Journal of Finance, 56(3), 815—849.
(2001b): “Resurrecting the (C)CAPM: A Cross-Sectional Test When Risk Premia
are Time-Varying,” Journal of Political Economy, 109(6), 1238—1287.
(2005): “Expected Returns and Expected Dividend Growth,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 76, 583—626.
(2009): “Euler Equation Errors,” The Review of Economic Dynamics, 12(2), 255—
283.

120

(2010): “Measuring and Modeling Variation in the Risk-Return Tradeoﬀ,” in Handbook of Financial Econometrics, ed. by Y. Ait-Sahalia, and L. P. Hansen, vol. 1, pp.
617—690. Elsevier Science B.V., North Holland, Amsterdam.
Lettau, M., S. C. Ludvigson, and J. A. Wachter (2008): “The Declining Equity
Premium: What Role Does Macroeconomic Risk Play?,” Review of Financial Studies,
21(4), 1653—1687.
Lettau, M., and S. Van Nieuwerburgh (2008): “Reconciling the Return Predictability Evidence: In-Sample Forecasts, Out-of-Sample Forecasts, and Parameter Instability,”
Review of Financial Studies, 21(4), 1607—1652.
Lettau, M., and J. A. Wachter (2007): “Why is Long-Horizon Equity Less Risky? A
Duration Based Explanation of the Value Premium,” Journal of Finance, LXII(1), 55—92.
Lewellen, J. W., and S. Nagel (2006): “The Conditional CAPM Does Not Explain
Asset Pricing Anomalies,” Journal of Financial Economics, 82(2), 289—314.
Lewellen, J. W., S. Nagel, and J. Shanken (2010): “A Skeptical Appraisal of Asset
Pricing Tests,” Journal of Financial Economics, 96(2), 175—194.
Li, Y. (2001): “Expected Returns and Habit Persistence,” Review of Financial Studies,
14(3), 861—899.
Lintner, J. (1965): “Security Prices, Risk and Maximal Gains from Diversification,” Journal of Finance, 20, 587—615.
Ljungqvist, L., and H. Uhlig (2000): “Tax Policy and Aggregate Demand Management
Under Catching Up With the Jonses,” American Economic Review, 90(3), 356—366.
Longstaff, F. A., and M. Piazzesi (2004): “Corporate Earnings and the Equity Premium,” Journal of Financial Economics forthcoming.
Lucas, R. (1978): “Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy,” Econometrica, 46, 1429—1446.
Ludvigson, S. C., and S. Ng (2007): “The Empirical Risk-Return Relation: A Factor
Analysis Approach,” Journal of Financial Economics, 83, 171—222.
(2009): “Macro Factors in Bond Risk Premia,” The Review of Financial Studies,
22(12), 5027—5067.
121

Lustig, H., and S. Van Nieuwerburgh (2005): “Housing Collateral, Consumption Insurance and Risk Premia: an Empirical Perspective,” Journal of Finance, 60(3), 1167—1219.
(2008): “The Returns on Human Capital: Good News on Wall Street is Bad News
on Main Street,” Review of Financial Studies, 21, 2097—2137.
Lustig, H., S. Van Nieuwerburgh, and A. Verdelhan (2007): “The ConsumptionWealth Ratio: A Litmus Test for Consumption-based Asset Pricing Models,” Unpublished
paper, NYU Stern School.
Lynch, A. (2003): “Portfolio Choice With Many Risky Assets, Market Clearing, and Cash
Flow Predictability,” Unpublished manuscript, New York University, Stern School of Business.
Malloy, C. J., T. J. Moskowitz, and A. Vissing-Jorgensen (2009): “Long-run
Stockholder Consumption Risk and Asset Returns,” Journal of Finance, 64, 2427—2479.
Mankiw, N. G. (1986): “The Equity Premium and the Concentration of Aggregate Shocks,”
Journal of Financial Economics, 17, 97—112.
Mankiw, N. G., and M. Shapiro (1986): “Risk and Return: Consumption Beta versus
Market Beta,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 68, 452—59.
Mankiw, N. G., and S. P. Zeldes (1991): “The Consumption of Stockholders and Nonstockholders,” Journal of Financial Economics, 29(1), 97—112.
Martin, I. (2008): “Consumption-Based Asset Pricing With Higher-Order Cumulants,”
Unpublished paper, Stanford University.
Mehra, R., and E. C. Prescott (1985): “The Equity Premium Puzzle,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 15, 145—161.
Menzly, L., T. Santos, and P. Veronesi (2004): “Understanding Predictability,” Journal of Political Economy, 112(1), 1—47.
Nagel, S., and K. J. Singleton (2010): “Estimation and Evaluation of Conditional Asset
Pricing Models,” Journal of Finance forthcoming.
Nelson, C. C., and M. J. Kim (1993): “Predictable Stock Returns: The Role of Small
Sample Bias,” Journal of Finance, 43, 641—661.
122

Parker, J. (2001): “The Consumption Risk of the Stock Market,” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, 2, 279—348.
Parker, J., and C. Julliard (2004): “Consumption Risk and the Cross-Section of Expected Returns,” Journal of Political Economy, 113(1), 185—222.
Piazzesi, M., M. Schneider, and S. Tuzel (2007): “Housing, Consumption, and Asset
Pricing,” Journal of Financial Economics, 83, 531—569.
Restoy, F., and P. Weil (1998): “Approximate Equilibrium Asset Prices,” NBER Working paper No. 6611.
Romer, C. D. (1989): “The Pre-War Business Cycle Reconsidered: New Estimates of Gross
National Product 1869-1908,” Journal of Political Economy, 97(1), 1—37.
Roussanov, N. (2010): “Composition of Wealth, Conditioning Information, and the CrossSection of Stock Returns,” Unpublished paper, Department of Finance, Wharton School,
University of Pennsylvania.
Rubinstein, M. (1976): “The Valuation of Uncertain Income Streams and the Pricing of
Options,” Bell Journal of Economics, 7, 407—25.
Santos, J., and P. Veronesi (2004): “Conditional Betas,” Unpublished paper, University
of Chicago.
(2006): “Labor Income and Predictable Stock Returns,” Review of Financial Studes,
19(1), 1—44.
(2010): “Habit Formation, the Cross-Section of Stock Returns, and the Cash Flow
Risk Puzzle,” Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Semenov, A. (2010): “Higher-Order Consumption Moments and Asset Pricing,” Unpublished paper, York University.
Sharpe, W. (1964): “Capital Asset Prices: A Theory of Market Equilibrium under Conditions of Risk,” Journal of Finance, 19, 425—444.
Shore, S. H., and J. S. White (2002): “External Habit Formation and the Home Bias
Puzzle,” Unpublished paper, Harvard University.

123

Stambaugh, R. F. (1999): “Predictive Regressions,” Journal of Financial Economics, 54,
375—421.
Stock, J. H., and M. W. Watson (2002): “Forecasting Using Principal Components
From a Large Number of Predictors,” Journal of the American Statistical Association,
97(460), 1167—1179.
Storesletten, K., C. I. Telmer, and A. Yaron (2004): “Cyclical Dynamics in Idiosyncratic Labor-Market Risk,” Journal of Political Economy, 112(3), 695—717.
Sundaresan, S. (1989): “Intertemporally Dependent Preferences and the Volatility of
Consumption and Wealth,” The Review of Financial Studies, 2, 73—89.
Tauchen, G. (1997): “New Minimum Chi-Square Methods in Empirical Finance, in Advances in Economics and Econometrics: Theory and Applications,” in Econometric Society
Monographs, ed. by K. F. Wallis, and D. M. Kreps, pp. 279—317. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
Valkanov, R. (2003): “Long-Horizon Regressions: Theoretical Results and Applications,”
Journal of Financial Economics, 68, 201—232.
van Binsbergen, J. H., M. W. Brandt, and R. S. J. Koijen (2010): “On the Timing
of Pricing of Dividends,” Unpublished paper, Booth School, University of Chicago.
Vissing-Jorgensen, A. (2002): “Limited Asset Market Participation and Intertemporal
Substitution,” Journal of Political Economy, 110(4), 825—853.
Vissing-Jorgensen, A., and O. P. Attanasio (2003): “Stock Market Participation,
Intetemporal Substitution and Risk-Aversion,” American Economic Review, AEA Papers
and Proceedings, 93(2), 383—391.
Vuong, Q. H. (1989): “Likelihood Ratio Tests for Model Selection and Non-Nested Hypotheses,” Ecoometrica, 57, 307—333.
Wachter, J. (2006): “A Consumption Based Model of the Term Structure of Interest
Rates,” Journal of Financial Economics, 79, 365—399.
(2010): “Can Time-Varying Risk of Rare Disasters Explain Aggregate Stock Market
Activity?,” Unpublished paper, The Wharton School.
124

Wang, Z., and X. Zhang (2003): “The Role of Artibtrage in the Empirical Evaluation of
Asset Pricing Models,” Unpublished paper, Cornell University.
Weil, P. (1989): “The Equity Premium Puzzle and the Risk-Free Rate Puzzle,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 24(3), 401—421.
White, H. (2000): “A Reality Check for Data Snooping,” Econometrica, 68(5), 1097—1126.

125

