                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




THE RETURNS TO THE BRAIN DRAIN AND BRAIN CIRCULATION IN SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA:
                SOME COMPUTATIONS USING DATA FROM GHANA

                                                Yaw Nyarko

                                           Working Paper 16813
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w16813


                         NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                    Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        February 2011




   I thank Bill Easterly with whom I collaborated on a precursor of this paper. I also thank David N. Weil,
   Oliver Babson, Murray Liebbrandt and participants in NBER Africa Project conferences for very useful
   comments . I also thank the NBER Africa Project for funding related to the research presented here.
   I thank my Research assistants over the past few years for research work related to this paper - Victor
   Archavski, Moussa Blimpo, Silvana Melitsko and Nicole Hildebrant. The views expressed herein are
   those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

   NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
   reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
   NBER publications.

   © 2011 by Yaw Nyarko. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
   may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
   the source.
The Returns to the Brain Drain and Brain Circulation in Sub-Saharan Africa: Some Computations
Using Data from Ghana
Yaw Nyarko
NBER Working Paper No. 16813
February 2011
JEL No. F35,F43,O0,O55

                                              ABSTRACT

We look at the decision of the government or "central planner" in the allocation of scarce governmental
resources for tertiary education, as well as that for the individual. We provide estimates of the net present
values, or cost and benefits. These include costs of tertiary education; the benefits of improved skills
of those who remain in the country; and also takes into account the flows of the skilled out of the country
(the brain drain) as well as the remittances they bring into the country. Our results are positive for
the net benefits relative to costs. Our results suggest that (i) there may be room for creative thinking
about the possibility that the brain drain could provide mechanisms for dramatic increases in education
levels within African nations; and (ii) by at least one metric, spending by African nations on higher
education in this period yielded positive returns on the investment. Our results on the individual decision
problem resolve a paradox in the returns to education literature which finds low returns to tertiary
education.


Yaw Nyarko
Department of Economics
New York University
19 W. 4th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10012
yaw.nyarko@nyu.edu
1     Introduction

Over the past several decades, African nations have been spending large amounts

of their limited government revenues on education, particularly higher education.

Many African leaders and many in the press in many African countries often express

the view that higher education is critical for African economic development. There

are those, however, who criticize spending on higher education because of statistics

showing that a high percentage of those who are educated leave the country (the

Brain Drain) - they point to statistics showing that for some countries around 50%

of the tertiary educated leave, and that many of those who leave were educated at

government expense.

    The question we pose is fairly simple. Could it be that the huge investments

in education, particularly at the tertiary level, were actually the right thing to do

during the period we study - roughly the period from post independence to around

the mid-2000’s? Specifically, could it be that spending on higher education, knowing

full well the extent of the Brain Drain, could have been the right thing to do for

many Sub-Saharan African nations, at least in terms of yielding positive and high

net returns on investment.

    We show that taking into account remittances of brain drainers provides a metric

under which the large expenses in tertiary education have been a success via the

metric we use. As we will discuss in our concluding remarks, imaginative thinking

about these computations could therefore in principle result in ways of increasing the


                                          3
exceptionally low tertiary enrollment rates in many African countries.

    The paper begins by setting out a simple model of the role of education in im-

proving incomes of individuals. We focus on tertiary education, as this is the most

pertinent for the brain drain from Africa for many countries.       It is the loss of the

skilled that attracts the greatest amount of attention in the media and in policy de-

bates. At the heart of the exercise is a Net Present Value computation, similar to

that used in the economics of education literature.        In particular, we will study

the question of the spending by governments on higher education, focusing on sub-

Saharan Africa.     The principal pecuniary costs and benefits of spending on higher

education are collected.   These include costs of the education itself and the benefits

of the education among those who stay in the local economy. The analysis explicitly

takes into account the fact that many leave - i.e., there is a brain drain. Further,

and in particular, those who are outside the country also bring in remittances. In

addition, many of those who leave return with higher skill levels.

    We discuss the costs and benefits of the brain drain from diﬀerent perspectives.

We begin by discussing this in the context of a nation or a "village." Under this

perspective we think of the village as paying for the tuition but also receiving the

benefits of the increased remittances.

    There is also another perspective which is often forgotten in the analysis. That

is the perspective of the individual himself or herself.   People migrate to seek better

lives.   If successful, then this should be included in the calculus of the pluses and



                                            4
minuses of the brain drain.         Under this perspective we again see that there are

positive net benefits to the brain drain.        Indeed, this resolves a paradox in the

literature on the economics of education that has found very low internal rates of

return to tertiary education in many African countries. This is a paradox because

it is contrary to what would initially be expected in countries with very low human

capital levels seeking rapid economic transformation. In our computations, allowing

for the probability of draining and therefore earning large incomes abroad, we obtain

relatively large rates of return.    This suggests that it is the probability of being a

part of the brain drain which results in evident high interest of many to invest their

time in tertiary education.

   This paper provides the detailed data analyses and empirical implementations

of ideas in Easterly and Nyarko (2009) and earlier.         As will be described later,

some computations have been made in Boller et. al. (2010) which are related but

diﬀerent from those of the current paper, using survey data for Ghana. We are not

aware of any other papers which explicitly model the costs and benefits of spending

on education taking into account the brain drain in Africa. As we shall point out

in each of the subsections, there has been a voluminous amount of research work

done on the various elements that go into our computations - remittances, brain

drain migration statistics, the value of diaspora both when they are abroad (trading

networks) and when they return.        Clemens et. al. (2008) and Clemens (2007) have

also documented positive aspects of the Brain Drain.



                                             5
2     The Simplest Village Economy

To fix ideas, we now describe a stylized small African village. We imagine the local

leaders or the village chief or voters deciding on how much to spend on tertiary

education at the university in their village which has recently been created.       We

imagine a village economy with small numbers of educated beyond the primary level,

modest secondary schooling and with an extremely limited tertiary educated stock.

The economy also has extremely limited industrial capacity or a tertiary sector.

    The decision makers need to decide how much to spend on higher education.

Those who have finished secondary school level may be able to enter the university

system. Since there are so few spots at the tertiary or university level relative to the

possible entrants with secondary schooling, the numbers that enter the university level

is constrained only by the village government spending.      Hence, the total number

of seats at the university level is determined by the total spending of the village

governments on tertiary education.      In particular, at this stage we ignore private

schools and tuition paid at government tertiary institutions, each being negligible for

many sub-Saharan nations for the period of interest. We will let c denote the cost

per year for educating an individual. It takes TC years to complete the university

education; typically, TC =4 but can run from 3 to 5 years. It is presumed that the

costs are raised from general taxes of the villagers. (Our robustness section will deal

further with this assumption and myriad other issues.)

    Of the tertiary educated a fraction will be drained oﬀ to foreign villages or coun-


                                           6
tries, with the residual fraction remaining in the home village. Those who remain in

the local economy earn wages and contribute to the economy. Those who are abroad

are assumed to send back home remittances to family members each year they are

abroad.

   The villagers obtain "utility" from having educated people locally around them.

In particular, their valuation of educated people is precisely equal to the wage rate
                                                              n      o∞
                                                                 (i)
they earn conditional on their being in the village.     Let wt            denote the
                                                                     t=0

expected wages of individuals of education level i in the local economy.      We shall

use i=0,1,2,3, to denote the education levels of categories "uneducated", "primary",

"secondary" and "tertiary", so that the two designations that will be important here

will be i=2 (secondary) and i=3 (tertiary).       As our emphasis is on the tertiary

educated, we shall suppose that it is only the tertiary educated who drain.

   The village chiefs also value the remittances of those who leave the village. These

remittances are of the form of transfers to other members of village, construction of

houses in the village, etc.   Let {Rt }∞
                                       t=0 denote the sequence of expected remittances


of an individual, which only happen when outside of the village; in particular we may

think of Rt = 0 when the individual is within the economy. In particular, the village

chiefs do not assign a value to the wages received in foreign countries by those who

leave for those foreign countries - they care only about their remittances.

   The village chiefs do not care who gets the remittances just as they do not care

who gets to talk to or be serviced by the educated within the local village economy.



                                           7
In particular distributional issues do not worry them.

   Incomes (and costs) in the future are discounted by a discount factor.                   Let r0

denote the rate of interest for those computations, with an implied discount factor of

                                                1
                                       δ0 ≡          .
                                              1 + r0

   Let C and W(i) denote the discounted costs and wages:


                        X
                        ∞                               X
                                                        ∞
                                                                   (i)
                                t
                   C≡          δ ct   and W   (i)
                                                    ≡         δ t wt     for all i,
                         t=0                            t=0

   and
                                           X
                                           ∞
                                      R≡          δ t Rt .
                                           t=0

   The village elders seek to maximize the expected discounted present value of the

streams of incomes, W + R of the diﬀerent types of agents less costs of educating

them at the tertiary level, C.

   At the optimum, the village chiefs will compare the costs of educating the marginal

student, from secondary level to tertiary level, to the expected discounted benefit

accrued from that marginal student.

   In this village, drainage occurs right after schooling.                 There is a probability d

that our representative individual will leave the village.               If the individual does not

leave but instead stays in the village, the individual will stay in the village forever.

If the individual leaves (or "drains"), there is a probability χ that the individual will

return to the village economy, and a probability 1-χ that the individual never returns.


                                              8
As mentioned earlier, the chiefs of the village receive satisfaction from knowing that

their young ones are either employed locally at high wages or are sending remittances

to other members of the village.

   The village chiefs think of there being two possibilities or types of the tertiary

educated representative individual. With probability (1 − d) the individual will not

drain and will stay in the local economy.        We refer to these types as the locally

resident educated (or "LRE").         The net additional return of the chiefs from such

individuals, over and above having them be secondary educated is:


                              NP V LRE = W (3) − W (2) − C.




   Next, with probability d the individual will drain.         Conditional on draining,

there is a probability of (1 − χ) that the individual will drain and never return to

work in the village.     The chiefs get no wage satisfaction in that state in any period,

but will be receive satisfaction from the remittances in that state.      If we let RNR

denote the net present value of the expected remittances in this state, then the net

satisfaction of the chiefs, NP V NR , equals the expectation of these remittances less

costs of education and relative to their expected contributions (wages) if they did not

get tertiary educated:

                               NP V NR = RN R − W (2) − C.

   Finally, conditional on draining, with probability χ the individual will leave the



                                             9
village but eventually come back. Let

                                                X
                                                ∞
                                 W   ret
                                           ≡E         δ t wtret
                                                t=0

   denote the expected net present value of this sequence of wages in the local econ-

omy, with an analogous definition for Rret ,the remittances they send when they are

outside of the country and which we set to zero in any period t when they are within

the village. The net contribution to the chiefs of these eventual returnees is therefore

given by:



                         NP V ret = Rret + W ret − W (2) − C.

   Hence, the expected return of the "Drainers" to the chiefs, including both those

who never return as well as those who return, will be


                       NP V D = (1 − χ)NP V NR + χNP V ret .


   The return to the chiefs, taking into account the net contribution of the two types

of tertiary educated, those who are local and those who drain, is therefore:



                        NP V = (1 − d) NP V LRE +dNP V D .                          (1)

   To see this even more clearly, write the expected utility of the educated in (1)

above as follows. First, recall we defined W ret to be the expected discounted wages of

the eventual returnee individual in the periods when returned to the village.     Then


                               W not_ret ≡ W (3) − W ret

                                            10
 is the expected sum of discounted wages that were not received because the individ-

ual was abroad. These are the wages that could have been received if the individual

was in the home country as opposed to being abroad. A simple re-arrangement of

(1) shows that




                       NP V = NP Vvillage + ∆NP Vabroad where



                                    ©                 ª
                       NP Vvillage = W (3) − W (2) − C ,   and



                                   ©            ª    ©                ª
             ∆NP Vabroad = d(1 − χ) RN R − W (3) + dχ Rret − W not_ret .


   In particular, the NPV can be broken into two parts.    The first part, NP Vvillage ,

is the expected net present value of the increment if there was absolutely no brain

drain, and the second, ∆NP Vabroad , representing the expected discounted increment

of the remittances over local village wages in each of the periods that the individual

is abroad.      The first term, NP Vvillage , is the NPV which would obtain if there

was absolutely no brain drain. We expect this to be positive, although the internal

rates of return obtained both here and in the literature are low.     The expression

∆N P Vabroad represents the impact of the brain drain. To the extent that remittances

exceed incomes locally, this expression will be positive. In the exposition below we

shall frequently talk about the returns to education without the brain drain and mean

                                          11
the expression NP Vvillage ; and refer to the incremental eﬀect of the brain drain as

the term ∆NP Vabroad .




3         Results for the Village Economy

In the subsequent sections we will be discussing our simple model in great detail, and

we will further discuss our data in some detail. In our robustness section we will stress

test our model with diﬀerent parameter value assumptions. In this section we quickly

state our main conclusions under some stylized parameter values for Ghana.            We

will follow some standard procedures in the literature on the economics of education

and compute some internal rates of return.

        We will proceed by providing a quick list of some of the data and parameter values

we use.

        (i) We use the cost data for tertiary education from the UN datasets.

        (ii) We obtain data on the brain drain probabilities, d, from the Doquier and

Marfouk et. al. (2005) data sets.

        (iii) We obtain the value of χ from survey data which suggests a value χ = 0.5

as the probability of return and with this taking place at year 7 being reasonable

assumptions to use.

        (iv) We use the Ghana Livings Survey data (GLSS V) to get the wages1 , W (3) and

W (2) .
    1
        See See http://www.statsghana.gov.gh/docfiles/glss5_report.pdf


                                                  12
       (v)   We use data on remittances given by the UN International Fund for Agri-

cultural Development (IFAD) surveys, which imply a per migrant remittance value

of US $5,260 for Ghana, as well as the lower value of $3600 per person per year.

       The first pass of our results can be summarized in Table 1 below.                     We report

both the internal rate of return2 (IRR) as well as the net present value at an interest

rate of 5%.         We do this for each of the diﬀerent types of tertiary educated types

mentioned earlier: Locally Resident ("LRE" above), Never Returns (NR above),

Returnees (’ret." above), the drainers ("D" above) and the tertiary educated as a

class ("E" above).




                 Table 1: Internal Rates of Return and Net Present Values.



       We obtain positive and large internal rates of return and net present values. Using

the IFAD remittances data we obtain for the tertiary educated as a whole, an internal
   2
       The internal rate of return is defined as the interest rate at which the Net Present Value is equal

to zero.     This is often used as a measure of the profitability of an activity or enterprise yielding

costs and incomes over time. Although it has many faults, its use is standard in the Economics of

Education literture.




                                                    13
rate of return of 29% and a net present value at r=5% of $32,361.       The values are

lower but still large when we use the lower value of $3600.

     What is driving the results should be clear: the remittances of those who leave

compensate for the loss from being at home locally.      In our robustness section we

stress test our model with even lower values of the remittances than the two illustrated

above.




4     Do W and R capture true costs and benefits?

One big question in this entire analysis is whether the wages and the remittances

truly capture the benefits of tertiary education and the value (or losses) associated

with those who drain. What are the arguments for and against using W and R as

measures of the value of the tertiary educated?

    We begin by noting that we have included the costs of tertiary education in our

computations, noting in our robustness section the obvious issues surrounding its use

and how sensitive our conclusions are possible errors in the estimates. So here we

take out costs in our discussion.

    So, our first and somewhat feeble defense in the use of wages as the value of

the tertiary educated is that it is what is used in most of the returns to education

literature. The question we seek to ask is not the moral or philosophical one of what

is the value of a human being. Instead it is the narrow economic question of whether


                                          14
resources used in educating an individual from secondary to tertiary education is

worth the resources used for that tertiary education.      The question then becomes

one of evaluating the benefits of that additional education against its costs.     At a

first pass, the additional wages that tertiary educated person will earn is a proxy

for that additional benefit from the schooling. For the village elders in the village

economy who are expending resources the additional resources of their village sons and

daughters and the remittances they bring back to the parents in the village will feature

heavily in their calculus of the pluses and minuses of the spending. Remittances often

end up with members of the village, often the poorest members. This is a plus to the

village elders.   In our individual calculations, one would presume that wages would

be a huge part of one particular person’s cost and benefit analyses of education. Yes,

there may be other motivating factors like quality of life, prestige, etc. But these are

often correlated with wages, and, raw cash itself has to be important too.

   Let us pursue this question further though. What are other measures that should

be used? How else could we objectively measure the value of the tertiary education?

Or, to say this in a diﬀerent way, what are the other possible aspects of the tertiary

educated which could be contributory factors in assessing the pluses and minuses.

Well, there are a number of possible ways.      There are valid factors to include in

our analysis, but it is not be clear whether these factors help our hurt our general

conclusions. In particular, the relative importance of tertiary education and also the

brain drain could actually be increased by adding these other factors. We leave these



                                          15
questions for later sections (and later papers). We will however mention one of them

now.

    One issue that comes us continually in the discussion of the brain drain is the issue

of having enough critical mass in the home countries. There argument is usually made

that if more of the talented Ghanaians, say, would stay in Ghana, they would exert

pressure locally to result in change at home.     There are of course many responses

to this argument.     First, there is quite a large amount of unemployment among

the tertiary educated. It is not at all clear that being in their home countries and

dependent on the government for jobs, the tertiary educated would form the eﬀective

pressure group often dreamed about in the media.       Indeed, having a large diaspora

community exerting a fearless independent voice may be much better. Those who

have been part of the brain drain and have returned to their home country may

have outside options and hence be less afraid of criticizing the local leaders. These

are potential pluses of the brain drain, and, when appropriately measured could

strengthen our basic argument.




5      The Individual Decision Problem

Above we have treated the costs and benefits from the point of view of the village

collectively. The villagers tax themselves to pay for the education of their children,

and perceive rewards according to the local wages the children receive when they are

locally resident, or the remittances they bring when they are abroad.


                                           16
   We can now think of the individual or family perspective.         As a first pass at

the individual perspective, we can simply follow the existing literature on internal

rates of return as follows.   In this first pass, suppose the tertiary educated benefits

are, as before, the incremental wages over and above secondary educated, and that

those tertiary educated wages equal either the local wages if the individual is locally

resident or foreign wages when the person is abroad. In particular, notice that this is

exactly the same as the exposition for the village economy but where the remittances

are replaced by foreign wages.

   Let us continue by assuming that the costs are precisely the costs of education as

above which is described in detail, as will be the described the data on foreign wages.

We are computing the social returns to tertiary education so we use the same costs

as in the village economy. By replacing remittances by foreign wages we are getting

to the individual decision problem and individual costs and benefits. This provides

a useful comparison with the existing literature: what happens to the rates of return

when we add the benefits of the Brain Drain - we know that for some countries 50%

or more of the tertiary educated are outside their home countries so omitting the

brain drain is potentially omitting an important factor in the returns to education

calculus.

   The returns we compute would be genuine private returns if individuals pay for

their education, which they do not in practice. However, we perform our computa-

tions as if they did, and we include as costs the costs of the education.



                                           17
      So, what do the Net present values (NPV’s) and the internal rates of return (IRR)

look like? Well, to continue with our computations we require the wages of the typical

tertiary trained individual when abroad. We have data on incomes of Ghanaians in

the US from the US census data.           We also have data on Africans in Europe from

various OECD databases. These are all described in detail later.

          In terms of our computations, note that all we have to do is to replace the

figure for remittances in the village economy computations with that of wages for the

individual computations. The village chiefs have an optimization problem similar to

the individual private returns computation except that when the tertiary educated

migrate, the chiefs value them for their remittances while the individual values himself

or herself via the foreign wages.         Clearly, since we obtained positive Net Present

Values (NPV) and Internal rates of return (IRR) with the lower remittances values, we

expect much higher NPV’s and IRR when we perform the individual computations.

      We will perform our computations under two scenarios.          The first is with the

parameters we used in the baseline case. The second multiplies the local Ghanaian

wages of the tertiary educated and the local costs of tertiary education by a factor of 2.

We intend for this to capture any possible miscalculations in those variables. Further,

since we are here comparing wages earned while resident abroad to wages earned while

resident locally, there is an argument for scaling the wages of the tertiary educated up

to account for purchasing power parity (PPP) as is standard in, for example, Gross

                                      3
National Income computations.               We seek to correct for biases which may cause
  3
      We can obtain the Purchasing Power Parity factor from the World Bank World Development


                                               18
us to underestimate wages and costs of the tertiary educated.                       In particular, we

are not also increasing the base wages of the secondary educated. All types of the

tertiary educated, which we focus on here, use the secondary educated as the base

in computing net present values so changes to the secondary wages would aﬀect each

group equivalently.

    For the Ghana data, our results can be summarized in Table 2 below, where we

have listed the internal rates of return (IRR) as well as the Net Present Values at an

interest rate of r=5% (NPV5).             We see that both are high for the individual, both

under the standard parameters (multiplier=1 in the table) as well as when we double

both the local wages and local costs (multiplier=2 in the table).                     For the tertiary

educated as a whole, the internal rate of return is 67% for the standard parameters

and 49% when we double the wage and cost parameters. Each of these numbers is

very high relative to what is normally presented in the literature.                   The net present

values NPV5 are $126,244 and $149,522 respectively.

Indices (WDI) by looking at the Gross National Income and dividing the value in PPP terms by

that in current US $.       For a variety of reasons, the PPP factor moves quite a bit from year to

year.   From the World Bank WDI datasets at http://data.worldbank.org/indicator as of Jan 12,

2011, for the years 2005,2006,...,2009 the GNI those years in current US $bn was [10.0, 13.3, 18.4

26.8 28.4]; while in PPP international US $bn was [25.8, 28.5, 31.4, 34.7 and 36.6] resulting in what

we call PPP ratios of [ 2.5, 2.1, 1.7 1.2 1.3].   Ratios for prior years also exhibits similar variability

around the value of 2.




                                                   19
                                              Table 2.



       When we double the costs and wages there is an increase in the IRR and the NPV5

for the locally resident - the IRR goes from 14% to 18% while the NPV5 goes from

$17,229 to $51,192. In this case the benefits to lifetime increases in wages outweigh

the eﬀect of the increase in costs (relative to the wages of secondary educated4 ).

There is a decrease in the values for those who never return, as they are aﬀected by

the increase in costs of education but do not get any of the benefits of the increase

in wages - the IRR goes from 90% to 68% while the NPV5 goes from $342,188 to

$338,409.

       We stress here that what we are computing are actually "social" rates of return, as

we have included the costs of education in the computation of the pluses and minuses.

If we excluded the costs of education we would obtain even higher values of the IRR

and NPV5.          Given the large percentage who travel abroad, and the higher wages
   4
       We remind the reader that we are not also doubling the wages of the secondary school educated

- if we did then there would be no change in the IRR and NPV5 of the locally educated as all

relevant variables would then have been doubled.



                                                  20
abroad relative to within the local economy, the higher returns of the drainers pushes

up dramatically the ex ante expected returns to tertiary education as a whole - i.e.,

among the collective group of tertiary educated drainers and non-drainers.

   We obtain figures far higher than those in the literature.       See for example the

survey paper Psacharopoulos and Patrinos (2004). The figures in the literature for

rates of return to tertiary education in Sub-Saharan Africa are of the magnitude of

what we obtain for in our tables above for the locally resident tertiary educated,

as they should be. They are the same measures, except that diﬀerent authors use

diﬀerent datasets and slightly diﬀerent methods of estimation. We believe that since

there is such a high incidence of brain drain in the countries we are interested in, it is

important to include the brain drain in the compuations of the returns to education.

When we do include these measures, we obtain extremely high rates of return.

   This may resolve a certain paradox.          Despite the low returns obtained in the

literature, many Africans continually clamor for governments to invest in higher edu-

cation. The media and popular presses all insist on the importance of investments in

tertiary education. Students also clamor for the limited slots in the tertiary institu-

tions. This would be paradoxical given the literature’s stated low rates of return to

higher education. A possible resolution to the paradox involves people taking into

consideration the fact that they may get a change to drain abroad to obtain higher

salaries. Our figures show that when these are taken into account, the rate of return

to tertiary education as a whole become relatively large numbers.



                                           21
    We now turn to a detailed description of the data in the next few sections. Follow-

ing that we will deal with some robustness issues - stress testing our model conclusions

with diﬀerent parameter values.




6     Cost of Tertiary Education, C.



    The cost to the government per year of the typical tertiary educated person is

obtained from the UNESCO datasets. The data on annual costs is often presented

in a form which is after normalizing by (or dividing by) that year’s nominal GDP per

capita.    This enables some comparability across nations, albeit imperfect. For all

African nations for which we have data, the per student annual tertiary costs have

been decreasing over time. For Ghana the costs have gone from 14.8 in 1970 to 2.09

in 2005. Given the recent extremely rapid increases in student numbers in Ghana,

our expectation is that per unit costs today for Ghana have dropped significantly

below this number. In Burkina Faso, it has gone from a large 29.39 in 1980 to 1.93

in 2005.
    COUNTRY              EARLY COST         YEAR     LATER COST         YEAR
    Botswana                 6.98           1975         3.72           1985
    Burkina Faso            29.39           1980         1.93           2005
    Ethiopia                 9.51           1995         5.74           1993
    Ghana                   14.82           1970         2.09           2005
    Mauritius               3.56            1980         0.30           2006
    Rwanda                  14.46           1970         4.04           2005
    Senegal                  4.32           1980         2.35           2005
    Zambia                  13.27           1970         1.68           2000


                                          22
    TABLE 3: PER UNIT ANNUAL COSTS OF TERTIARY EDUCATION



   For example, for Ghana the cost today is about 2 times GDP per capita.           For

the countries for which there is reasonably current data, the per unit annual costs

hover around this number or less. The questions about the costs and how they move

over time will be important in our robustness section. For this reason we re-produce

below the most current data we have for African nations as well as the year of the

data, ordered from the smallest to the highest costs.


                                C O U N T R IE S                 COST       YEARS
                      L ib y a n A r a b J a m a h ir iy a        0 .2 4     1999
                                    M a u r it iu s               0 .3 0     2006
                                  M a u r it a n ia               0 .4 1     2005
                                 S o u t h A f r ic a             0 .4 5     2004
                                    S o m a lia                   0 .5 0     1970
                                       E g yp t                   0 .5 4     1980
                                     T u n is ia                  0 .5 6     2005
                                  C a m e ro o n                  0 .6 0     1999
                                   Z im b a b w e                 0 .6 4     1985
                                      A n g o la                  0 .6 5     2005
                                    M o ro c c o                  0 .6 7     1996
                                 C a p e V e rd e                 0 .7 4     2005
                                       Togo                       0 .8 7     1970
                                    N a m ib ia                   0 .9 3     2002
                                       B e n in                   1 .1 4     2002
                                   S w a z ila n d                1 .4 0     1980
                                     Z a m b ia                   1 .6 8     2000
                                M adagascar                       1 .7 5     2005
                                     G u in e a                   1 .8 9     2005
                                     U ganda                      1 .8 9     2004
                                B u r k in a F a s o              1 .9 3     2005
                                 Iv o ry C o a s t                1 .9 4     1994
                                      K e n ya                    2 .0 5     2000
                                      G hana                      2 .0 9     2005
                                S ie r r a L e o n e              2 .3 1     1985
                                       C had                      2 .3 5     1996
                                    Senegal                       2 .3 5     2005
                                     G a m b ia                   2 .3 8     2004
                                      C ongo                      2 .4 6     2002
                                      L ib e r ia                 2 .5 8     1975
                                        M a li                    2 .6 5     1999
                      C e n t r a l A f r ic a n R e p u b lic    2 .9 1     2006
                                     B u ru n d i                 3 .4 9     2005
                                   B o ts w a n a                 3 .7 2     1985
                                       N ig e r                   3 .9 6     2006
                                    R wanda                       4 .0 4     2005
                                      E r it r e a                4 .2 7     2002
                                     L e s o th o                 5 .0 5     1994
                                M o z a m b iq u e                5 .3 2     2004
                                    E t h io p ia                 5 .7 4     1993
                                     N ig e r ia                 1 0 .1 5    1970
                                      M a la w i                 1 1 .7 7    1992



                                                           23
                          Table 4: Most current Cost data.




6.1     Cost Recovery via Loans, Tuition, etc.

There are a number of issues which may distort the calculations above and give us

potentially an incorrect view of the costs of the provision of tertiary education.   On

the one hand there are various cost recovery and tuition policies by universities. To

the extent that there is cost-recovery, this would imply an overestimation of costs and

an underestimation of the benefits of education in our own computations in the village

economy above. We list these below,but argue that they are very small and would not

appreciably change our main conclusions. Further, it is unclear whether the costs of

education above eﬀectively take into account (a) the school capital construction costs

and (b) the possibly distortionary eﬀects of the method in which the government

raises money to pay for the costs of higher education. We will revisit these issues in

our robustness section, but first we list some of the possible cost-recovery schemes.

Again, we will argue that under plausible assumptions our main assumptions still

hold.

   Before we provide the list of these schemes, it may be important to discuss in the

context of our model whether and how cost recovery should be treated in the basic

optimization problem.     There are two ways of viewing the interpretation of costs

and indeed the entire optimization exercise in enter our village economy above. One

interpretation is that the village elders think of "taxing" themselves to pay for the

                                          24
costs of the tertiary education for which they receive as benefits both remittances and

the benefit of the services of the educated youth, and that those services are measured

by the wages the educated receive. For example the value of the services of a doctor

is higher than the services of a clerical worker, the value of each measured by their

respective wages. Under this interpretation of cost recovery is a net benefit to the

village chiefs; they receive the same services at lower net cost. (In this hypothetical

exercise we suppose remittances would not be aﬀected by cost recovery.)

      However, there is another interpretation of the village economy.     Suppose that

the chiefs have primarily altruistic motivations and caring mostly about the youth,

and in particular the net wages the youth receive upon graduation (as well as the

remittances).        If the students have to pay back to the chiefs a part of the cost,

then this should be equivalent to a negative wage for the youth while going to school,

and therefore a negative in the altruistic chiefs net present value computation. In

particular, for these altruistic chiefs the cost recovery reduces chiefs costs and also

reduces one for one their perceived benefits.          Cost recovery therefore would not

aﬀect the net present value computation of these altruistic chiefs.5      As mentioned

earlier, cost recovery is very small for many sub-Saharan African nations so the above

mentioned arguments are somewhat moot.


      We now list some possible cost recovery mechanisms practiced.
  5
      I thank David Weil for bringing this point up.




                                                 25
Tuition and Private Universities If universities charge students tuition, then

the government costs are much lower than those computed above. Indeed, one could

imagine situations where the government cost of providing education is zero. Indeed,

in some private for-profit universities the tuition may even exceed costs, so that there

is a surplus for the investors or shareholders of the private university. During the

period we have most of our data - up to 2000, the numbers of private universities

in Ghana and many other African countries has been small. It is only in the past

decade and less that private universities have taken oﬀ.



Student Loans As with student payment of tuition and enrollment in private

universities, student loans could be used as a form of cost-recovery. This however

is not widely used in Africa and even in situations where it is used, it is not clear

how much of costs are really recovered (given the low or negative real interest rates,

administrative costs and loan defaults).   (See Douglas and Ziderman (1993)).



National Service An alternate form of cost recovery is national service.           This

scheme requires those in universities to work before during or after their schooling.

The salary is often lower than government civil service salaries so in principle this

could be a form of cost recovery. As noted by Albrecht and Ziderman (1995) however,

the cost recovery benefits of national service are very low. Further, in areas where

there is an excess supply of the tertiary educated and therefore unemployment in



                                           26
those ranks, the national service could be considered a benefit to the student and

potentially a cost to the government as the jobs are eﬀectively being guaranteed.



Partnerships with industry Partnerships with industry are often touted as being

possible ways of generating income for universities. At this time, however, even for

Europe the estimates of the contribution to total costs of universities is low (6.5%

was the estimate for Germany by Albrecht and Ziderman (1995)), and given their

lower industrial bases his would be expected to have almost negligible contribution

to costs for African countries.




7     Young Locally Educated who Stay

Estimates of incremental wages of those with tertiary education will be obtained from

living standards surveys. As described earlier, the time series of wages of secondary

educated, tertiary educated and returnees are all needed in making our net expected

returns computations.     We have explicit data from the Ghanaian data sets, which

we proceed to describe.




7.1    The GLSS Data Sets

We describe the Ghanaian data set below. The Ghana Living Surveys were taken

at three diﬀerent years: versions 3, 4 and 5 taken respectively in years 1991, 1998,

                                         27
and 2005. The surveys asked respondents a series of questions including education

levels, age, and wages, among very many others.       In the computations presented

here we focus on the GLSS 5 datasets, the most recent.      GLSS5 was conducted in

2005/2006, covered the entire country with a sample size of 8,687 households. In the

Figure 1 below we summarize the number of data points - broken down by education

level and age level.   We will of course be most concerned about the secondary and

tertiary education levels in our computations.




              Figure 1. Number of Data Points in GLSS Survey Data.



        Next, for our computations we need to compute the wage rate for each edu-

cation level at each age. The first and direct method is of course to take the average


                                         28
wage for each education level and age combination. These averages will give us the
                n     o∞
                  (i)
wage sequences wt          used earlier and are shown in Figure 2 below.
                      t=0




        Figure 2.   Earnings of each educational group as a function of age.



   We note here that the average wages of the tertiary educated in Figure 2 may

seem low to the casual observer. We did some back of the envelope checks of this

data.   After university education Ghanaians are required to do national service,

considered by some as guaranteed employment for such students, many who may

otherwise be unemployed.     Those wages were in the relevant years around $600

per year.   In contrast , public service workers were around $300-$500 per year,

with higher amounts in the private sector.    There was also anecdotal evidence of a

decent amount of unemployment among the tertiary educated.       These facts seem to




                                         29
corroborate the data from the GLSS survey for the tertiary educated6 .

      One other issue we have to address is whether to include or exclude the wages

of those coded in the data as having income of 0.            Most, although probably not

all, of these are presumably unemployed.             In our computations we average wages

including those of all the zeros (although we exclude all those with income "N/A"

or not available).      In Table 5 below, we note the ratios of incomes including and

excluding the 0 incomes.        We do this for the three diﬀerent waves of the GLSS

data sets.     We compute for each the income ratio between tertiary and secondary

educated (as these are the cohorts of interest to us). In particular, columns 2 and

3 of Table 5 provide the ratio w̄3 /w̄2 of the average wage of the tertiary educated,

w̄3 , and the secondary educated, w̄2 ,         with and without the zero income earners.

The second column above shows the ratio of the average of the tertiary educated to

the average of the secondary educated in the GLSS samples, including those with

zero income. These range between 2.30 and 2.66 indicating a slight increase in the

ratio over the diﬀerent waves - the tertiary educated are out-earning the secondary

educated by larger fractions over time. The third column shows the ratio of average

wages when we exclude those with zero incomes (presumably due to unemployment).

We see then that there is a small decrease in ratio from wave 3 to 4, then an increase
  6
      GLSS 5 Report (September 2008) summarizes the findings of the GLSS 5 survey. Section 9.8

covers household income. Table 9.18 shows mean annual per capita income for all Ghana at GHC397

or about US$433 in prevailing exchange rates. The stated mean annual per capita income for the

highest quintile is GHC688 (or about US$750).



                                                30
from 4 to 5. We look at respondents who are of age 18 and above in computing our

average wages. Columns 4 and 5 report the ratios of the logs of average incomes,

log(w̄3 )/log(w̄2 ).   Given our purposes and the results presented here, we therefore

do not believe that the issues of the zeros and non-zeros will significantly change our

results.


                                                                   Ratio of
                                          Income       Ratio of
                                                                    log-
                          Income ratio   ratio with     log-                  Mincer
                                                                  Incomes
           GLSS Version with all Incomes    only      Incomes               Regression
                                                                  with only
                            Included      positive     with all               Coeff
                                                                   positive
                                         Incomes      Incomes
                                                                  Incomes
                 3             2.30         2.29        1.07        1.06       0.69
                 4             2.33         2.18        1.06        1.05       0.81
                 5             2.66         2.37        1.06        1.05       0.82


      Table 5: Income Ratios (tertiary over secondary) and Mincer Regression

                                         Coeﬃcients.




7.2        Smoothing Data via the Mincer Regressions

As an alternate to using the raw average wages, one could consider smoothing the

wages using the Mincer regressions, as is popular in the economics of education lit-

erature. In particular, let w denote income, let AGE be the age of the individual,

and let SCHOOL be the dummy which is equal to 1 if tertiary educated, and zero

otherwise.      As is common in this literature, we use age as a proxy for experience.

The Mincer regression we run is then given by



                                               31
                ln w = α + β 0 .AGE + β 1 .AGE 2 + γ.SCHOOL + ε.

   The Mincer regression we report is, γ, the coeﬃcient on the tertiary schooling

dummy variable.      Some standard theory, or the interpretations of the theory, in

the Economics of Education literature considers the parameter γ to be the returns to

schooling and the internal rate of return of that schooling (the interest rate at which

the net present value of the incremental return to schooling is zero).

   We can apply the Mincer regressions to get an estimate of the wage rate as a

function of age or experience. We then assume that an individual currently beginning

the schooling process will follow that trajectory of wage rates into the future. We

then set the wage of an individual of age t and education level i to be equal to the

value predicted by the Mincer Regression, at those given values of t and i.     Figure

3 shows the Mincer equation smoothing of the raw income data.




                                          32
                Figure 3. Mincer Regression smoothing of incomes.


   First, we note that we obtain very little diﬀerence in our results upon using

the method with raw averages versus those with the Mincer regressions. We have

therefore chosen to report the former.   We also note in passing that the issues of

inclusion or exclusion of the unemployed arises, just as with the raw non-smoothed

averages.   Again, since it does not seriously aﬀect our results, we report only the


                                         33
values with the zero incomes included.

   Our results are of course are consistent with standard results in the Economics of

Education literature, when remittances and the Brain Drain are excluded. Without

the latter, the returns to tertiary education in Africa are surprisingly low, as well

documented in the literature. Bloom Canning and Chan (2005) and references cited

there are a good source for a review of the literature.



7.3       Panels and Pseudo-Panels

Note that we have used a fixed year (2005) cross-section of individuals and used this

as a proxy for the evolution of incomes across time.      This use of a fixed time data

set to measure life cycle earnings, although common in the economics of education

literature, is still not one would wish for. There are, however, surprisingly few panel

data sets which track individuals over time to enable us to seriously answer this

defect.    One option, which we have not chosen here, is to create a pseudo panel to

with some individuals from each of the three waves of the GLSS datasets at diﬀerent

ages to mimic the evolution of individuals across time. In particular, earlier datasets

are used for younger cohorts while later datasets are used for the older cohorts. We

would be piecing together diﬀerent people at diﬀerent times to construct a fictitious

panel. Given the somewhat stark nature of our net present value results, we doubt

that this would have made a significant diﬀerence to our conclusions.

   Again, we concede there are many issues with the use of the data sets in computing



                                          34
the wage profiles. The possible weak arguments in our defense are first that it is the

best data we have and second that it is currently the norm in the literature we seek

to contribute to.




8      The Rate of Drainage, d, and the rate of return

       χ

In the description of the village economy above, we made a number of simplifying

assumptions on when there is the first exit out of the local economy, the drain, and

when there is return to the local economy of those who do indeed return.         In the

more general version of the simple village economy, there is potentially a complicated

stochastic process explaining the emigration and return decisions.       In this general

model, what we need to do is to set a sequence of probabilities {dt }t of draining in

each period t.        Then, conditional on draining in period T, we need to specify in

addition the probability of return in each subsequent period, {χt }∞
                                                                   t=T .     Since there

is a chance the representative individual never returns, we let χ∞ . represent this

probability. In particular, we need to set probabilities {χt }∞
                                                              t=T and χ∞ such that

       P∞
χ∞ +       t=T   χt = 1. Further, in the general case, there could also be re-migrations

after the first return, and later returns after later migrations.

    Instead, we shall impose very severe assumptions in our initial computations. The

motivation for these come from surveys and casual observations.         Recall that our

                                             35
primary focus is with emigration to OECD countries.        Many who leave make one

important emigration decision and then stay abroad for a while. When they decide

to return, it is usually for good. (We are of course excluding short tourist visits).

In the survey by Black, King and Litchfield (2003), they find that the overwhelming

majority of respondents who have returned (83%) state that their return is perma-

nent, with only 11% stating that they intend to re-emigrate.      We therefore model

our representative agent as making a decision to migrate one time, then after going

abroad, staying there until a one time and irreversible decision to return.

   We further calibrate our model as follows. First we suppose that migration takes

place almost immediately after completion of tertiary education. In particular, in our

first cut we assume that the drainage occurs right after schooling. In particular, we

suppose that tertiary education ends at age t=22, then using the notation mentioned

above, d22 = d > 0 and dt = 0 for all other periods t.

   We then use as a flow probability d, the average rate of migration of tertiary

educated migrants obtained from obtained from the work of Docquier and Marfouk

(2005). The data are obtained from censuses in OECD countries, and is available

for the year 2000, as well as from national enrollment data. We will use the 2000

rates of migration of skilled or tertiary educated in our computations. If one believes

that emigration has been increasing over time, then these average migration rates

will underestimate the true migration rates.     As will be shown later, this would

strengthen our basic conclusions.



                                          36
   When does our representative agent return?         In particular, using the notation

above, what are the return probabilities χ∞ and {χt }∞
                                                     t=T ? Of those who decide to


return, we shall approximate this by assigning all of the probability χ on a return

date at year 7.     There are two reasons for this.     First, this is suggested by the

survey of Black, King and Litchfield (2003) and Pires et. al. (1999).      Second, it is

our hunch that a lot of the tertiary educated go to the OECD for further education

(graduate degrees), which take about 5 or 6 years and then spend a year or two doing

practical training (if they are on F1 visas) or if they want to get a quick job to ready

themselves for return.

   Again, in our robustness section we shall discuss alternative formulations of the

return probabilities and analyze the impacts on our results, spreading this probability

over several years. It is fairly easy to see the impact of these changes in the date of

return. We mention a few more surveys from the return migration literature in the

subsection below.




8.1    Review of some of the Return Migration Literature

   • Gundel and Peters (2008) use data from the German Socio-Economic Panel

      (GSOP) to examine return migration among immigrants to Germany. They

      find that highly-skilled individuals are more likely to leave Germany than low-

      skilled migrants. However, return migration is found to be lower for migrants


                                          37
      from non-EU countries.


    • Borjas and Bratsberg (1996) and Docquier, F. and H. Rapoport (2007) also

      study the return of migrants.     The latter refers to work showing that return

      rate rose from less than one fifth to about two thirds for the return of Taiwanese

      Ph.D.s who graduated from US universities the fields of Science and Engineering

      from the 1970’s to the 1990’s.    Very low rates of return are quoted from some

      studies of China and India, while some other Indian software industry surveys

      "showed strong evidence of brain circulation, with 30-40% the higher-level em-

      ployees having relevant work experience in a developed country (Commander

      et al., 2004b)."


    • The survey by Lowell and Findlay (2002) shows that some 50% of skilled workers

      return to their countries of origin , usually after about five years.




9     The Premium of the Returnees

When those who have been abroad return to their home countries, how much do

they earn? Well, there are several parts to this, only one of which we will be able

to meaningfully capture at this time.      First, the returned come back with better

skills. Second, they may earn a premium relative to their skill level because of the

fact that they have had experiences abroad.       On the other hand, because of lost


                                           38
social networks the returnees may face diminished wages.     For our initial cut on the

Net Present Value computations, we shall assume for now no premium on returned

migrants. In later work, and with better data, we will provide estimates of what we

think are the net positives from the returned superior skills of migrants.



9.1     Literature and data on Returnee Premia

As regards data on the premium of the returned we have identified a number of

surveys which we list below.


   1.    Gibson and McKenzie (2010) find that migrants who return home do not

tend to earn higher incomes than non-migrants. However, they do tend to return with

higher levels of human capital. Levels of repatriated savings appear to be similar in

level to annual remittances, and there is some evidence that return migrants are more

likely to be investing in business start-ups and sharing knowledge than non-migrants.


   2.   A recent household survey on urban population De Vreyer, P., F. Gubert,

and A-S. Robilliard (2008) studied the impact of return international migration in

seven major cities in Africa (Benin, Burkina Faso, Cote d’Ivoire, Mali, Niger, Senegal

and Togo). The surveys took place from 2001 to 2002. The sample consists of

58,459 individuals aged 15 years and older; 52,267 individuals in the sample never

left the country where they were born and interviewed. The return migrants from

OECD countries are 390 in number, and they constitute 0.6% of the sample. Average

individual earnings of return migrants are 227.1 and non migrants are 55.9 (in 1000

                                          39
FCFA PPP; only active individuals). The average years of education of OECD return

migrants is 11.1, compared to 5.6 for the non-migrants.

   In Benin and Togo, conditioning on education individuals who have been abroad

earn 28% and 21% more than those who have not, and the eﬀect is statistically

significant. In the other 5 cities the outcomes are mixed (negative in Cote d’Ivoire,

Mali, Senegal and positive in Burkina Faso and Nigher) but the coeﬃcients are not

significantly diﬀerent from 0.


   3. Wahba (2007) examines the labor market performance of return migrants to

Egypt, and finds that on average, return migrants earn about 38% more than similar

non-migrants. The wage premium is lower for highly educated migrants: university

graduates earn on average 19% more than their non-migrant counterparts.


   4.    Barrett and Goggin (2010) estimate the wage premium for Irish migrants

using a 2006 survey of Irish firms. After controlling for other factors likely to aﬀect

earnings, they find a 7% wage premium associated with return migrants. Estimated

wage premiums diﬀer by education level and migration destination. The premium

for migrants with a postgraduate qualification was estimated to be 10%. Moreover,

migrants that moved to far away countries (US, Australia) were found to benefit from

a higher premium than migrants that stayed in the UK or Europe. Finally, they find

that the premium diminishes at a rate of about 1% per year.




                                          40
10       Remittances


10.1       How big are the Remittances?

African workers send home around US$40 billion by one estimate to the region (see

table below) . The value of remittances in Sub-Saharan Africa (excluding North) are

small by world standards, but high relative to GDP in Africa.              The highest value

of the remittances to GDP ratio is Nigeria, at 10.9 percent, with an additional four

countries at ratios of 9 percent or higher (see Table 6 below, as well as Barajas et.

al. (2010)).




                       Country              Year Remittances/GDP

                       1 Nigeria            2007 10.9%

                       2 Sierra Leone       2007 9.7%

                       3 Togo               207     9.6%

                       4 Guinea-Bissau 2004 9.4%

                       5 Senegal            2007 9.4%
        Table 6: Estimates of remittances/GDP ratios, top 5 African countries7 .


      The data on remittances come from a number of sources. None of them is really

completely satisfactory. We shall discuss the diﬀerent sources of data, and note the

limitations of each. One diﬃculty with the oﬃcial statistics is that so much of the
  7
      From IMF Balance of Payments data as reported in Barajas et. al. (2010).



                                               41
flows of remittances take place through informal channels - friends and family cash

transfers, or the hawala system.      In our empirical exercise, we shall specify the

possible biases that could result from the use of diﬀerent datasets on remittances.


   1. Balance of Payments Data - Broad Definition: The oﬃcial statistics for

remittances are obtained from the Balance of Payments data collected by the IMF.

The broad category used is that listed under "Workers Remittances, Compensation of

Employees, and Migrant Transfers," made up of three constituent parts: (i) Workers’

Remittances, defined as current private transfers from migrant workers resident in

the host country for more than a year, irrespective of their immigration status, to

recipients in their country of origin; (ii) Compensation of Employees, defined as

wages, salaries, and other benefits paid to individuals who work in a country other

than where they legally reside, for example, seasonal workers; and (iii) Migrants’

Transfers, defined as the net worth of migrants who are expected to remain in the host

country for more than one year that is transferred from one country to another at

the time of migration. Migrants’ transfers are reported as “capital transfers” in the

capital account of the balance of payments accounts.

   The data are published by the World Bank Development Indicators (WDI), which

relies on the IMF’s Balance of Payments Yearbook (item codes 2391, 2310, and 2431

respectively). Data are available from 1970 and onwards. This source is very often

used in the literature on remittances.    As has been pointed out by Chami et. al.

(2008), this is on the one hand too broad of a definition, as it adds "wages, salaries,


                                          42
and other benefits paid to individuals who work in a country other than where they

legally reside, for example, seasonal workers". On the other hand and as mentioned

earlier, it is also widely believed that a huge part of the remittance flows of individuals

from host to home countries does not pass through the oﬃcial channels at all so would

not be picked up in the BOP data. Freund and Spatafora (2008), based on market

survey reports, indicated that the informal transfers may lie in the of 50% to 250%

of recorded flows, depending on the country. Authors may use the more expansive

BOP definition to compensate for the fact that informal transfers are excluded but

are important.        This definition is used by Kapur (2004), who explains further the

pluses and minuses of its use.

       2.   Balance of Payments Data - Narrow Definition: This uses only the

entry "Workers’ Remittances Receipts" in the Balance of Payments. In particular, it

applies the correction to (1) advocated by Chami et. al. (2008). The problem with

using this narrower definition is that there are fewer observations as, presumably,

for many countries the aggregate of the three portions of (1) are listed, without

a disaggregation into component parts.            For example, countries like South Africa,

Kenya and Ivory Coast appear not to have entries for the narrower definition.


       3. The United Nations IFAD8 Data:
   8
       From their web page, (http://www.ifad.org): "The International Fund for Agricultural Devel-

opment (IFAD), a specialized agency of the United Nations, was established as an international

financial institution in 1977 as one of the major outcomes of the 1974 World Food Conference. The

Conference was organized in response to the food crises of the early 1970s that primarily aﬀected the


                                                 43
    In an attempt to capture informal flows of remittances, the IFAD (International

Fund for Agricultural Development) has developed and reported data based on sources

like population censuses in destination countries, household surveys, Central Banks

and other oﬃcial government sources, money transfer companies, international or-

ganizations and academic institutions.              Sample estimates are obtained from which

extrapolations are made.

    4. National Central Banks:

    Individual countries, especially the Central Banks, also gather local data on re-

mittances. For (2003) in Ghana, the Bank of Ghana estimates that the remittances

equaled US $1,017.2 (Addison 2004) which is an order of magnitude higher than the

US $65million estimate of the World Bank in the same year. Even this amount may

be an underestimate. Mazzucato et al. (2004) suggest that unregistered remittances

flowing into Ghana is around 65% of the total, meaning that the true remittances

are around 3 times the value of the Bank of Ghana numbers.                   Based on this, the

(2003) remittances of Ghana equal $3billion. Informal quotes by the then Ghanaian

President John Kuﬀour put the 2006 number at US $4bn, while that of the Minister

of Tourism and Diasporan Aﬀairs put the number at US$ 4.3bn in 2007. (see Voices

of the South on Globalization, No. 8, 2007). Note that this would make remittances

a sizeable percentage of GDP.
Sahelian countries of Africa. The conference resolved that "an International Fund for Agricultural

Development should be established immediately to finance agricultural development projects primarily

for food production in the developing countries".



                                                44
      Irving, Mohapatra, and Ratha (2010) reports on the findings of a 2008-09 World

Bank survey of 114 central banks worldwide (33 in Africa). Approximately 43 percent

of respondents in remittance-receiving countries collect information on remittances

transferred through informal channels. Of these respondents, 42 percent base these

estimates on information and data gathered in household and/or overseas migrant

surveys. The report notes that there can be very large discrepancies between what

central banks report to the IMF and what was reported to the World Bank in the

survey: e.g. for Ghana, remittances reported to the IMF totaled $105 million in 2007,

while remittances reported in the survey were $1.8 billion (pp. 6-9).


      5. Other Studies:

      Bollard et al (2009) describe and analyze a new dataset on remittances. The

database is a compilation of micro-level immigration data from 14 surveys in 11

OECD destination countries. According to the authors, these countries were the

destination for 79% of all global migrants to OECD countries in 2000. The surveys

cover 33,000 immigrations, including 12,000 African migrants to 9 OECD countries

(Bollard et al, Nov 09, p. 9; Bollard et al, Apr 10, p. 4).

      Table 7 provides the data on remittances for African countries from various

sources, with WDI-broad and narrow representing the broad and narrow definitions

of remittances mentioned in (1) and (2) above, and in current US $ millions, 20069 .
  9
      World Bank World Development Indicators (WDI) downloaded June 2010.




                                            45
Table 7: Remittances per year, in current US $ millions, 2006.




                             46
   As argued above, the numbers from the Balance of Payments data probably do not

capture what we need when we speak by remittances.          In our baseline "Simplest

Model" scenario, we use the higher UN IFAD numbers in computing remittances.

The UN IFAD numbers are much more in accordance with Central Bank figures we

have obtained from local African nations.     This results in a per migrant remittance

value of US $5,260 for Ghana (total of US$851m from 161800 migrants).           In our

baseline figures above we also indicated the internal rates of return and net present

values at a per migrant remittance of US $3600 (or $300 per month). Our robustness

section discusses even lower values of the remittances.

   The numbers that we use will be average remittances over all classes, and we

believe that this captures more fully the remittances of the tertiary educated. We

now proceed to the question of remittances from diﬀerent educational classes.




10.2    Decomposition of Remittances from Diﬀerent Educa-

        tional Classes

In our computations we will be using average remittances of nationals abroad when

determining returns to tertiary education. One potential problem that needs to be

addressed is the possibility that diﬀerent educational groups send diﬀerent levels of

remittances. In particular, if it turns out that the tertiary educated remit much less

than the average, then our use of the average remittances would bias upwards the


                                         47
positive eﬀects of the brain drain of the skilled.

   Although one would a priori think that the higher skilled, being better educated,

are more likely to remit more, some (e.g., Faini (2007)) that the skilled are more likely

to bring their families with them to their host country, and therefore remit less. The

basic finding is confirmed by Niimi, Ozden and Schiﬀ (2008) who suggest that a 1 %

increase in the proportion of university educated migrants will lead to a 2.8% decline

in total remittances.

   Bollard et. al. (2009) on the other hand, show the opposite. The authors focus

on the relationship between remittances and educational attainment of migrants (all

source countries). They look at both the likelihood of remitting and the level of

remittances. They find that migrants with a university degree are less likely to remit

than migrants without a degree (27% versus 32%). However, the average level of

remittances is higher for migrants with a university degree.     The authors find that

remittance behavior is primarily accounted for by income eﬀects — i.e. more-educated

migrants earn more money abroad and are thus able to send more home.

   Next, we note that there are many studies which find no impact of education on

remittances per migrant (e.g., Naufal (2007) for Nicaragua and Rodriguez and Horton

(1994) for the Philippines).




                                           48
10.3      When Do Remitters Remit?

One could also ask: When Do Remitters Remit? We model in our baseline scenario

remittances to be independent of time of return. Bollard et. al. (2010) show that

future returnees remit more.    Gundel and Peters (2008) find that individuals that

send remittances home are more likely to re-migrate.




10.4      Data on Wages Abroad used for the Individual Problem

We proceed by providing a few snapshots on the data, each producing slightly diﬀerent

estimates of the average wage rate of tertiary educated Ghanaians moving abroad.

We will use these snapshots in explaining how we arrive at a figure we will use in

our computations. We have, we believe, used very conservative numbers (i.e., low

foreign wage rates).


  1. From the Docquier et. al. datasets, we know that approximately 44% of the

       Ghanaian migrants to the US have tertiary education. The US Census data

       states that 31% of their sample of people born in Ghana and resident in the US

       has tertiary education. This is not a perfect measure of incomes, but it should

       come close. It is imperfect because, of course, many of those who migrated to

       the US with less than tertiary education could later become tertiary educated

       in the US. Since we are interested in wage data, we use the US Census data

       which also asks individuals for wages and we compute the average income of the

                                          49
  top 31% of Ghanaians in the US. This gives us a mean household US income

  of between $74,000 and $104,000 (the high and lows of the US 2000 Census

  income buckets), or $89,000 with the mid-point value. Assuming a two-income

  household gives us an income level of $45,000 per person.


2. The average individual income of all Ghanaians in the US among full time

  year-round workers is, according to the US 2000 Census US $32,262 for men

  and $26,235 for women.     We know from the Docquier et. al. datasets that

  a majority of the migrants are men. A simple average of the two would give

  $29,242.50.


3. Although a large percentage of migrants from Ghana move to the US, a signifi-

  cant percentage also go to other Western European countries. We however use

  the same US figure for them. We do not currently have precise data for the

  UK, but we doubt that this will significantly throw oﬀ our IRR computations.


4. We of course need to exclude taxes from income statements. Or do we? Taxes

  after all are, for the most part, returned as benefits to the individual in terms

  of services, unemployment benefits, etc.     Further we did not take out taxes

  from the Ghana data. At the income levels we are using in the US, the average

  federal tax rate was 16.6% in the year 2000.      Even if we assume Ghanaian

  taxes are zero (they are not), addition of the taxes did not measurably the very

  large IRR values.



                                      50
      In our first pass at the Individual Problem, we will use the after tax average annual

US income values. That is, the wage figure in (2) above less US federal income taxes

of 16.6%.      We obtain an annual after tax wage of $24,388.        As argued above we

believe this to be an under-estimate of the wages.




11        Robustness

We will begin by discussing the eﬀect of changes in various parameters used in the

model. We hope that this will enable us to test the basic assumptions of our model.

Our baseline parameters are those used in the implementation of the village econ-

omy presented earlier. The values of our parameters involve estimates from diﬀerent

sources. In this robustness section we will vary some of the parameters across a range

obtained from the literature or that seem reasonable as ranges. We will look at the

impact of changes in these parameters on two types of results we could be interested

in:


      1. The first is on how the return to education as a whole is aﬀected - this is the

        ex ante definition of education taking into account those who stay and those

        who leave. This is measured by the NPV of the educated (NPVE )- again, this

        includes both the locally resident and the drainers.


      2. The other question is the eﬀect on the comparison between the return of the

        locally resident educated versus the drainers.     This is measured by NPVLRE

                                             51
       and NPVD , and their internal rates of return.



   As described in the introduction, the second question gets most of the attention

in the media and in the press, but it is first which should be the most relevant for

policy makers in many developing African nations. As we argue here, the returns

to education are large, even allowing for the Brain Drain.     The policy implication

should be an increase in education.      In this robustness section however, we will

discuss the implications on both questions as we change our baseline parameters.

   We proceed in the next section by discussing the eﬀect on our two questions in

(1) and (2) above, of changes in the costs of education, C, of the wage profile of the

tertiary educated, of the level of remittances and of the drainage probabilities.   We

will measure the eﬀect of these changes by looking at the changes in the internal

rates of return (IRR) and the Net Present Values at baseline rates of interest of

r=5% (which we denote by NPV5) for the relevant quantities required in answering

questions (1) and (2) above.




11.1      Cost of Education

Suppose we have under-estimated the average cost of tertiary education. Suppose

that the costs are higher than what we have from oﬃcial statistics. Suppose further,

that following Feldstein (1995), that the true cost of each $1 of spending is actually



                                          52
say $2 because of the distortionary eﬀects of the taxation required to raise that $1.

How will this aﬀect our conclusions on the Brain Drain?

   In our baseline "Village Economy," all tertiary educated have the same cost C

of education, whether they stay in the local economy or eventually leave.         Changes

in C therefore aﬀect the locally educated exactly the same as the drainers.            In

situations where the NPV of drainers is higher than that of the locally resident, as

was in our baseline model, if the drainers become "unprofitable" in an NPV sense

(i.e., NPV less than zero) because of increases in the cost C, then so too would the

local non-drainers, since the latter have lower NPVs. Indeed, the locals will become

unprofitable before the drainers in this case - i.e., at a lower level of cost.

   So, how much of a diﬀerence in the cost of education do we need to overturn our

results?    Well, keep the wage profile at our baseline, as obtained from the livings

survey data, and maintain the remittance level at our (lower) baseline of $3600 for

Ghana.     Define the "Cost Multiplier" to be the corrective multiplicative factor to

costs - so that a cost multiplier equal to 1 is the baseline cost data as reported by

oﬃcial statistics and, for example, a cost multiplier equal to 2 denotes doubling the

costs of tertiary education - as perhaps recommended by Feldstein (1994).

   The Table 8 below shows the decrease in the internal rate of return (IRR) and

in the value of the Net Present Value NPV at the baseline interest rate of r=5%,

NPV5, caused by the increase in costs from our baseline values to twice the baseline

value.     The internal rates of return still drop, but remain positive and large for



                                            53
education as a whole (from 23% to 14%) and particularly for the drainers (32% to

20%).   Similarly the NPV5 computations all remain positive.

   One could ask how costs have to be to begin to overturn the positive NPV5

numbers. It turns out that we would need costs 5.6 times the baseline cost values

for the returns to begin to be negative. The negative returns begin with the lowest

values - the NPV5 of the locally resident educated.   At that level the other NPV’s

still remain positive, and it takes a cost factor of 7.4 for the NPV5 of the Educated

(which includes both resident and drainers) to become zero.




                       Table 8: Eﬀect of Changes in Costs C.


   Again, we note that the changes in the robustness exercise here are changes in

costs only, keeping all other relevant parameters at their baseline "Village Economy"

levels mentioned in the earlier section.




                                           54
11.2     Are there Quality Issues and Capacity Constraints on

         Production of Tertiary Educated?

We presented in Tables 3 and 4 the cost data across Africa as these values are critical

for our computations and the entire NPV exercise. We will not pursue here in any

detail the very interesting question of the changing production function of tertiary

education in Africa as capacity rises.     One of the policy recommendations of this

paper will be an increase in output in tertiary education in Africa.      If there are ca-

pacity constraints and the costs figures rise significantly as enrollments rise, contrary

to the impression given by Tables 3 and 4 above with everything else remaining the

same, then our policy recommendations may no longer be valid.         We have a number

of responses to this concern. (i) It is our own view that economies of scale will work

as a check on rapid rises in the costs of tertiary education. We have seen declines

over time in the per person costs of tertiary education since independence of many

African countries, and although it is unlikely to fall much further in the future, it is

also unlikely, in our opinion, to rise that steeply. (ii) The capacity constraints of real

significance are related to the shortage of professors for the universities - other costs

like housing and infrastructure one would expect to have major economies of scale.

The shortage of professors is probably related to the existence of better opportunities

in the local economy for both the professors and the graduates themselves. However,

if wages of graduates are rising, then the entire Net Present Value exercise needs to

be redone as this could increase the baseline returns to tertiary education without the


                                           55
brain drain (what we called NPVvillage earlier).   That is, the factors which cause an

increase in costs (shortage of professors) could also increase the wage of locals. The

negative eﬀect of increased costs of professors is mitigated by the increased wages of

graduates in our NPV computations.

   In summary, if the production of tertiary education is supply constrained and costs

go up, there is the potential for our policy recommendations to be made invalid. At

this time we do not believe that the changes in costs will change that rapidly, due

to economies of scale, and further as it changes there are other parts of the calculus

which will also move around which will result in small net eﬀects.


   Quality Issues: There is a second and related issue concerning the possibly declin-

ing quality of the tertiary educated graduates in local African universities as there

is a massive push in enrollments.     Here it is important to distinguish two parts

of this question - that related to past graduates and our computations above, and

those related to future graduates and our policy recommendations. As regards the

computations in the village economy earlier and those using current data, we have

already incorporated quality issues into the computations.     Presumably, the wage

rates locally and remittances (which should be related to wages abroad) are all a

function of the quality of the tertiary educated. They have therefore already been

accounted for.

   The bigger issue is with the policy prescriptions for the future.   If tertiary en-

rollments are expanded and quality falls, how would this aﬀect our basic argument?


                                         56
Well, first there is the question of the returns to tertiary education itself, even without

taking into account the brain drain; i.e., the term NPVvillage . The reduced quality

will presumably reduce the local wages and perhaps lead to increased unemployment

of the tertiary educated. How do these reduced wages compare to the new reduced

costs of education? It is the comparison of these two which will determine the net

eﬀect.

   How about the eﬀect of reduced quality of graduates on the incremental returns

to brain drain, ∆NP Vabroad ? Well, the main channel will be via remittances. Since

remittances are a small proportion of total wages abroad, it is possible that these

remittances will stay relatively robust even as there are reductions in wages abroad

due to reduced quality of of those graduates.

   Our position on the quality issues is related to that of costs and supply constraints

mentioned earlier. Since the NPV’s of education are generally positive and since there

are returns to scale in the provision of tertiary education as evidenced by past cost

data, we believe that there are opportunities for increasing the quantity of education

without major impacts on the quality.




11.3     Wages of non-Draining Locals

Suppose we have under-estimated the level of wages of the locally resident educated.

Suppose this is either because of poor data, or non-representative samples. Alter-

natively, this could be because we are incorrectly measuring the value of the tertiary


                                            57
educated by their wages.      How would an upward revision in the wages of the locally

resident aﬀect our results?

   It should be repeated here, however, that given the high unemployment of the

tertiary educated, it is not obvious that the existing wages are an under-estimate in

our village economy model. However, we perform this robustness check anyway.

   An increase in the imputed wage rate of the tertiary educated with no change in

that of the secondary educated will of course increase the NPV’s and internal rates

of return to educated of the locally resident.    Further, to the extent that some of

the drainers return, the higher local tertiary wages will also increase the NPV’s and

IRR of the drainers.    In particular, a revision upwards in the wage sequence of the

tertiary educated will increase all NPV’s and IRR’s.

   How about the comparison between the locals and the drainers? Well, an increase

in the level of the wage sequence will obviously have a bigger eﬀect on the locally

resident than the drainers. So, how much of a diﬀerence in the wages of locals do

we need to overturn our result that the expected NPV’s of the Drainers exceed those

of the locally resident. Again, note that we keep all other parameter equal to our

baseline levels:   costs are those from the UNESCO datasets and we maintain the

remittance level at our baseline of $3600 for Ghana. Let the wage multiplier denote

the corrective multiplicative factor to the sequence of local wages - so that a wage

multiplier equal to 1 is the baseline wage sequence and, for example, a wage multiplier

equal to 2 denotes doubling the local wages at each and every date. Table 9 below



                                           58
shows the increase in the internal rate of return (IRR) and in the value of the Net

Present Value at the baseline interest rate of r=5% (NPV5) caused by the increase

in local wages. The internal rates of return rise from 14% to 24% for locally resident

tertiary educated and from 32% to 33% Drainers, and from 23% to 29% for the

tertiary educated as a whole. The NPV’s at 5% interest rates rise from $17,229 to

$54,971 for the locally resident tertiary educated, from $31,197 to $47,596 for the

Drainers and from $24,213 to $51,270 for the tertiary educated as a whole.




                Table 9: Eﬀect of Changes in Local Wage Sequence.


   We also note that the wage multiplier of 1.65 is needed for the expected NPV at

r=0.05 of locals to exceed that of the drainers (where again we should stress that

we believe the comparison of NPV5 of locals to that of drainers is actually not the

appropriate question to be asking.)

   It should be mentioned that part of the reason for the exercise in this section is

that the data we have indicates what some many may consider to be low domestic

wage rates. Part of the issue is that we have correctly included wages of unemployed

as 0.   It should be stressed that the main conclusions do not change much when we

omit the unemployed.     The average wages will rise, but definitely not as much as

                                         59
the two-fold rise modeled in this robustness section.




11.4     The Eﬀect of Errors in Measurement of Remittances

The earlier section explained the eﬀect of changes in local wages.       The eﬀect of

changes in remittances is almost the exact opposite.     An increase in remittances

aﬀects the relative importance of Drainers in comparison to locally resident in only

those periods an individual is away, just like the eﬀect of wages.    A $1 increase in

the remittances has the same positive relative eﬀect (i.e., on NPV of drainers minus

NPV of locally resident) as a $1 decrease in the local wage rate.

   We now ask what happens if suppose that our estimates of the remittances are

too high relative to our baseline (of $3600).   We should mention here we actually

believe that our remittance levels are too low, and do not include all the informal

remittances and investments of people who are abroad. Nonetheless, we provide the

robustness checks here.

   In particular, we look at remittance multipliers: a remittance multiplier of 1 is

the baseline level, and a multiplier of 1/2, say, means that we use remittances equal

to one half of our baseline level.

   A decrease in the imputed remittances of the tertiary educated drainers with

no change other parameters will of course decrease the NPV’s and internal rates

of return to the drainers, and will not aﬀect the locally resident.   In particular, a

revision downwards in the remittances of the drainers will decrease all NPV’s and


                                         60
IRR’s except those of the locally resident.

   Table 10 below shows the decrease in the internal rate of return (IRR) and in the

value of the Net Present Value at the baseline interest rate of r=5%, NPV5, caused

by the decrease in remittances from our baseline to half its value. The internal rates

of return all remain positive. The biggest drop, as would be expected is among the

drainers who never return - the NPV5 figure goes down from 33,026 to $6,256.




          Table 10: Eﬀect of Changes in the assumed level of remittances.


    We also note that the remittance multiplier of 0.6 is needed for the expected

NPV5 of locals to exceed that of the drainers. (Again, we stress that the comparison

between locals and drainers is not the right question; it is the NPV of the educated

as a whole taking into account the drainers - in the table it remains positive even

with a halving of our baseline remittance numbers.)




11.5    The Drainage Probabilities

The Net Present Value of the educated, NPVE , is a weighted average of the NPV’s

of the locally resident educated, NPVLRE , and the drainers, NPVD .     The larger is

                                          61
the probability of drainage, d, the more the weights move the NPVE toward NPVD

and away from NPVLRE .

       So, suppose we have miscalculated the drainage probability and that instead it is

a larger number.         Since for most of our computations NPVD exceeds NPVLRE , the

increase in the drainage probability d will increase the NPV of education.                      It will

actually strengthen the main conclusions of this paper. It is indeed possible that our

drainage probabilities, being the average drainage rates (nationals abroad divided by

total nationals for the tertiary educated) may underestimate the marginal drainage

probabilities (those in the most recent years) if the drainage probabilities have been

rising over time.




11.6         Timing of Return

We have adopted a very stylized model of the timing of return of those who drain

and come back. We have assumed all who drain leave immediately after school and

those who return do so in 7 years10 . The more general case involves a complex model

of the tertiary educated leaving at all diﬀerent dates and returning at diﬀerent dates

with a complicated model of return probabilities and random durations of stay.
  10
       One may be concerned that a return date of 7 years means that the returnees are not important.

This is not correct. First, a return date of 7 years means that at a 5% interest rate, since 1/(1.05)7 =

0.71, we see that after 7 years approximately 71% of the value is retained with 29% discounted

relative to the present value. Further, we are comparing income streams so both returnees and

non-returnees incomes are both discounted, and at the same rate.


                                                  62
   Our feeling at this time based on the various surveys we have seen is that we have

probably under-estimated the duration of stay abroad.     Given the relative values of

the remittance term and the local wage rates, this would imply that in a more general

model we should have larger returns to tertiary education more generally and to those

who drain more specifically. A more general model, given the other parameters in

the model will most probably strengthen our general conclusions.




11.7     Post- Year 2000-2005 data issues

We have worked with a lot of data from around the year 2000-2005. This has been

constrained by the data sources we have - the data on stocks of migrants usually

are obtained from census figures, many which were last taken around the year 2000.

There are a number of post-2000 developments that should be discussed. In Ghana

there has been a tremendous increase in enrollments at the tertiary level over the

past 5 to 10 years.    As the enrollment levels have increased, so too presumably

has been the per person costs of education. Many have remarked that this has been

associated with reduced quality of education. We discussed issues of costs and quality

in our robustness section above. The big open question is what is the extent of the

brain drain currently as the total stock of tertiary educated has increased so rapidly.

Rather than speculate, we await the census figures which should be in within the

next couple of years in Ghana and in many other countries.


                                          63
12       Items Omitted from Discussion

12.1     Skills of the Returnees

Due to a lack of data, we have modeled the returnees as having no extra education

after their time spent abroad. We know however that many come back with superior

skills, which could be extra formal education or skills in more advanced economies

working in sectors for which there would be few opportunities for advancement in

their home countries. There has been quite of attention put on the importance of

returnees to India in the Information Communication Technologies (ICTs) industries

there.   If these benefits of the returnees are added, they will of course increase the

already high returns to those who drain out of the country. In much earlier work (see

Easterly and Nyarko (2009)), we have commented on the skills of the returnees. We

reserve for subsequent work the study of the improved skills of those who return. We

merely remark here that if these skills were added into the computations our results

would be stronger, and we believe considerably so. In that sense, the fact that we

have obtained strong returns to education and the brain drain without including these

factors may be a reflection of the power of our results.




12.2     Internal African Migration

The focus of much of our work has been on the Brain Drain outside of Africa. There

has been quite a bit of Brain circulation within Africa.   Adepoju (2002) and (2006)

                                          64
have observed that highly-skilled African professionals have increasingly found South

Africa and Botswana to be "attractive alternatives" to Europe, the U.S. and the Gulf

States. At this time we do not have data indicating large transfers of the tertiary

educated from one sub-Saharan African country to the next. We leave the question

of within-Africa brain drain or circulation to future work.




12.3    Labor Hoarding?

As the economy of Ghana and many other African countries improve, we are beginning

to get anecdotal evidence of an increase in the return of the tertiary educated. This

of course begs an obvious question. Could it be that it was a great idea to educate

people and have them sent abroad when the economy was doing poorly, so that they

could form a reserve pool of skilled labor ready to come back to the home country

when the economy improved? Was there an invisible hand leading the central planner

to educate people and to "hoard" them in foreign countries so that when the local

economy could absorb them they are available to return? Our data can not directly

test this hypothesis of course, but the model we present could easily be tweaked at

get a handle at this. Again, we leave an in-depth discussion of this for future work.




12.4     Incentives

In other work (see Easterly, W. and Y. Nyarko (2009)) we have discussed the very

important literature on the question of the role of incentives to invest in education

                                          65
in the presence of the brain drain.     The basic idea is that in the presence of the

brain drain and the opportunity to receive very high wages in the future with some

probability, individuals make bigger investments in their education (either in terms

of money spent or eﬀort in studying and attending university). This incentive eﬀect

could increase the supply of the tertiary educated so much that it more than compen-

sates for those who leave. In particular, the final number of tertiary educated left in

the home or source country after the brain drain exceeds the number who would be

in the country if the incentive eﬀect of the brain drain was not there (say by banning

the drain by law or by making it extremely diﬃcult for people to leave).




13      Conclusion

In this paper we have discussed the brain drain in Ghana. We have performed some

rates of return to education computations using various datasets.        Our main con-

clusions are that when using wages and remittances in standard cost-benefit returns

to education computations, we have found that there have been high rates of return

to tertiary education in general, taking into account the brain drain.     Both from a

social or "village" point of view as well as from the individual point of view, the rates

of return are large.

   Our results on the individual returns to education resolve a paradox in the returns

to tertiary education literature, which often finds low or sluggish returns.     This is

paradoxical given the clamoring for tertiary education by leaders and the general


                                           66
publics in many sub-Saharan African nations.         It is also paradoxical as one may

expect a high rate of return to tertiary education in countries which have such low

stocks of tertiary educated and where development is a priority.

   In our robustness checks we have stress tested the model, and the main conclusions

seem to withstand these tests. Various variables we have omitted from our analyses

may strengthen the conclusions we have.

   There are several issues we wish to highlight in our concluding remarks. First, we

point out that in most of the conversations on the brain drain in Africa, it is almost

universally considered something which is bad and to be avoided. The arguments in

the media and in policy circles often use a cost-benefit argument. It is often stated

that "the government has wasted money" if people trained at the tertiary level then

drain out.   Our numbers show that these statements must be made carefully, and

indeed that the opposite may be true.        There are also arguments of the form "if

only the highly skilled would stay" the local economies would do much better. Our

results at least cast a little doubt on such assertions.

   More importantly though, our results indicate that there is room for creative

thinking around the question of tertiary education provision. We have found high

internal rates of return to tertiary education.    This suggests that creative thinking

around the provision of higher education could possibly be both self-financing (or even

return a profit) and lead the education of large numbers of people.       At currently

levels of local incomes, however, this may involve some leaving the home country, at



                                           67
least for a while. In particular, rather than thinking of the brain drain as a curse

upon the economies of sub-Saharan African countries it could instead be a part of

the instrument to use for expanding the number of tertiary educated who are in the

local economies.   If it is known that one out of every two tertiary educated people

leave the country, then the logical implication is that there is the need to train twice

as many to get the desired number locally. Our numbers show that this may indeed

be feasible financially for the sponsoring entity (the government or NGO?).        Our

numbers also suggest that the individuals would also be able and willing to pay for

loans incurred in this process.    Our computations suggest interesting possibilities

with financing schemes for tertiary education which (a) explicitly take into account

the possibility that some will drain out of the country and (b) which asks those who

are out of the country, and presumably earning more money, to pay higher amounts

to reimburse the government for their education. The analysis also suggests that the

payments by those who leave could in principle form the bulk of the income which

in later years will finance the massive expansion of tertiary education in the local

economies.

   For emphasis, we should note all the beneficiaries of schemes as described above.

First, since this is potentially self-financing, the local economies will benefit from

expanded numbers of educated. Second, by introducing a new financing system for

higher education, those who are initially credit constrained may be able to attain

an education which otherwise would have been denied them. Finally, it should be



                                          68
remarked that those who end up being part of the brain drain should be counted in

the welfare computations. In the discussions and the rhetoric on the brain drain it is

often presumed that once Ghanaians leave their country they cease being Ghanaians

and so their welfare no longer matters.   Should the goal of development not be the

development of Ghanaians as opposed to those who happen to reside in Ghana? If a

large number of people are educated who otherwise would not be, and a large fraction

of those get improved incomes and livelihoods abroad who otherwise would not or

would be unemployed in Ghana, is that not a positive to be included in evaluating

policy?

   In this paper we have evaluated the costs and benefits of the tertiary education

system including the calculus all Ghanaians, those abroad and those in the home

country.   Our data show that continued investments in tertiary education may yield

significantly large net present values and internal rates of return and further that

higher education financing schemes could therefore be ultimately self-financing.




14        References

Addison, E.K.Y (2004) “The Macroeconomic Impact of Remittances,”unpublished

manuscript, September.


   Adepoju, A. (2002). "Issues and recent trends in international migration in Sub-

Saharan Africa," International Social Science Journal, Vol. 52, No. 165, pp. 383-394


                                          69
(December).


   Adepoju, A. (2006). "Leading issues in international migration in sub-Saharan

Africa," in Cross, C., D. Gelderblom, N. Roux, and J. Mafukidze (eds) Views on Mi-

gration in Sub-Saharan Africa: Proceedings of an African Migration Alliance Work-

shop, Cape Town: HSRC Press, and Pretoria: Department of Social Development.


   Albrecht, D. and A. Ziderman (1993). “Student Loans: An Eﬀective Instrument

for Cost Recovery in Higher Education?”, The World Bank Research Observer, Vol.

8, No. 1, pp. 71-90.


   Albrecht, D. and A. Ziderman (1995). “National service: A form of societal cost

recovery for higher education?”, Higher Education, Vol. 29, pp. 111-128.


   Barajas, A., R. Chami, C. Fullenkamp, and A. Garg (2010). “The Global Finan-

cial Crisis and Workers’ Remittances to Africa: What’s the Damage?”, IMF Working

Paper No. 10/24, January.

   Black, King and Litchfield (2003): "Transnational Migration, Return and De-

velopment in West Africa," Sussex Center for Migration Research, University of

Sussex.


   Bollard, A., D. McKenzie, M. Morten, and H. Rapoport (2009). “Remittances

and the Brain Drain Revisited - The Microdata Show that More Educated Migrants

Remit More”, World Bank Working Paper No. 5113, November.



                                        70
   Bollard, A., D. McKenzie, and M. Morten (2010). “The Remitting Patterns of

African Migrants in the OECD”, World Bank Working Paper No. 5260, April.


   Borjas, G. and B. Bratsberg (1996). “Who Leaves? The Outmigration of the

Foreign-Born”, The Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 78, No. 1 (Feb., 1996),

pp. 165-176.


   Burns, A. and S. Mohapatra (2008). “International Migration and Technological

Progress”, World Bank Development Prospects Group.


   Chand, Satish and Michael Clemens (2008). "Skilled emigration and skill creation:

A quasi-experiment", CGD Working Paper and Australian National University Craw-

ford School Working Paper 08-05.


   Chami, R., C. Fullenkamp, and M. Gapen (2008). “Measuring Workers’ Remit-

tances: What Should Be Kept In and What Should Be Left Out?”, IMF Working

Paper, July.

   Clemens, Michael and Gunilla Pettersson (2008). "New data on African health

professionals abroad," Human Resources for Health 6:1.

   Clemens, Michael. 2007. "Do visas kill? Health Eﬀects of African Health Profes-

sional Emigration", CGD Working Paper 114.


   De Vreyer, P., F. Gubert, and A-S. Robilliard (2008). “Return Migrants in West-

ern Africa: Characteristics and Labour Market Performance”, unpublished manu-

script.

                                        71
   Docquier, Frédéric and Abdeslam Marfouk (2005), International Migration by

Educational Attainment (1990-2000) - Release 1.1., update of World Bank Policy

Research Working Paper 3381 (Washington, DC: World Bank).

   Docquier, F. and H. Rapoport (2007). “Skilled Migration: The Perspective of

Developing Countries,” IZA Discussion Paper No. 2873 (June).


   Docquier, Frédéric and Hillel Rapoport (2004), .Skilled migration: The per-

spective of developing countries., World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 3382

(Washington, DC: World Bank).


   Dustmann, C. and Y. Weiss (2007). “Return Migration: Theory and Empirical

Evidence from the U.K.”, British Journal of Industrial Relations, Vol. 45, No. 2, pp.

236-256.



   Easterly, W. and Y. Nyarko (2009): "Is the Brain Drain Good for Africa?" with

William Easterly in “Skilled Migration today: Prospect, Problems and Policies,”

(eds) Jagdish Bhagwati and Gordon Hanson, Oxford University Press, USA (April

21, 2009).



   Faini, R. (2007). “Remittances and the Brain Drain: Do More Skilled Migrants

Remit More?”, World Bank Economic Review, Vol. 21, No. 2, pp. 177-191.


   Feldstein, M. (1995). “Tax avoidance and the Deadweight loss of the Income

tax”, National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) Working Paper No. 5055.

                                         72
   Finn, M. (2003). “Stay Rates of Foreign Doctorate Recipients from U.S. Univer-

sities, 2001”, Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education, Oak Ridge, TN.




   Freund, C. and N. Spatafora (2008). “Remittances, Transaction Costs, and Infor-

mality”, Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 86, No. 2 (June), pp. 356-366.

   Ghana Livings Survey, Versions 3, 4 and 5,


   Gibson, J. and D. McKenzie (2010). “The Economic Consequences of Brain Drain

of the Best and Brightest: Microeconomic Evidence from Five Countries”, Working

Paper, February.



   Gundel, S. and H. Peters (2008). “What determines the duration of stay of

immigrants in Germany? Evidence from a longitudinal duration analysis,” The In-

ternational Journal of Social Economics, Vol. 35, No. 11.


   Haour-Knipe, M. and Davies A (2008). Return Migration of Nurses, International

Centre on Nurse Migration, Geneva, Switzerland and Philadelphia, PA.



   Higazi, Adam (2005). “Ghana Country Study”, a part of the report on Infor-

mal Remittance Systems in Africa, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) countries, Ref

RO2CS008, commissioned by DFID UK, EC-PREP, and Deloitte and Touche, Janu-

ary.



                                        73
   IFAD (2007). “Sending Money Home: Worldwide remittance flows to developing

countries”, International Fund for Agricultural Development, Rome, Italy.


   Irving, J., S. Mohapatra, and D. Ratha (2010). “Migrant Remittance Flows:

Findings from a Global Survey of Central Banks”, World Bank Working Paper No.

194, April.


   Kapur, D. (2004). “Remittances: The New Development Mantra?”, United Na-

tions Conference on Trade and Development, G-24 Discussion Paper Series, No. 29,

April.

   Mazzucato, V. , B. van den Boom, and N. N. N. Nsowah-Nuamah (2004) “The

Impact of International Remittances on Local Living Standards: Evidence for house-

holds and rural communities in Ghana”, paper presented at the Conference on Mi-

gration and Development in Ghana, Accra (14-16 September).



   Naufal, G. (2007) “Who Remits? The Case of Nicaragua”, Institute for Study of

Labor (IZA), Discussion Paper, No. 3081, Bonn, Germany.

   Niimi, Y., Ozden, C. and Schiﬀ, M. (2008) “Remittances and the Brain Drain:

Skilled Migrants Do Remit Lessu”, Institute for Study of Labor (IZA), Discussion

Paper, No.3393, Bonn, Germany.

   Pires, M., R. Kassimir, and M. Brhane (1999). Investing in return. Rates of

return of African Ph.D.’s trained in North America. New York, NY: Social Science

Research Council.

                                        74
   Psacharopoulos and Patrinos (2004): "Returns to Investment in Education: A

Further Update," Education Economics, Vol. 12, No. 2, August.

   Ratha, D., S. Mohapatra, and A. Silwal (2009). “Migration and Remittance

Trends 2009: A better-than-expected outcome so far, but significant risks ahead”,

World Bank Development Prospects Group.


   Ratha, D., S. Mohapatra, and A. Silwal (2010). “Outlook for Remittance Flows

2010-11: Remittance flows to developing countries remain resilient in 2009, expected

to recover during 2010-11”, World Bank Development Prospects Group.


   Rodriguez, E. and S. Horton (1994) “International Return Migration and Re-

mittances in the Philippines”, in D. O’Connor and L. Farsakh (eds.) Development

Strategy, Employment and Migration. Country Experiences, Paris: OECD Develop-

ment Centre.



   Voices From the South on Globalization (2007). “Migration - Benefits and the

Bane”, No. 8, IPS Europe.



   De Vreyer, P., F. Gubert, and A-S. Robilliard (2008), “Return Migrants in West-

ern Africa: Characteristics and Labour Market Performance”, unpublished manu-

script.


   Wahba, J. (2007), “Returns to Overseas Work Experience: The Case of Egypt”,

in Ozdon, C. and Schiﬀ, M. (eds.) International Migration, Economic Development

                                        75
& Policy. Washington, DC: The World Bank.


   World Bank (2010). World Development Indicators. Data retrieved June 2010,

from WDI online database.




                                     76
