                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    A PIGOVIAN RULE FOR THE
               OPTIMUM PROVISION OF PUBLIC GOODS




                         Mervyn A. King



                     Working Paper No. 1681




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                          August 1985




This paper is based on a lecture delivered at MIT in November 1983.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Taxation and project in Government Budget. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                              NBER Working Paper      1681
                                              August 1985




                        A Pigovian Rule for the
                   Optimum Provision of Public Goods


                               ABSTRACT




The  integrated treatant of opttm1       taxation and public expenditure
presented   here is based on the dual relationship between the prices of
private goods and the quantities of public goods. In this paper we derive
analogues of Roy's identity and the Slutsky equation for the case of public
goods. The opti m1 provision of public goods and the level of taxation are
shown to be dual problems. The conditions for optimum public good
provision can be expressed as a ndification of the Samuelson conditions
with extra terms representing (a) the distortionary effect of taxes on the
willingness to pay for the public good, and (b) distributional effects.
The former captures Pigou' a notion of the indirect daniage caused by the
need to finance public expenditure out of distortionary taxes, and we call
this the "Pigou term". In certain cases a very simple benefit—cost ratio
for public projects emerges that is equivalent to measuring benefits as if
they were taxed.




Professor Nervyn A. Xing
Depaxtment of Economics
London School of Economics
oughton Street
London, 12A ZAE
England
Tel. Nos. 022, 024, 321
                                      —2—.

            A PICX)VIAN RULE FOR THE OPTDVPI P)VISIOII OF PUBLIC GOODS

                                   MERVYN KING

1.   Introduction

     The analysis of the conditions for the optimum provision of a public

     good   when its cost must be financed by distortionary taxes dates   from

     Pigou (1947). In this second—best context Pigou argued that the
     "indirect damage" caused by distortionary taxes should be added to the
     cost of production to obtain the true opportunity cost of the public
     good. The indirect cost of raising revenue by distort ionary taxes
     should clearly be measured in terms of substitution effects. Hence it
     should be possible to express the first—order condition for the optimum
     provision of a public good financed by diltortionary taxes as a
     modified version of the Samuelson (1954, 1955) conditions for the
     first—best case. The sum of the marginal rates of substitution would be
     equal to the marginal rate of transformation plus a term representing
     the marginal indirect damage. But the existing formal solutions of the
     problem (Diamond and Mirriess 1971, Stiglitz and Dasgupta 1971,
     Atkinson and Stern 1974, Diamond 1975 and Starrett 1983) do not yield
     first-order conditions of this form.            Instead the first-order
     conditions are expressed in terms of derivatives of total tax revenue
     rather than pure substitution effects and are dependent upon the
     optimality of the distortionary tax structure.

     In this paper we show that the total social marginal cost of a public
     good can be expressed as the sum of its production cost and the
     marginal efficiency costs of the distortionary taxes required to
     finance the public good.       The latter is a function solely of
     substitution effects and the interpretation of the first-order
                                      —3—


condition does not depend upon whether the distortionary taxes are set
at their optimal levels.        To some extent this resurrects Pigou's
discussion of the issue.       Where Pigou was wrong was in failing to
appreciate   that at a second—best optimum the marginal efficiency cost

could    conceivably   be negative.    As Atkinson and   Stern   (1974) have

shown,    such an outcome might occur   if an increase in the quantity    of
the   public good led to an increased demand for private goods that were
highly taxed. This possibility is an illustration of the general
theory of the second—beat, and has been the focus of the critique of
Pigou.   In contrast, in this paper the aim is to derive a genera].
result for the optimum provision of public goods that expresses
formally the substance of Pigou' a argument about the need to take into
acount the "indirect damage" resulting from the use of distortionary
rather than lump-sum taxes.


The key to our result is to exploit the duality that exists between the
prices of private goods and the quantities of public goods, and between
the quantities of private goods and the willingness to pay for public
goods. Recognition of this dual relationship leads directly to the
result that the conditions for the optimum provision of public goods
are simply the dual of the many—person Ramsey rule for optimal
conmdity taxes. These conditions may then be given a straightforward
interpretation as a many—person Pigovian rule for optimal public goods
provision.


Although   neither Pigou (1947) nor Atkinson and Stern (1974) explicitly

allowed     for distributional effects, the model presented here
incorporates differences among agents. The use of distortiona.ry taxes
                                —4—


presupposes such differences if a uniform poll tax is feasible.


In Section 2 some basic duality results for public goods are presented,
and the optimum conditions for the provision of public goods are
derived in Section 3. An example is analysed in Section 4.
                                        —5—


2. Duality and Public Goods
   Consider an economy comprising agents whose preferences are defined
   over leisure, 3 private goods which may be traded at consumer prices 2'
   and G public goods in which trade is not possible. These preferences
   may be represented by the indirect utility function


                        V   = v(, 2' Y)                           (1)


   where 2 is a 3 x 1 vector of consumer prices
          2 is a G x 1 vector of the quantities of public goods
          y is the agent's exogenous "full" income.


   Equation (1) defines the maximum level of utility that an agent can
   obtain given his income, market prices, and the coaun vector of public
   goods in the economy. Corresponding to (1) is the expenditure function


                        e = e(E, g, v)                            (2)


   Following King (1983) we may define an agent's imney metric utility, or
   "equivalent income", as the convolution of (1) and (2). Equivalent
   income is that level of income which, at some reference vector of
   consumer prices and public goods provision (, 9R), affords the same
   level of utility as can be attained under the budget constraint
   (2 ,   y).
                                R R , v)
                            = e(2   ,                             (3a)


                                R  R
                              f(2,2,212,Y)                        (3b)
                                      —6—


The function f describes individual preferences, and its arguments
denote the budget constraint at which ixney metric utility is being
evaluated.


We shall assume that v and e (and hence f) are continuous functions of
the   quantities of the public goods,      with first and second derivatives.1
Given this assumption we may define the marginal willingness to pay        for
the kth   public    good by the expression




                          wk -—fl—                                 ()4

If we differentiate (1) with respect to gj holding the level of utility
constant   we obtain

                                                                   (5)
                                 aYag

Combining    (4)   and   (5) yields the following analogue of Roy' s identity
for public goods.



                                                                   (6)


Comparing   this expression with Roy's identity we see that in (6) the
marginal willingness to pay for the public good replaces the quantity
demanded of the private good and the quantity of the public good
replaces the price of the private good. The sign difference reflects
the   fact that v is increasing in        and decreasing in 2•
                                 —7—



From (2) and (4) may be derived the analogue to Shephard' a lenna



                                                                 (7)



The compensated and uncompensated demands for private goods are given,
respectively, by


                   x. = i— = x.C   (, , v)              i=l. . .J (8)


                                   =x.(,g,y)            i=l...J (9)


The compensated effect of a change in the quantity of the )cth public
good on the demand for the ith private good is denoted by 8Bc            From

(8) and (9) it is given by


                             C
                          8x.1     8x.         8x. 8e
                    S. =—=—+——
                    ik ag
                           1
                             ay
                                1
                                                                 (10)




Combining (7) and (10) yields the Slutsky equation for public goods


                    8x                   8x.
                                                                  (11)
                                          —8—


There is a further set of equations relating changes in the quantities
of public goods to changes in the willingness to pay for public goods.


                          8w.               8w.

                          8g5ik
                                      +
                                          Wkay
                                                    k—1 ...             2



where    s is   the change in the     willingness to   pay   for the jth public
good resulting    from a compensated change in the quantity of the )cth

public good.



Symrietry   of the substitution      effects follows directly from the

assumption   that the expenditure function is continuous and twice
differentiable. In (11) 8i)c =        s, which is the change in the
willingness to pay for the kth public good following a compensated
change in the price of the ith private good. In (12) the own—price
substitution effects, 5Jc' are not necessarily negative. This is
because the expenditure function may not be convex in the quantities of
public goods (see footnote 1).


For a given choice of reference prices and quantities, the             equivalent

income function (3b) is defined over actual private good           prices,   public

good   quantities   and    income.     There are two ways in which commodity

demands and willingnesses to pay may be obtained from              the equivalent

income function. First, since it may be thought of as an expenditure
function defined over reference prices then from (7) and (8) demands
are given by differentiating (3a) with respect to reference prices and
quantities and evaluating the derivatives at the point where reference
values equal actual budget values. Secondly, we may differentiate (3a)
                                —9—



and (3b) with respect to actual prices and quantities and substitute
from Roy's identity. These yield



                        j   R
                                   _af
                                   —
                                       8p   8f            (13)




                                            af
                   Wk_af R = 2         ôf
                                            8y
                                                          (14)
                             Ig =
                                        —10—


3. A Many—Person Piqovian Rule for Public Goods


   Armed with the above duality results for public goods we may now
    analyse the optimum provision of public goods in an economy where
    lump—sum taxation is limited. We shall consider an economy with a
    continuum of agents who differ in respect of some attribute. The
    individual—specific attribute will be denoted by e,                      and     its
    distribution function by F( e) •2        For   example, individuals may   have

    different     wage rates. The aim of allowing for such differences is

   partly     to motivate   the problem (with identical individuals a uniform

    poll   tax is clearly optimal arid this implies the Sainuelson conditions
    for public goods), and partly to compare the result for the optimum
    provision of public goods with the many—person Ramsey rule for optima].
    corrmiodity taxes.


    The government is assumed to choose levels of public         goods    provision
    arid tax rates in order to niaximise a social welfare function defined
    over individual levels of equivalent income.3          For simplicity we
    assume also that the social welfare function is additively separable
    arid is   given by


                             SW =
                                    w[y(e)J'(e)                            (15)


    The concavity      of W describes   the degree of   aversion to inequality

    in money metric utility levels.



    The    government's   budget constraint is that total per     capita   revenue

    from    all   taxes, r, must be at least as great a.s per    capita   public

    expenditure
                                    — 11   —




                       r   £.                                      (16)


where c is a G x 1 vector of the (constant) per capita marginal costs
of the public goods.


The value of r depends upon the particular tax instruments available to
the government. We assume that the feasible set of taxes comprises a
uniform poll tax, denoted by 2, and uniform specific commodity taxes, t
on the J private goods. Leisure is taken as the numeraire and is
assumed to be untaxed.


Producer prices are assumed to be constant, and the relationship
between producer and consumer prices (denoted by and 2 respectively)
is given by4


                                                                   (17)


Denoting the mean demand for good i by              we have that
                                J
                       r=2+ i=l
                             E t.k.                                (18)


The Lagrangian corresponding to the government' s optimisation problem
is


        Je w{yE(e)]r(e)
                           +A        +         t.    —

                                                         l   Ck    (19)




where A denotes the multiplier corresponding to the government's budget
constraint and is the shadow price of government revenue.
                                   — 12 —



The     first order conditions for the optimum levels of the three sets of
policy instruments (i) commodity tax rates, (ii) quantities of the
public goods, and (iii) the level of the poll tax (or subsidy), are the
following. They use the facts that 8f/82 =             —af/8y   and 8f/8t = ef/apj.
W' denotes the derivative of W with respect to YE



       w'      dP(9) + X                  _2            = 0     j=l.   J (20)
 Je                                 J          dP(e)}




                                                                          (21)




       W                )                               = 0
 ire
               dF( 9)
                            [       J2  e)}
                                               dF(


Following Diannd (1975) and Atkinson and Stiglitz (1980, p387) we
                                                                           (22)




define      the total social marginal   valuation    of income    of   an individual

with    attribute   9 by

                                W' 8f      J     8x.
                                                                           (23)


In this expression all of the derivatives depend upon 9. The                 value   of

b( 9)   is the money value to   the planner    of an additional unit of           income

in the hands of a person with attribute 9. The first term measures the
value to the planner of the increase in the agent ' s welfare, and the
second term measures the money gain to the government resulting from
                                             — 13     —




the increased taxes paid by the agent when he spends his additional
income.


The Slutsky equation for private goods is


                         ax.1               ax.
                         —=s..
                         ap. ij
                                         —x—
                                          jay
                                                       1
                                                                                          (24)



substituting    this    equation into (20) (noting sj =                                  and using
equation     (13) and   the   definition of b( e) in (23) yields                    the   many—person

Ramsey rule for opt i .. 1 conmdity taxes


     r                                            r
          b(s) x.(e)dP(e)     =              t.        s..(e)           dF(6) j=1.. .J    (25)
     Je                                i=l        Je

Let the    mean value   of the social marginal valuation of incoma be
denoted by

                              = I b(e)dP(e)                                               (26)
                                  Je

It   is possible to rewrite (25) so that it is a natural extension of the
simple Ramsey rule for an economy of identical individuals by defining
the normalised covariance of b( e )fb                 and X3            ( )/ as

                                         b(s) x.(O)
                          •.=cov
                                             b            x.


                                       (b(e)—) (x.(e)—.)
                                       ________  j
                              =                                            dP()           (27)
                                  Je         b                 ic
                                                                    3
                                — 14   —

Hence




                        J [te — b]x.(e)dF(e) = b k. 4'.            (28)


Substituting (28) into (25) yields the alternative form of the
many—person Ramsey rule (Atkinson and Stiglitz 1980, p387)



                        E t.    s..(e)dF(e)
                        i      Je                  = (1—b)—b 4'.
                                                        j=l.. .J   (29)



This condition states that the propoxtionate reduction in the
compensated demand for good j resulting from the imposition of the
commodity tax structure is equal to a constant that is negatively
related to the covariance between the consumption of good j        and    the
social marginal value of income .          The   more consumption is
concentrated aixng those with a high total social marginal valuation of
income, the smaller the reduction in demand that should result from the
imposition of the optimal tax structure. This result is well—known and
is presented here solely for purposes of comparison with the case of
public goods for which there is an exactly analagous condition.


The first—order condition for the optimal poll tax implies (from (22),
(23) and (26) that

                                                                   (30)
                                          — 15   —




This equation has the simple interpretation that if the government can
make uniform lump—sum transfers then the average value of the total
social marginal valuation of income must equal the average cost of the
marginal transfer, namely unity. Note that a linear income tax can be
thought of as a combination of a poll tax (or subsidy) arid uniform
commodity tax rates. It is, therefore, a special case of the tax
structure examined here.6


The first—order condition for the optimum provision of public goods,
equation (21), may be combined with the analogue of Roy's identity,
(14), and the Slutsky equation for public goods, (11), to give



   I
        b(e)wk(e)dF(e)
                         =
                             Ck
                                  —
                                      E    t.        s(e)dP(e)
    e                                            e        k=1. . .G   (31)


This equation for optimum public goods provision is exactly analagous
to equation (25) for optimal conmodity taxes. The quantities of the
private good in the latter are replaced by the wi].lingnesses to pay for
the public good in the former, and the average quantity demanded is
replaced by the cost of production. The duality between the prices and
quantities of private and public goods means that (25) and (31) are
dual to each other and can be interpreted as particular cases of a
single general condition for optimum public intervention.


We may define the normalised covariance of the total social marginal
valuation of income and the willingness to pay for the )cth public good
                                       — 16   —



as


                                     b(9)     wk(e)
                             = coy                                            (32)
                                       b       Ck.
Hence




                             [b(e) —                        = b Ck k          (33)
                                       b} Wk
                        Je


Substituting   (33)   into   (31) yields




                                                       Ck
                                                            (1   -   k )- b


                                                             k=1...G          (34)


where wk    is the mean willingness        to pay for the ]cth public         good.

We   may think of   this as a many—person         Pigovian rule for the optimum
provision of public goods. It states that the (approximate)
proportionate change in the compensated willingness to pay for the )cth
public good that results from the imposition of the distortionary
couidity tax structure is equal to a constant that is negatively
related to the covariance between the willingness to pay for the public
good and the total social marginal valuation of income. The greater
is the relative willingness to pay of those with a high total social
marginal valuation of income the larger is the optimal proportionate

reduction in the marginal willingness to pay. One would expect that
                                  — 17   —




this would normally be associated with a larger supply of the public
good. Equation (34) is dual to the many—person Ramsey rule given by
equation (29), with the exception that the ratio     enters into the

right—hand side of (34) because,         as   noted above, in the government
revenue constraint the average quantities of private goods are dual to
the marginal production costs of public goods rather than their mean
willingnesses to pay. This affects the interpretation of (34).
Consider the case in which agents are identical (4 = 0) and there is
no poll tax. The Pigou rule states that for small deviations from
first-best (where ck =      ) the proportionate change in the compensated
willingness to pay is the same for all public goods. reover, it is
exactly equal to the proportionate reduction in the compensated demands
for all private good.s (equal to 1—b) from (29)). For large changes,
however, the right—hand side of (34) will depend upon the nature of the
public good.


The final step in the analysis is to compare the second—best optimum
described by (31) with the Samuelaon first—best conditions. The latter
state that in a first—best the sum of the marginal rates of
substitution between the public good and the numeraire must be equal to
the marginal rate of transformation between the two. This implies that


               dF(e) = Ck                                         (35)
    [wk(e)
    Je


Using (33) we may rewrite (31) to give



    JeWk(9) dF(e) = Ck + [(l_b)k_ b Ckk} —                tiSki   (36>
                                                    i=1
                                 — 18   —

where   § is the mean value of sj (and equals jc).

Equation (36) has an appealing interpretation. The difference between
the first and second best is that in the latter the effective cost of
the public good is equal to its production cost plus two additional
terms. The first of these terms relates to the distributional effects
of the public good provision, and with the poll tax set optimally (b=l)
its value as a proportion of production costs is exactly equal to minus
the covariance between the willingness to pay and the social marginal
valuation of income.      The second term we may call the Pigou term
because it measures the distortion to the aggregate willingness to pay
resulting from the use of distortionary taxes to finance government
expenditure.     It consists solely of substitution effects and is          a

measure    of the "indirect damage" caused by taxation. For this reason
it seems to capture the essence of Pigou's argument.            Where Pigou's
intuition let him down was in suposing that the Pigou term must
necessarily be positive. By the usual second—best argument it is
possible that the shadow cost of the public good should be lower than
its value as given by the Samuelson condition because the provision of
an extra unit may reduce distortions elsewhere. Examples have been
provided by Atkinson and Stern (1974).      But in many cases it is
possible    to prove that the Pigou term is positive and we provide
examples   below. It should be noted that the    formulation in (36) and the
definition of the Pigou term do not in any way depend upon the

couidity    tax structure being set optimally. The many—person Pigou
rule   holds for any distortionary tax structure in exactly the same way
that the many—person Ramsey rule for        optimal   commodity taxes does not
depend on whether the revenue raised is spent optimally. This follows
directly from the duality of the two problems but the existing
treatment of the optimum provision of public goods in the literature
                                 — 19    —




leans heavily on the conditions for optiznality of the tax structure to
interpret the first—order conditions for public goods. Such an
approach is unnecessarily restrictive.


we conclude by considering some special cases that throw further light
on the general second—best optimum and the nature of the Pigou term.
First, it is easy to check that (36) is consistent with the Samuelson
conditions. In the first—best when unrestricted lump—sum taxation is
possible b(s) = 1, for all e. This implies that 'Jc = 0, b =1 and
tj =0 (for all i) and with these values (36) reduces to (35).

Secondly, when agents are identical (36) yields the simple Pigou rule

                                   J
                            ck    i.—l
                                         tiSki
          J v)(e) dF() =                                   (37)
          e
                                   b


It is obvious that if a poll tax is fea.sib].e no conmrdity taxes would
be employed and the first—best would be attainable. If, however, the
poll tax was infeasible then from (22) 0 < b 1, and the effective
cost exceeds the production cost modified by the Pigou term.


Finally, and of most interest, consider the case of equal ad valorem
coimnodity tax rates and a poll tax (such that b=l). This corresponds
to a linear income tax. The duality formulation allows us to derive a
very simple expression for the optimum in this case. Let the common
tax rate as a percentage of the tax—inclusive consumer price
(equivalent to the constant marginal income tax rate) be
                                            —20--


                                 t.
                             t=—i                     i=l ...J     (38)
                                 pi

The Pigou term, denoted by P, becomes
                                           '7
                            P—ti=].E p1                            (39)

If the public good is a substitute for expenditure on private goods as a
whole, then the Pigou term must be positive. From equation (4) and the
definition of fufl. income as total expenditure on goods and leisure, we
obtain


                                      '7
                           Wk_ 1=1
                               E                                   (40)

where s is the ccxzensated effect of an extra unit of the kth public good
on labour supply. The Pigou term becomes


                           P=   t(     —
                                            i.1c)                  (41)


Substituting (41) into (36) and setting the poll tax to its optimal value
yields the second—best optimum




                I.
                I    Wk
                          (9) dF(9) =                    —
                                                                   (42)
                                                    (1—t)    1—t
                j
                e
                                   — 21   —




If the degree of substitutability or couiplementarity of the public good and
leisure is very small, then the criterion for the provision of public goods
with a linear income tax is very simple. The marginal benefit—cost ratio,
denoted by r, required to justify a project is given by



                                                                (43)



The benefits, adjusted for distributional effects, should be equated with
the production cost grossed up by the marginal tax rate. Alternatively,
the benefits should be measured net of tax. In other words the Treasury
should instruct those responsible for project appraisal to calculate
benefits as if they were taxed at the same rate as private sector incomes.


The distributional adjustment is defined in terms of the total social
marginal valuation of income as given by (23).     Where social preferences
ta)ce no account of the distribution of welfare, and are concerned solely
with "efficiency" then only the second term in (23) varies across agents.
In this case (arid with uniform coumKdity tax rates) a sufficient condition
for Z' to be zero is that the marginal propensity to consume leisure is the
same for all agents .'   The   required marginal benefit—cost ratio is then
project—independent and is given simply by r = 1/(l—t). Although the value
of t depends upon the full general equilibrium solution, this formulation
gives a simple rule of thumb for the implementation of optimal public
expenditure decisions. The cost should be grossed—up by    the tax rate to
allow for the marginal deadweight loss of financing the public good by
distortiOflary taxes. For example, with a tax rate of 50 per cent, the
benefits (sum of the willingnesses to pay) would have to exceed twice the
                                   —22—


cost to justify provision of the public good. An alternative interpretation
is that the benefits of a project should be thought of as equivalent to
other forms of income and the net of tax value taken as the relevant value.


To surise, equation (43) describes the optimal marginal benefit—cost
ratio under the following assumptions:
(i)   uniform couinodity taxes, or a linear income tax, are employed. It is
      not required that uniform tax rates be optimal, merely that they
      charaterise the tax system used.
(ii) the public good is, on average, neither a complement not a substitute
      for leisure. Any pattern of complementarity or substitutability
      between private goods and the public good is allowed.
                                         — 23   —




4.   An ..-p].e

      To illustrate the power of the duality formulation of the problem, we

      shall   examine a simple example, similar to that used by Atkinson and
      Stern (1974), and show that explicit expressions may be derived for the
      optimum provision of the public good and the marginal benefit—cost
      ratio as functions of the underlying preference and technology
      parameters.      Consider an economy of identical individuals whose
      preferences are defined over a single public good, leisure and two
      private goods. Preferences are assumed to be Cobb—Douglas in form and
      described by the indirect utility function (with the wage rate
      normalised to unity).


                                     12
                  v(p1, p2, g, y) = p1    p2        g '   0
                                                               (X]J   a2   1 (44)
                                                              f3 0


      The   representative consumer' s budget constraint is8
                                                                             (45)
                   p1x1+p2x2+(—L)=Y


where L is hours worked, HM is the maxi.mum number of hours available for
work, and y is exogenous full income. Producer prices are assumed
constant. We denote the reference prices of the private goods and the
reference quantity of the public good by R1, P1z and gR respectively.
Prom (3) and (44) the level of equivalent income is given by
                                     —24—


                             R a1    R   U2g R
                            —
                            p1      — — .y
                                    p2
                                                              (46)
                            p1      p2      g




From (13) and (46) the demands for the private goods and the supply of
laur are given by

                    xl = —
                           a1y
                           p1
                                                              (47)
                    x2 =   —
                           a2y
                           p2

                    L




From (14) and (46) the marginal willingness to pay for the public good
(denoted by w) is


                                                              (48)
                        g

In the first-best case where the public good can be financed by a
nondistortionary lump—sum tax then at the optimum


                    w=c                                       (49)


Exogenous income is reduced by the amount of the lump—sum tax which, from
the government revenue constraint, must be equal to the cost of providing
the public good (cg). Hence (48) and (49) yield the first—best level of
public good provision, g*, as
                                         — 25    —




                     g*__
                       l+j3 C
                                                                     (50)
Consider now the second—best case in which only comnodity taxes may be

employed.


The Ramsey rule (29) implies that



                     t1s11 + t2s12                   t1s21 + t2s22
                                        =        =                   (51)
                           xl                             x2                -




where   b is the social marginal value of income. The substitution effects
corresponding to the demands in (47) may be inserted into (51) to yield



                     ti t2
                     —=—=t                                           (52)
                     p1 p2
                      b=   1   —
                                   t(1—u1—cx2)
                                                                     (53)


The cobb-Douglas preferences described by (44) imply equal co1IIKdity tax
rates (as a proportion of the producer price) on the two private goods.
The comnn tax—inclusive rate of tax is given from the government budget
constraint and optimal coimmnodity demands as


                            cg
                     t=                                              (54)




From (37) the first—order condition for the provision of the public good
may be written as
                                             —26—


                              c —
                        w=           t(PiBig+   P282g)
                                                                           (55)
                                         b


The   substitution effects of the public good are given by          (11)

                        öx.

                        _=Sjg+W_J=O                       i1,2             (56)


Eence



                                                                           (57)
                                    pi



Substituting   (53)   and   (57)    into (55)   yields the following simple result.


                               C
                        w=—   l—t
                                                                           (58)




At the second—best opt2inuin the use of distortionary comndity taxes
increases the relevant marginal cost. In effect, the marginal cost is
grossed up by the rates of tax or, equivalently, the marginal benefits must
be computed   as if   they were taxed.



To   solve explicitly   for the optimal quantity         of the public good substitute
(48) and (54) into (58).            This yields the second—best optimal     quantity,


                                    (a + a )t3
                      g** =
                                                   C                       (59)
                                   a1+a2+f3
                                   — 27   —




Comparing   this expression with (50)

               g (a1 + a2)(l + 13)
               —=                       <1                       (60)
               g*      a1+a2+13

Less of the public good is supplied at the second—best optifflum.
substituting (59) into (54) gives an explicit expression for the optimum
tax rate

                         '3
               t=                                                (61)



Together with (58) this defines the marginal benefit—cost ratio to be used
in evaluating public projects1°


               w    a1+a2+13
               —=                                                (62)
                C




The   welfare loss that results from the inability to use lump—sum taxes may
be calculated by evaluating (46) at the first—and second—best optima. It
is important to note that the loss arises from the impact of the
distortionary tax structure on both the pattern of demand for private goods
and the provision of the public good. As Hines (1984) has pointed out,
conventional measures of the impact of distortionary taxes ignore their
effect on the provision of public goods by examining a switch from
distortionaxy to lump—sum taxation holding public goods provision constant.
In our example the total welfare loss can be decomposed quite simply. When
calculating iney metric utility we take as reference prices and quantities
the producer prices of private goods and the first—best quantity of the
                                        — 28    —




public good. With these choices of reference values uney metric utility
in the first—best is given (from (46)) by

             y*=y_cg* j                                               (63)

In the second—best optimum the prices of private goods are equal to
producer prices grossed up by the tax rate t, and public good provision is
g**. Equivalent income is

                 =                         y                          (64)
                      (l_t)'2[._]
Substituting from (50), (59) and (61) gives a measure of the welfare loss
resulting from the use of distortionary taxes in terms of the ratio


                                      a14-a2+
                          a1;                   . ( l+i3)   l+)         (65)
             ;*=      {         a2]
In contrast, the welfare level that can be achieved by replacing coimxdity
taxes by lump-sum taxes holding revenue and the quantity of the public good
constant is measured by



                'E              y_cg**                                (66)


Substitution yields

                                                     l—a1—a2
                          (a1+cx2)      (a1+a2+/3)                1   (67)
                                13 + (a1+a2)(1—13)
                                            —29—


The   total welfare gain from removing distortionazy taxes can be decomposed
into that part attributable to the distortion of the pattern of demand for
private goods and that part attributable to the distortion of public goods
provision. This is shown by



                   YE** =   ___
                            YE** —
                                 'E
                                                                       (68)
                   YE*




5. Conclusions

The key to our       results   is the dual     relationship between   the price   of
           goods and the    quantity   of   public goods. We derived analogues of

                                 ln
private

Roy' s   identity, Shephard '8         and the Slutaky equation for public goods.
From these we showed that the determination of optim1 tax rates and the
optimal provision of public goods are dual problems.     An integrated
treatment of optimal taxation arid public expenditure follows naturally.
The first-order conditions for public goods provision can be expressed as a
modification of the Samuelson conditions with extra terms representing (a)
the distortionaiy effect of taxes on the willingness to pay for the public
good (the "Pigou term"), and (b) the distributional effects of the
government budget. Our analysis of the Pigou term (defined as the sum of
substitution effects) captures Pigou 'a notion of the i ndi rect damage
resulting from the need to finance public expenditure by distortionary
taxes. In some special cases we showed that the consequence of the
indirect damage is that the benefits of a public project should be measured
as if they were taxed.
                                      — 30 —



                                    F0S
1.    In the case of private goods the properties of continuity and
      differentiability follow from the fact that because of substitution
      possibilities the expenditure function is concave in prices. In the
      case of public goods the analagous result would be that the expenditure
      function was convex in the quantities of the public goods. But this is
      a statement about preferences for public goods and cannot be derived
      from the assumption of optimising behaviour on the part of individual
      agents as in the case of private goods. To prove that the expenditure
      function is concave in the prices of private goods requires the
      assumption of consistent individual choice over bundles of private
      goods (see, for example, Deaton and Muellbauer 1980 pp.39—40 and Varian
      1978 p.29), but individual   agents have no such choices to makewhen it
      comes to public goods.        Chiappori (1984) and   sines  (1984) have
      independently noted the   duality between private and public goods, but
      in their formulation indirect  utility is defined over the willingness
      to pay for public goods rather than quantities. The problem with this
      is that the willingness to pay is a function of preferences exactly
      analogous to the "virtual price" of a rationed private good.
2. For notational simplicity we take e to be a scalar. The generalisation
    is straightforward.
3. Defining social welfare over levels of money metric utility rather than
    over indirect utilities, for example, makes it possible to distinguish
    the cardinality of social preferences from the form of individual
    preferences.
4. The assumption that producer prices are constant may be relaxed in a
    straightforward manner provided that any pure profits that result may
    be taxed at a rate of 100 per cent (Diannd and Mirrlees 1971).
5. The left—hand side of (29) is only approximately equal to the
    proportionate reduction in compensated demand for large taxes.
6. For a discussion of nonlinear income taxes see Atkinson        and   Stiglitz
      (1976).

7. An alternative sufficient condition is that the willingness          to pay
    for the public good    is
                          uncorrelated with full income.

8. The preferences defined by (44)     exhibit nonsatiation.
9.    If labour supply is non—negative then a1 + a2       1.


10.   The reader may  easily check that if households are not identical but
      differ in respect of their endowments, the tax rate and marginal
      benefit—cost ratio are unchanged and that the quantity of the public
      good is   given by (59) with income   replaced by mean income.
                                     — 31   —


                                 RiNCES

Atkinson, A.B. and N.H. Stern (1974), "Pigou, Taxation and      Public   Goods",
    Review of Economic Studies 41, 119—128.

Atkinson,      and J.E. Stiglitz (1976), "The Design of Tax Structure:
            A.B.
    Direct versus Indirect Taxation", Journal of Public Economics 6, 55—75.
Atkinson, A.B. and J.E. Stiglitz (1980), Lectures on Public Economics,
    McGraw—Hill, New York.

Chiappori, P.A. (1984), "Household Behaviour and     the   Demand for Public
    Goods: A Duality Approach", mimeo, Paris.
Deaton, A. and J. Muellbauer (1980), Economics and Consumer Behaviour,
    Cambridge University Press.
Diaxcnd, P.A. (1975), "A Many—Person Ramsey Tax Rule", Journal of Public
    Economics, 4, 335—342.
Diaxrcnd, P A. and J.A. Mirrlees (1971), "Optim1 Taxation and Public
    Production I: Production Efficiency and II: Tax Rules", American
    Economic Review, 61, 8—27 and   261—278.

Hines, J. (1984), "Opti in I ity and Deadweight Loss in a Tax and Spending
   System", mimo, Harvard University.
King, M . A. (1983), "Welfare Analysis of Tax Reforms Using Household Data",
    Journal of Public Economics, 21, 183—214.
Pigou, A.C. (1947), A Study in Public Finance (3rd     Edition),   MacMillan,
    London.
Samuelson, P . A. (1954), "The Pure Theory of Public Expenditure", Review of
    Economics and Statistics, 36, 387—389.
Samuelson, P.A. (1955), "Diagraimnatic Exposition of a Theory of Public
   Expenditure", Review of Economics and Statistics, 37, 350—356.
Stazrett, D.A. 1983), "On the Marginal Cost of Government Spending",
    Tn1TTo, Stanford University.

Stiglitz, J.E. and P.S. Dasgupta (1971), "Differential Taxation, Public
    Goods and Economic Efficiency", Review of Economics Studies, 38,
    151—174.

Varian, H.R. (1978), Microeconomic   Analysis,   W.W. Norton & Company, New
    York,   38, 151—174.
