NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FREEDOM TO TRADE AND THE COMPETITIVE PROCESS
Aaron Edlin
Joseph Farrell
Working Paper 16818
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16818

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2011

*This paper has been long in gestation, but at the time of its release Professor Farrell is on leave serving
as Director of the Bureau of Economics, Federal Trade Commission. The opinions in this paper are
those of the authors as individuals and are not intended to represent those of the Federal Trade Commission,
or of any Commissioner, or of the National Bureau of Economic Research. We thank David Gilo,
Fred Kahn, Louis Kaplow, Douglas Melamed, Ariel Porat, Ed Rock, Carl Shapiro and seminar participants
at Tel Aviv University for helpful comments.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Aaron Edlin and Joseph Farrell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Freedom to Trade and the Competitive Process
Aaron Edlin and Joseph Farrell
NBER Working Paper No. 16818
February 2011
JEL No. D2,D4,K2,L2,L4,L5,M2
ABSTRACT
Although antitrust courts sometimes stress the competitive process, they have not deeply explored
what that process is. Inspired by the theory of the core, we explore the idea that the competitive process
is the process of sellers and buyers forming improving coalitions. Much of antitrust can be seen as
prohibiting firms’ attempts to restrain improving trade between their rivals and customers. In this way,
antitrust protects firms’ and customers’ freedom to trade to their mutual betterment.
Aaron Edlin
The Richard W. Jennings '39 Endowed Chair
University of California, Berkeley
Department of Economics and School of Law
Berkeley, CA 94720-7200
and NBER
edlin@econ.berkeley.edu
Joseph Farrell
Bureau of Economics
Federal Trade Commission
600 Pennsylvania Ave NW
Washington DC 20580
farrell@econ.berkeley.edu

Page 2 of 10
[B]y the omission of any direct prohibition against monopoly in the concrete [the
Sherman Act] indicates a consciousness that the freedom of the individual right to
contract when not unduly or improperly exercised was the most efficient means for the
prevention of monopoly…
[T]he right to freely contract was the means by which monopoly would be
inevitably prevented …
Justice White in Standard Oil (1911),1 emphases added.
The freedom to switch suppliers lies close to the heart of the competitive process
that the antitrust laws seek to encourage.
Justice Breyer in Discon (1998)2.
Antitrust analysis considers both process and outcomes. That is, it asks both
whether an activity or agreement interferes with the competitive process and whether it
leads to outcomes that are inefficient and/or injure consumers. The mix of these two
strands of analysis varies. For example, horizontal merger analysis is almost entirely
outcome-focused, while cartel enforcement scarcely addresses outcomes at all; formbased and effects-based analyses continue to contest other areas of antitrust.
Recent decades have seen increasing weight placed on direct analysis of
outcomes. Some commentators even suggest that whether an act is anticompetitive turns
by definition on whether its outcome will be bad. Courts, on the other hand, still
frequently stress the competitive process, even when they may not be particularly clear
about what that process is. .
We take a step toward understanding what the competitive process entails,
because we side with the courts in thinking that an analysis of impacts on the competitive
process should remain central to antitrust.
A very intuitive and robust benefit of competition is that if firm A is greedy or
incompetent, consumers can trade with firm B instead. Firm A would of course love to
thwart the formation of this improving coalition, and might sometimes be able to do so,
as we illustrate below. These observations suggest a perspective that the competitive
process is the process of sellers and buyers forming improving coalitions.
We explore below the idea that the competitive process centrally involves the
freedom to strike better deals. From this perspective much—though by no means all—of
antitrust can be seen as prohibiting firms’ attempts to restrain or thwart improving trade
between their rivals and customers, echoing the Sherman Act’s ban on agreements in
“restraint of trade.” In this way antitrust protects B’s and consumers’ freedom to trade to
their mutual betterment.3
We also illustrate how some antitrust controversies arise when firm A itself is an
essential participant in the improving coalition.
1

Standard Oil v. United States 221 U.S. 1 (1911).
NYNEX v. Discon 525 U.S. 128, 137 (1998).
3
Antitrust prohibits certain things (all statutes do), but it is a shallow paradox to
observe that laws protecting freedom can take the form of prohibitions. (For instance,
laws against kidnapping prohibit certain conduct but clearly protect freedom.)
2

Last printed 2/8/11 4:50 PM.

Page 3 of 10

1. Outcomes,	  Process,	  and	  the	  Core	  
An entirely outcome-focused view would define restraints of trade as practices or
agreements that lower economic (consumer or total) surplus, perhaps measured by
quantity traded, in a market. Some mainstream antitrust commentary might approach this
view. Posner [2001, p.22] views the “completed act” of violating section 1 as “an actual
restriction of output,” while Posner [1976, p. 53] argues that “antitrust policy is to be
shaped by the monopoly problem” after explaining that monopolies lower output and
raise price, relative to the perfectly competitive level or the level that would otherwise
obtain. Similarly, Hovenkamp (2006, ch. 1) frames his “legal and economic structure”
using outcome measures. Bork [1978, p. 51] states that “[t]he only legitimate goal of
American antitrust law is the maximization of consumer welfare.”4
The freedom-to-trade perspective, in contrast, stresses the freedom of buyers and
sellers to change their trading partners whenever that is mutually beneficial. The aspect
of the competitive process that we study here is buyers and sellers exercising this
freedom and forming improving coalitions (i.e., new configurations of trading partners).
In a highly competitive market a seller who does not give its customers good
deals will find that rivals offer better deals to attract these customers. The process of
firms fighting over customers and offering them better and better deals raises consumers’
utility skyward. This competitive process is closely aligned with what Schumpeter called
creative destruction.
Until the outcome reaches what economists call the core, an improving coalition
of buyers and sellers is always possible and the competitive process will continue. In fact
the core is defined as the set of outcomes or payoffs from which no coalition of people
improve their payoffs by simply trading among the coalition.
Because it is framed in terms of payoffs and is flexible as to institutions and
modes of trading, the core is more meaningful than perfectly competitive equilibrium in a
broad range of markets of interest to antitrust. As Edgeworth (1881: p. 31) wrote,
“[the core] is attained when the existing contracts can
neither be varied without recontract with the consent of the
existing parties, nor by recontract within the field of
competition. The advantage of this general method is that it
is applicable to the particular cases of imperfect
competition; where the conceptions of demand and supply
at a price are no longer appropriate.”
Outcomes in the core are efficient, making the core a reasonable ideal to pursue if we
judge by outcomes.5

4

By consumer welfare Bork means (confusingly) what is more often called total
welfare; but our point here is that he asserts that antitrust is outcome-focused.
5
However, the proof that outcomes in the core are (Pareto) efficient relies on the
prospect of forming the “grand” improving coalition containing everyone in the
Last printed 2/8/11 4:50 PM.

Page 4 of 10
Traditionally, antitrust commentators think of the outcome ideal or benchmark as
the perfectly competitive equilibrium in which firms are price takers; this naturally
inspires them to focus on acquisitions and maintenance of market power (i.e., power over
price) as a problematic outcome, but does not provide much guidance of what process
(i.e., what kinds of acquisitions or maintenance) are anticompetitive and should be
condemned. Grinnell famously and unhelpfully identifies “willful acquisition” as its
process prong.6 On the other hand, if the outcome ideal is the core, as we consider here,
then the process focus shifts to a search for whatever restrains, thwarts or blocks the
formation of improving coalitions; this provides meaningful guidance of what constitutes
a process violation.
Perversely (to our minds) most discussion of the core in antitrust appears to have
fretted that, with large fixed costs, the core might be empty, so that the competitive
process will never reach closure and assumed that the resulting creative destruction must
be worse than a non-competitive “equilibrium.”7

2. Freedom	  to	  Trade	  and	  Horizontal	  Agreements	  under	  Section	  1	  
To illustrate this view of the competitive process as freedom to trade, suppose that
suppliers A and B collude and agree to charge a high price H. If their contract were
legally binding, it would prohibit either from trading with a buyer at a lower price L < H.8
In the case of a buyer who pays H to buy from A, the contract thwarts the {B, buyer}
coalition that would otherwise improve on the status quo for its members. The contract
thus restrains the freedom of B and the buyer to trade.
Typically, of course, a cartel does not contemplate court enforcement; rather, A
indicates that if B attracts buyers by offering a better deal, A will punish B. This threat
discourages the otherwise improving coalition. B is not entirely “free” to cut price so as
to trade with the buyer, because A will punish him for doing so. Thus viewing
competition as centrally involving freedom to trade shows how cartels are a core
violation of Section 1, which may “explain” the per se treatment of cartels in a more
fundamental way than the courts’ mantra that “experience” shows that they almost
always lead to bad outcomes.
Readers may ask why {A,B} isn’t an improving coalition relative to the
competitive outcome: why doesn’t our interpretation of antitrust as freedom to trade
fatally include freedom to collude? In the language of the core, {A,B} is not an
improving coalition because a coalition with only sellers yields no surplus: worthwhile

economy. If such coalitions are very hard to form, it becomes an appealing hypothesis
rather than a theorem that the formation of improving coalitions tends toward efficiency.
6
United States v. Grinnell Corp. 384 U.S. 563 (1966).
7
See generally Telser (1978); Sjostrom (1989) argues that the core may be empty
in ocean shipping and asserts that this would justify cartels.
8
Even if A and B are bound to their collusion by honor alone, an agreement not to
deal with one another’s customers restrains trade and discourages each from forming an
improving coalition with the other’s customers.
Last printed 2/8/11 4:50 PM.

Page 5 of 10
coalitions include the trading partners. And {A, B, customers} with trade at H does not
“improve on” the competitive outcome because customers are worse off. 9
Maricopa may illustrate the view that restraining rivals’ trade is illegal even in the
face of a natural intuition that the effects might not be bad. The Court decided it was per
se illegal for doctors to agree on maximum prices—that is, to agree not to charge more
than certain prices. In an outcome-focused approach, the Court’s per se condemnation
would be puzzling. After all, maximum prices would seem likely to expand output (if
doctors have market power or information rents), suggesting at least a need for more
analysis. On the other hand, the doctors were nakedly restraining one another’s freedom
to trade; for instance, each doctor was agreeing not to compete away business from the
others by offering very high quality service at high prices. A freedom-to-trade approach
appears to better explain the result in Maricopa than an outcome approach.
However, we do not suggest that outcomes can be ignored. To do so might risk
returning antitrust to pre-Chicago Board paradoxes such as whether all contracts are
illegal restraints or whether all trade restrains other trade. In ASCAP and BMI, the Court
declined to apply the per se rule.10 Although the case literally involved fixing a price for
the blanket license, each copyright holder remained free to trade on his own with a
licensee.11 One could thus analyze the case by saying that the blanket licenses did not
limit anyone’s freedom to trade. Alternatively, if one did view collective pricing of the
blanket license as limiting freedom to trade, a court might allow the limitation if
efficiencies are sufficiently compelling.
In Engineers, engineers agreed not to quote a price until a customer had engaged
a particular engineer. They argued that without this restriction, customers would choose
low bidders, engineers would cut corners, and bridges would fall down. That defense
goes to efficiencies, not to whether the horizontal agreement limits freedom to trade. A
court might concern itself exclusively with the competitive process, and strike down the
agreement; or it might evaluate the efficiency defense. The Court took a confusing path
somewhere in between. It points out that consumers can trade off quality against price,
potentially the germ of a real efficiency analysis, but did not engage with an implied
efficiency theory involving consumer irrationality. The short shrift given to the
engineers’ defense is more compatible with a focus on restraints of the competitive
process than with a focus on outcomes.
Illustrating some of these tensions and interweavings of process and outcome,
consider an art dealer D who agrees to sell a painting to buyer A in a week for $500, but
leaves it hanging in his gallery. Buyer B arrives mid-week and offers $750 for the
painting. The forward contract between D and A prevents D from selling to B at the
higher price. Does it “restrain” the freedom of B and D to trade to their mutual benefit
and thwart an improving coalition {D, B}?
Had D and A entered a spot contract instead of a forward one, and had A taken
the painting home with him, then when B arrived, D would plainly have no painting, so
{D,B} would not be an improving coalition (let alone one that is thwarted). Inspired by
9

In principle one should specify the terms on which members of a coalition trade;
in some cases we take the liberty of leaving that implicit.
10
Broadcast Music v. Columbia Broadcasting System 441 U.S. 1 (1979).
11
This right to bypass ASCAP was the product of a prior antitrust settlement.
Last printed 2/8/11 4:50 PM.

Page 6 of 10
this observation, one could analyze the forward sale by saying that {D, B} is not an
improving coalition because the painting is already sold even though it still hangs in the
gallery. Here, and in many situations, this may be the soundest answer.
Another tack (less compelling in this instance but perhaps helpful in others)
would say that the forward sale did limit {D, B}’s freedom to trade, but might yet not
violate Section 1. First, the forward sale may well have helped D and A to trade in the
first place, so it might on balance increase freedom to trade. This approach would try to
balance pro and anticompetitive effects in terms of the competitive process, not directly
balance efficiencies. Second, even if forward sales hinder the competitive process, one
might allow them if they greatly improve efficiency. This approach would try more
directly to balance inefficient outcomes against anticompetitive restraints.

3. Freedom	  to	  Trade	  and	  Monopolization.	  
As the quotation from Justice White suggests, Section 2 tries to ensure that
monopolies do not thwart others’ incentives to trade around a greedy or incompetent
monopoly. This might suggest glossing Section 2 as: A monopoly may not block
improving trade between customers and rivals who would offer customers a better deal.
How, if at all, can a monopoly do that? Raising rivals’ costs can do it: consider
sabotaging a key rival’s factory, or threatening customers who deal with rivals.12 Less
obviously, we show below how a firm might discourage improving coalitions using
pricing—not price levels but pricing patterns. A low price may exclude, but only by its
merit: that is, only by offering customers a genuinely good deal. But a pricing pattern, it
turns out, can hinder the competitive process by forcing rivals to compete against a price
lower than the price that customers pay.
To see how this can happen, we first note two simple models in which it fails.
First, suppose that n firms each set a price simultaneously. Each firm’s price to
consumers is also the price against which its rivals compete. If a rival offers a better
deal, it gets the business.
Second, in the contestability model of Baumol, Panzar and Willig [1982], an
incumbent sets a price, and potential entrants make entry decisions knowing that (for long
enough at least to recoup sunk costs of entry) they can compete against that price. Again,
if a rival offers a better deal than what customers pay the incumbent, the rival wins the
business.
Reflecting the powerful intuition of such models of simple price level, Posner
(2001: p. 34) wrote:
The framers of the Sherman Act were concerned with the
“trust” problem, but what they conceived that problem to
be is obscure, and indeed contradictory. They seem to have
12

As this sentence indicates, otherwise-improving trade between a rival and a
customer could be discouraged from either end. Blowing up a rival’s factory is a popular
hypothetical in antitrust commentary: see, for example, Roundtable: Recent
Developments in Section 2, Antitrust Magazine, Fall 2003, p. 20. Somewhat similarly,
Conwood involved a claim that one firm ruined another’s sales displays. Conwood v.
United States Tobacco 290 F. 3d 768 (2002).
Last printed 2/8/11 4:50 PM.

Page 7 of 10
been concerned with low prices harmful to small-business
competitors of the trusts… as well as with high prices
harmful to consumers. …Protecting competitors from low
prices and consumers from high prices are incompatible
objectives, with a few rare exceptions, such as when a
monopolist prices below cost in an effort to intimidate a
potential entrant.
Indeed, if competition involved simply naming one price, that price could not
simultaneously be too high and too low. But the contradiction disappears if the price
confronting competitors is not the price that consumers pay.
For instance, monopoly M charges a high price H, but would cut its price upon
entry to L. A potential rival R who knows this and who cannot compete successfully
against L will not enter; with no entry, customers pay H. If R could profitably attract
buyers away from H but not away from L, then R and the buyers are not “free to trade.”
Specifically, relative to the situation in which M charges H, there would be an improving
coalition of R and customers, but its formation is thwarted by M’s threat to lower price to
L. Is M “competing on the merits,” the touchstone of competitive behavior since United
Shoe? M’s “merits” are inversely measured by the consumer price H, but it “competes”
using L. In that sense, when H and L differ, M is not competing on the merits. We say
that a firm has moved the goalposts (thus restraining freedom to trade) if its rivals must
compete against a price lower than the price its customers pay.
Moving the goalposts restrains R and customers from trading to their mutual
betterment, relative to M’s pre-entry price of H. More concretely, allowing monopolies
to move the goalposts chills entry and may well have bad consequences (see Edlin (2002
and 2011)). That said, setting policy to prevent it raises very real difficulties, both
practical and conceptual. At the conceptual level, M’s post-entry price of L represents,
ex post, an improving coalition of M and customers, relative to R’s offer.
Antitrust has long wrestled with the concept of exclusionary pricing, often
formulated (stressing the paradox) as whether prices can be “too low.” That formulation
suggests a focus on the level of price, for example relative to the firm’s cost. But, as
suggested by the discussion above, an incumbent’s pricing pattern can restrain or tax
potential trade by others. Here the low price is charged only out of equilibrium:
consumers do not benefit from it.13 In this view, neither high pricing nor low pricing is
itself a problem. What is cheating is moving the goalposts, not putting them in a “bad”
spot. Note that nothing in this core logic turns on the relationship between the
incumbent’s price and its costs.

4. Bundling	  and	  Loyalty	  Pricing	  
Suppose that buyers buy good 1 from firm A, and may buy good 2 either from
firm A or its rival firm B. If A worsens the terms of trade in good 1 when the buyer buys
13

Of course, a court would only observe a price that occurs. A lawsuit erupts
only if an entrant mistakenly enters anyway, and then is driven out. But the fact that the
case is brought only ex post does not imply that the antitrust analysis should focus on the
ex post effects.
Last printed 2/8/11 4:50 PM.

Page 8 of 10
good 2 from B, the worsening creates a tax on trade between firm B and the buyer. When
there is significant surplus in good 1 relative to likely quantities of good 2, the tax may
exclude trade between B and the buyer even while A charges a high marginal price for
good 2. In this way, much as in our monopolization discussion above, B may have to
compete against a low price (net of the tax) even while the buyer has to pay a high price
for incremental units of good 2 (including the tax if it buys from B).14
These concerns seem to align with the general notion of moving the goalposts and
finding a pricing pattern that hinders B-buyer trade by means other than simply charging
low prices to the buyer. On the other hand, the tax is avoidable if the buyer ceases to buy
good 1 from A, so it is limited by the buyer’s surplus in good 1. Moreover, B and the
buyer can trade between themselves if they are willing to say goodbye to A, so there is no
violation of plain freedom-to-trade. Thus, we see that moving goals is in some ways
broader than restraints on freedom to trade.
We think that a significant set of antitrust controversies thus arise where a rival
and buyer(s) would like to bypass a dominant firm in one line of business but where the
buyers are not willing to eschew all trade with the dominant firm. The pricing principle
suggested above and the freedom-to-trade principle suggest differing answers.

5. Vertical	  Agreements	  
The process-based freedom-to-trade criterion need not return us to pre-Chicago
antagonism to vertical agreements. Consider for example retail price maintenance
(“RPM”), involving a manufacturer M, retailer R, and consumer C, and a retail price r at
which R agrees with M that it will sell to C. The RPM agreement means that R is then
not free to charge a higher or lower price than r. Does this restrain the freedom of {R,C}
to trade? The tone of Dr. Miles,15 overruled by Leegin,16 suggested so. But {R, C} is not
an improving coalition: without M, it has no goods to sell or consume.17 On the other
hand, if one considers another retailer S, if M promises R that it won’t allow S to sell at
p<r, one might wonder if freedom to trade is restrained.
Consider now an exclusive distributorship. M and R1 agree that M will supply
R1 but not a would-be competing retailer R2. Is freedom to trade restrained? M could
shift its business entirely to R2, so if {M, R2, C} is an improving coalition because R2 is
a better retailer than R1, that coalition is free to form suggesting no restraint. As with
bundling, the thornier issue is whether there is an improving coalition that includes R1,
here {M, R1, R2, C}, and whether R1’s (or jointly M’s and R1’s) refusal to negotiate
towards such an improving coalition “should” count as restraining freedom of trade.
Some vertical agreements may restrain freedom to trade, but by no means all.

14

(2010).

See e.g. Inderst and Shaffer (2010) and Farrell, Pappalardo and Shelanski

15

Dr. Miles Medical Co. v. John D. Park & Sons Co. 220 U.W. 373 (1911).
Leegin Creative Leather Products v. PSKS, Inc. 551 U.S. 877.
17
If R is also a manufacturer, there is a horizontal problem, which is not our focus
here, so we assume that R is purely a retailer.
16

Last printed 2/8/11 4:50 PM.

Page 9 of 10

6. Freedom	  to	  Trade	  and	  the	  Goals	  of	  Antitrust	  
Commentators as diverse as Bork (1978), Posner (2001), Salop(2010), and
Hovenkamp (2006) have argued that antitrust should seek to protect total or consumer
welfare. Clearly it does so, but equally clearly it is not so simple. Antitrust doesn’t just
fail, but explicitly doesn’t try, to protect total or consumer welfare against certain obvious
threats, notably the exercise of legitimately acquired monopoly power by raising price.
While trying to address those threats would certainly involve administrative
difficulties and could affect ex ante incentives, antitrust’s refusal to try seems proud and
categorical rather than regretful and pragmatic. We think that a straightforward account
of why simple monopoly pricing is legal is found in the quotation from Standard Oil with
which we began. Antitrust (mainly) seeks to protect against monopoly abuse not by
barring deviations from competitive outcomes, but by safeguarding the competitive
process, which we suggest involves freedom to trade. Simply charging monopoly prices
harms welfare, but does not limit rivals’ freedom to trade, Justice White’s “surest
protection against monopoly”.
Antitrust protects the potential beneficial trades between competitors and
consumers. Since both consumers and competitors gain from such trade, this view can
explain why both consumers and thwarted competitors have antitrust rights, even though
antitrust protects “competition and not competitors.” Consumers are not protected from
all high prices, but only from those that a competitor would be happy to beat but for some
thwarting action; this explains why a pure monopoly does not violate the law simply by
charging high prices. Competitors are not protected from actual everyday low prices, but
only from tactics such as moving the goalposts that block them from giving customers a
better deal than a monopoly does.
Antitrust does not ban everything that reduces consumer welfare in equilibrium.
Instead Congress banned restraint of trade and monopolization, which can be understood
as a monopoly’s erection of “unnatural barriers” (restraints) that “restrict free
competition” in the words of Judge Wyzanski in United Shoe.18 We explored the idea
that these prohibitions may be unified if the competitive process is understood to mean
the process of sellers and buyers forming improving coalitions. This contrasts with the
ahistorical view that the meaning of “competition” is anything that improves total or
consumer welfare.19

7. References	  	  
Baumol, William J., John C. Panzar, & Robert D. Willig (1982). Contestable Markets and
the Theory of Industry Structure.

18

U.S. v. United Shoe 110 F.Supp. 295 (D. Mass. 1953). Aff’d Per Curiam, 347
U.S. 521 (1954).
19
On an economic view of process versus outcomes, see for instance Farrell
(2006).
Last printed 2/8/11 4:50 PM.

Page 10 of 10
Bork, Robert (1978), The Antitrust Paradox: A Policy at War with Itself. Basic Books,
New York.
Edgeworth, F.Y. (1881), Mathematical Psychics, London: C. Kegan Paul.
Edlin, Aaron (2002), “Stopping Above-Cost Predatory Pricing,” Yale Law Journal, Vol.
111, 941-991, January 2002.
Edlin, Aaron “Predatory Pricing,” forthcoming in Research Handbook on the Economics
of Antitrust Law, 2011.
Farrell, Joseph (2006), “Complexity, Diversity, and Antitrust,” The Antitrust Bulletin
51:1 (Spring): 165-173.
Farrell, Joseph, Janis Pappalardo, and Howard Shelanski (2010), “Economics at the FTC:
Mergers, Dominant-Firm Conduct, and Consumer Behavior,” Review of
Industrial Organization.
Hildenbrand, Werner (1974), Core and Equilibria of a Large Economy, Princeton
University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Hovenkamp, Herbert (2006) The Antitrust Enterprise, Harvard University Press.
Inderst, Roman, and Greg Shaffer, “Market Share Contracts as Facilitating Practices,”
unpublished (2010).
Posner, Richard A. Antitrust Law: An Economic Perspective, 1976, University of
Chicago Press, Chicago, Illinois.
Posner, Richard A., Antitrust Law, 2nd Ed., 2001, University of Chicago Press, Chicago,
Ill.
Salop, Steven (2010), “Question: What is the Real and Proper Antitrust Welfare
Standard? Answer: The True Consumer Welfare Standard,” 22 Loyola
Consumer Law Rev 336-353 (2010).
Sjostrom, William (1989), Collusion in Ocean Shipping: A Test of Monopoly and Empty
Core Models. The Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 97, No. 5, pp. 1160-1179.

Telser, Lester G. (1978), Economic theory and the core. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press,.

Last printed 2/8/11 4:50 PM.

