NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE UNOFFICIAL ECONOMY IN AFRICA
Rafael La Porta
Andrei Shleifer
Working Paper 16821
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16821

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2011

We are grateful to Nicholas Coleman, Sonia Jaffe, and Francisco Queiro for excellent research assistance.
This research was supported by the NBER Africa Project. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Rafael La Porta and Andrei Shleifer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Unofficial Economy in Africa
Rafael La Porta and Andrei Shleifer
NBER Working Paper No. 16821
February 2011
JEL No. O0,O12,O17,O43
ABSTRACT
We examine the productivity of informal firms (those that are not registered with the government)
in 24 African countries using field work and World Bank firm level data. We find that productivity
jumps sharply if we compare small formal firms to informal firms, and rises rapidly with the size of
formal firms. Critically, informal firms appear to be qualitatively different than formal firms: they
are smaller in size, produce to order, are run by managers with low human capital, do not have access
to external finance, do not advertise their products, and sell to largely informal clients for cash. Informal
firms thus occupy a very different market niche than formal firms do, and rarely become formal because
there is very little demand for their products from the formal sector.

Rafael La Porta
Dartmouth College
Tuck School
210 Tuck Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
rafael.laporta@dartmouth.edu
Andrei Shleifer
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center M-9
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ashleifer@harvard.edu

I. Introduction.
Informal economic activity is pervasive in developing countries. It includes both output produced
by firms that are not registered with the government, and output by registered firms that is sold for cash
and is not reported to the government. Unregistered firms might be entirely unknown to the government,
or might be registered with some authorities (such as municipalities) and not others (such as tax).
Employees of informal firms rarely have formal employment contracts, or pay taxes.

Altogether,

unofficial output often accounts for half or more of the total in a developing country. Informality declines
sharply as countries grow.
The prevalence of informality in poor countries raises a number of important questions for
economic development. Are informal firms just like formal firms, except that they fail to register because
of the ominous tax and regulatory burdens? Are they as productive as formal firms? Do they sell the
same kinds of output? Should informality be fought because it provides unfair competition for formal
firms, as Farrell (2004) expressing the views of the McKinsey Global Institute has argued, or encouraged
because it creates employment where there would be none otherwise? What are the basic characteristics
of informal firms?
In an earlier article (La Porta and Shleifer 2008), we have presented evidence that informal firms
are qualitatively different from formal firms.

In particular, they are much smaller and much less

productive. Their managers have much less human capital than do managers of formal firms. They sell
to very different customers, who are predominantly themselves informal. They do not advertise, have less
capital, and rely to a smaller extent on public goods such as police protection. Very few of the formal
firms have been previously informal, inconsistent with the view that formality is a later stage of a firm’s
life cycle, as its business grows.
In our earlier paper, we referred to this as the dual theory of informality, inspired by the ideas of
dual economy and the big push in development economics (e.g., Harris and Todaro 1970, Murphy,
Shleifer and Vishny 1989).

According to these models, the source of economic growth and

transformation to modernity is the creation of large formal firms, often taking advantage of increasing
returns technologies.

Informal firms operate in the so-called dual economy, providing subsistence to

their owners and employees, but not being productive enough to become a source of economic progress.
Our research points to an intimate connection between duality and informality.
In this paper, we seek to extend and deepen this analysis, with a particular emphasis on African
countries. There are three reasons for doing so. First, Africa is one of the poorest regions in the world,
and informality is the dominant form of economic activity. Moreover, informality in Africa, as in other
1

very poor countries, may take more dramatic forms than in middle income countries such as Brazil, where
it largely consists of tax evasion in cash transactions. Second, since we wrote our paper, the World Bank
has made available a great deal of new data from its Enterprise Surveys, including for African countries,
so we can significantly expand the analysis. Third, we have had the opportunity to make research trips to
Madagascar, Mauritius, and Kenya, and to visit a modest number of formal and informal firms to make
comparisons. Our particular focus was on furniture makers, although we visited several other types of
business. The idea was to gain a more subtle understanding of the working of the informal economy, and
in particular to put more meat on the statistical bones of Enterprise Surveys.
The results we obtain from this investigation confirm many of our earlier findings, but add a new
and potentially crucial element to the story. Specifically, the strong impression we obtained from country
visits is a substantial difference in the quality of goods sold by informal and formal firms. The lower
product quality of informal firms might be the unifying factor of the dual theory: it explains how smaller
size, production to order rather than mass production, lower human capital of the managers, lower use of
capital, the absence of advertising, and sales to largely informal retail clients for cash all go together.
Informal firms can only supply low quality inexpensive goods, but fortunately their customers demand
low quality inexpensive goods. Informal firms thus occupy a very different market niche than formal
firms do, and rarely become formal precisely because there is very little demand for their products from
the formal sector. Quality segments the economy. This idea of quality segmentation of markets is known
international trade as the Linder effect, according to which poor countries trade with other poor countries
rather than with the rich ones (see Murphy and Shleifer 1997 for a model), but as far as we know the
relevance of this phenomenon to informality and development has not been emphasized.
In the next section of the paper, we briefly review some observations from our visits to formal
and informal firms in Madagascar, Mauritius, and Kenya. In Section 3, we describe the main data we use
in the paper and present some information on the characteristics of formal and informal firms. Section 4
presents the main results on the productivity of formal and informal firms. Section 5 focuses on obstacles
do doing business. Section 6 concludes.

II. Country visits.
As part of this project, we conducted three country visits.

La Porta went to Madagascar and

Mauritius in October 2008, while Shleifer went to Kenya in March 2009. La Porta stayed in capital cities;
Shleifer went to Busia in Western Kenya as well as to Nairobi. Both visits were conducted in conjunction
with World Bank’s implementation of its Enterprise Surveys. In all three countries, we have visited a
2

substantial number of both formal and informal firms, largely to discuss business with their owners rather
than collect statistical data.

We have visited businesses in several lines of activity, including

metalworking, retail, garment manufacturing, shoe manufacturing, and food service, but our particular
interest was in furniture making and retail.

Altogether, we visited about a dozen establishments

manufacturing and/or retailing furniture in the three countries.
There are several reasons to be interested in furniture in a study of informality. First, furniture is
a nearly universally demanded good, so one can consider markets for furniture in just about every
country. Second, furniture is demanded by the rich and the poor alike, as well as by firms, so it is
produced and sold both formally and informally. Third, furniture is typically made of wood, and is
therefore heavy. As a consequence, much of the furniture is locally made rather than imported. We say
much because, as we discovered, even in poor African countries a growing amount of furniture is
imported from China and Malaysia; this furniture tends to require assembly rather than being sold as a
finished product. Fourth, and perhaps most important, furniture can be of higher and lower quality, and,
furthermore, the production of higher quality furniture is typically more capital intensive. A producer
needs machines to make wood panels that are smooth, polished, and nicely fitting together. Finally,
furniture can be and often is produced by relatively small firms. While there are some increasing returns
from producing standardized products, furniture is not like bottle or automobile manufacturing, in which
increasing returns concentrate production in very large firms.
We visited both furniture makers and retailers, and tried to find out about manufacturing when the
initial business we approached was retail. We used our guides to help us find both formal and informal
firms. We were explicitly looking for firms of some size rather than the equivalent of street hawkers.
Most businesses combine retail and production in the same location, although in a few instances even
informal retailers had their workshops elsewhere (nearer to where the workers live). We did not go to any
very large furniture firms (and we doubt those exist in the countries we visited).
To give a sense of the firms we visited, begin with four furniture makers in Madagascar. The first
was a small informal store at one end of a street market in a poor neighborhood of Antananarivo, looking
like an abandoned house. There were three beds on display, but the dressers, which were the most
popular item according to the shop keeper, were not available. Beds for children sold for $50, those for
adults for $75. The shop keeper, who seemed idle but reluctant to talk, said the shop was supplied by two
informal workshops at the outskirts of town.
The second furniture maker had a workshop behind a wooden fence in the middle of a slum. A
larger establishment, it had 6 permanent workers, all family members, and hired temporary employees
3

when there was demand (at the time of the visit, they had 10). All production was to order. The owner
said that the business was registered, which the translator suggested was consistent with its having an
industrial electrical connection. The business operated 4 machines, but manufacturing seemed very
primitive (wood cut only in straight lines, visible nails in chairs). At the time of the visit, the workshop
was working on a 200 piece order for a hotel, and could generally produce 18-20 pieces a week.
The third furniture maker was a small workshop with 3 people outside town on the side of the
main road. All production, again, was to order, but the owner had a catalog with pictures. The owner
first said he was unregistered because he was still learning the business, but then said he was registered.
The store sold armchairs for $250, beds for $120-$150 in pine and $200-$250 in palissandre, a more
expensive wood.
The most interesting furniture maker in Madagascar was the fourth one, largely because there was
a line of 50 beds displayed along the street, made in two workshops across the street. The owner initially
said that the 7 year old business was unregistered, but then said he was registered because he paid
“professional tax.” The workshops looked extremely primitive, but had a couple of simple machines.
The owner said that a new lathe costs about $1600, but could be assembled from components for $400
(the cost of 6 beds in the owner’s words), yet he could not find the money to do that. He also complained
he could not grow because he lacked capital, but then estimated the value of his inventory at $3300. He
said he sells 2-3 beds per week for $170 each, but makes another every time he sells one. Occasionally
hotels order 20 beds, but the owner said he could not expand production beyond that. We could not
obtain any explanation for the size of the inventory, which was exposed to rain and required security at
night to be protected. Our best guess was the lack of human capital by the owner.
We also visited Courts, a large retailer of furniture and household appliances from the UK, active
in former British colonies.

Courts is very big in Mauritius and has two stores in Madagascar.

Interestingly the cheapest beds at Courts were $120, and of visibly higher quality than the more expensive
(at least at asking prices) beds of the informal furniture makers described above.
The quality of furniture in Mauritius was visibly higher than in Madagascar, presumably because
Mauritius is a much richer country. The first maker we saw had a mid-size workshop, with about 10
employees but no owner present, selling in a store down the street. The sales were on credit, and the
business appeared to be formal.
The second business we saw in Mauritius was much more substantial. It was clearly registered,
with a VAT number prominently displayed at the entrance. It had 15 employees working on a piece rate

4

basis, and sold 70% to Courts and 30% through its own store. Courts generally ordered 50-100 pieces
once every three months, but returned some defective items that the owner then sold in his own store.
The owner reported that in 2007 the sales of the business were $500,000 and the profits $40,000. The
owner nonetheless complained that the business was slow in part because Courts was bringing furniture
from China and Malaysia, and that he was considering shutting down unless business recovers.
The third furniture business in Mauritius was formal as well, and looked the most substantial of
the three. The owner started 10 years ago, and now had 16 employees. There was a car and a truck
parked outside, as well as other signs of prosperity. The owner reported that he had a loan from the Stateowned development bank. He also reported that he registered 2 months ago because he was getting too
big to avoid getting into trouble with the government. This owner complained as well that business was
slow.
We visited Courts in Mauritius as well, and learned how it buys furniture. The manager said that
the suppliers they found initially were all informal but Courts required them to register to do business.
They offered the suppliers training (e.g., by sending them to Malaysia), joint design of products, as well
as 3 month guaranteed orders. Furniture suppliers ranged from $70,000 to $800,000 per year in annual
contracts with Courts. The manager reported growing imports from Malaysia and China, but also said
that most domestic suppliers could not produce enough volume, as well as deliver with sufficient time
consistency, to be of interest to Courts.
A small informal furniture manufacturer in Busia, in Western Kenya, had all the work done
outside. Some wood, and a minimal inventory, were stored in a nearby shed. All the furniture was made
to order, after the customer made a down payment for materials. There were no machines (or access to
electricity), and the furniture looked extremely rough and unpolished, despite being made from beautiful
hard wood.

All of the 10 workers were informal, the business had no loans, and paid no taxes.

Nonetheless, the business was registered with the municipal council.
In Nairobi, we visited an informal furniture stand on the side of the main road leading to a good
neighborhood. There are some finished products exhibited by the roadside, clearly of very rough quality.
Some assembly work was done in the back of the shop, but the owner said there were also workshops in
the slum, but not machines. All workers were casual. The owner said that he has a license from the
municipality to allow him to sell at that location, but he was not registered with tax authorities, nor
compliant with various labor regulations.

5

We then saw quite a large furniture factory in Nairobi, specializing in making frames for sofas
and armchairs from wood. Sometimes the factory upholstered the frames itself, sometimes it sold
wooden frames to formal upholsterer and retailers, but most of the time, according to the owner,
individuals just came to pick up the frames and upholstered them on their own. The sales of the firm
were obviously substantial: during the half an hour that we were there, several people came and picked up
frames, all paying cash. The owner said he had 80-100 employees, all informal. He said he had been
there for 15 years, but has just registered last year, largely because his business with formal firms was
growing, and they demanded invoices.

The factory had several electric machines.

Perhaps most

interestingly, all production was done outside: there was no building. There were vast amounts of wood
chips scattered all over the place, and the owner informed us that another factory a few yards down
burned down a few months ago. But he had no fire insurance.
A final furniture visit was to a factory next door, which made slightly more complex furniture,
including bedroom and dining room sets, also had machines, also had nearly all production outside, and
was not registered.
These visits suggest several observations. First, formality is not an all or nothing state. Many of
the firms we visited, in both Madagascar and Kenya, including even street-side sellers, had some kind of a
municipal license to operate, but employed purely informal employees and were very far from any contact
with tax authorities. Tax registration, including incorporation into the VAT collection system, seems like
the last step of becoming completely formal, delayed for as long as possible.
Second, the main reason that firm owners gave for becoming formal in that last sense of being
able to issue invoices and joining the tax system, was sales to formal firms. Because of the VAT, formal
firms such as Courts nearly always demand invoices they use to report their costs, and to issue such
invoices the seller must be formal itself. It is this pull from the formal sector that appears to offset, at
least for some firms, the tax and other costs of becoming formal. Without this pull, informal firms
typically maintain extremely low production of low quality goods, and, consistent with the old theories of
dualism, appear idle most of the time. Perhaps this idleness stands for something more productive, such
as guarding the goods, but presumably the owners could be making and guarding at the same time.
Third, and perhaps most interestingly, our visits to furniture factories and other businesses gave
us a very strong impression that formal firms produce higher quality output than informal firms do.
Informality seems to be associated with producing very low quality goods, in small batches, often to
order, with few or no machines, with no credit, advertising, or other aspects of modern production. The
buyers of these goods are typically individual or informal businesses themselves, who transact in cash.
6

Formality, in contrast, is associated with higher quality, larger production volumes, sales to formal firms,
and greater use of credit and advertising. As we show in the statistical part of our paper, a crucial
dividing line separating formal and informal firms might be the human capital of the entrepreneurs.
Before turning to the statistical part of the paper, we should elaborate what we mean by quality.
In the case of furniture, quality reflects visible characteristics of the product, such as roughness of the
wood. But quality can also refer to whether a product can be trusted in the first place: whether the bottled
water sold by the peddlers outside the formal store for much lower prices is actually bottled or filled in
from the tap, whether watches or bags sold with designer labels are genuine, whether food served in a
restaurant is fresh, and so on.

III. Characteristics of informal firms.
In this section we describe our data and present simple descriptive statistics. Our basic approach
is to compare country-by-country the relative performance of formal and informal firms in Africa. To do
so, we combine data from three World Bank surveys of individual firms. The first survey –the Enterprise
survey—covers formal firms and is available for 123 countries throughout the world. The other two
surveys –the Informal and Micro surveys— contain information on both informal and formal firms in a
few poor countries. The Informal survey is available for 9 African countries, including Burkina Faso,
Cameroon, Cape Verde (surveyed twice), Egypt, Kenya, Niger, Senegal, Tanzania and Uganda. All these
countries are below the world median income in 2008 (USD 7,558 in PPP terms) and 6 out of 9 are below
the 25th percentile (USD 2,194 in PPPP terms). The Micro survey is available for 20 African countries,
including Angola, Botswana, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Congo, Gambia, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Ivory Coast, Madagascar, Mauritania, Mauritius, Namibia, Rwanda, Swaziland, Tanzania,
Togo, and Uganda. With the exception of Botswana and Mauritius, all are below the world median
income, and 13 out of 20 are below the 25th percentile. The concept of informality used in the Informal
and Micro surveys focuses on registration (as we discuss below, there are several possible kinds of
registration). Although questions about tax avoidance are asked, they are indirect.
Before describing the data in detail, we need to preempt a possible misconception about the
nature of the firms in our data. In the context of poor countries, the term informal firm evokes the image
of street hawkers selling goods out of baskets or of eateries in front of homes. In fact, such image is a
good description of how the very poor people make a living (Banerjee and Duflo, 2007). However, the
informal firms in our sample do not fit that image. For example, roughly 75% of the observations in the

7

Informal and Micro surveys have –in addition to the entrepreneur-- two employees or more. The informal
firms in our sample are likely to be substantially more productive than the own-account workers of
Banerjee and Duflo. Indeed, the people who work in them look more like the developing countries’
middle class as discussed in Banerjee and Duflo (2008).

III.A Data
All three World Bank surveys have a similar structure and differ mainly in the firms that they
sample. It is easiest to start by describing the Enterprise Survey--the source for our control group of
registered or formal firms. It covers mainly manufacturing and certain services firms with five or more
employees. The earliest available data is from 2002 and the latest is from 2009. The initial step in
carrying out an Enterprise survey involves contacting the government statistical office of the relevant
country to request a list of registered establishments. In some instances, the World Bank supplements the
government’s list with firms registered with the Chamber of Commerce of the relevant country or listed
by Dun and Bradstreet or by similar private vendors of business directories. Thus, although firms in the
Enterprise Survey may hide some of their output, the central government typically knows of their
existence. We refer to these firms as “registered” and define the term below. The next step involves
contacting the firms that will be sampled. Enterprise Surveys use either simple random sampling or
random stratified sampling. A local World Bank contractor phones the firms to set up an interview with
the person who most often deals with banks or government agencies. At that stage, firms with fewer than
5 employees are dropped from the sample, as are government-owned establishments, cooperatives, and
community-owned establishments. Typical final sample sizes range between 250 and 1,500 businesses
per country. The core questionnaire is organized in two parts. The first part seeks managers’ opinions on
the business environment. The second part focuses on productivity measures and is often completed with
the help of the chief accountant or human resource manager.
The World Bank has also conducted separate surveys of informal and small firms to complement
the Enterprise Survey.

Data on unregistered firms has been collected through the “Informal”

questionnaire while data on firms with less than 5 employees has been collected through the “Micro”
questionnaire. Both surveys share a similar methodology. In the case of the Informal survey, local World
Bank contractors identified neighborhoods perceived to have a large number of informal firms. These
neighborhoods were then divided into enumeration blocks. These enumeration blocks were subsequently
surveyed on foot. In the case of the Micro survey, local World Bank contractors selected districts and
zones of each district where, based on national information sources, there was a high concentration of
8

establishments with fewer than five employees. The contractor then created a comprehensive list of all
establishments in these zones. Finally, the contractor selected randomly from that list and went door-todoor to set up interviews with the top managers of the selected establishments. Although the Micro
survey targets establishments with fewer than five employees, larger establishments are not dropped from
the sample. In fact, firms with fewer than five employees account for only 62% of the African firms in
the Micro sample.
Participation in the surveys is voluntary, and respondents are not paid to participate. Respondents
are asked sequentially about the business environment, infrastructure, government relations, employment,
financing, and firm productivity. There is some variation in the response rate across questions. To
illustrate, out of 8,203 Informal and Micro firms surveyed in our sample, we have: (1) the age of 8,167
firms, (2) the number of employees of 8,193 firms, (3) the sales of 7,699 firms, (4) the fraction of
investment financed internally of 7,083 firms, (5) assessments of the fraction of taxes typically evaded by
firms in their industry of 5,210 respondents, and (6) capacity utilization of 3,259 firms. Since Informal
and Micro firms typically do not keep detailed records of their operations, some respondents may simply
not know the information being asked. Unfortunately, we have no way of quantifying the biases, if any,
from missing data.
Critically, the “Informal” and “Micro” surveys cover registered firms as well as firms that exist
without the government’s knowledge (i.e., “unregistered” firms). In the remainder of this paper, we focus
on informality understood in terms of hidden firms rather than hidden output.

To compare the

performance of registered and unregistered firms, we need to define what it means to be registered. The
questions regarding the legal status of the firm are worded differently in the Informal and Micro
questionnaires. In the Informal Survey, we rely on respondent’s answer to whether firms are “registered
with any agency of the central government". In practical terms, firms are registered with an agency of the
central government if they have obtained a tax identification number. In the Micro Survey, we rely on
respondent’s answer to whether firms have either “registered with the Office of the Registrar…or other
government institutions responsible for commercial registration” or have “obtained a tax identification
number from the tax administration or other agency responsible for tax registration”.1 Both surveys also
keep track of whether firms are registered with “any local government agency”. We focus on registration
with the central government because this form of registration is more directly relevant to avoiding taxes,
enforcing contracts, and raising finance. We will also present statistics on municipal registration and, for
firms in the Informal survey, industry board registration. In sum, the Informal and Micro surveys allow us
1

We obtain very similar results if the definition of Micro “registered” firms only includes firms that have a tax
identification number.

9

to examine the productivity of (small) registered and unregistered firms whereas the Enterprise Survey
provides information on the productivity of registered firms that have at least five employees.

III.B. Descriptive Statistics
Table 1 lists the African countries surveyed and presents the number of observations and average
sales for the Informal (Panel A) and Micro samples (Panel B). Each panel also shows similar statistics for
a control group of African firms from the Enterprise Survey. The average 2008 income per capita in
purchasing power terms is roughly $3,000, and ranges from $313 in Congo to $13,574 in Botswana.
The Informal Surveys covered 9 countries. They were carried out between 2003 and 2009 and,
on average, have 151 firms with non-missing sales in each country. The Micro surveys were carried out
in 20 African countries between 2006 and 2009 and, on average, have 109 firms with non-missing sales
per country. The World Bank also carried out Enterprise surveys in parallel with the relevant Informal
and Micro surveys. We use firms from the Enterprise survey as a control group. The average number of
firms in the control group with available sales data is 283 for the Informal sample (Panel A) and 299 for
the Micro sample (Panel B), and ranges from 53 in Niger (Panel A) to 1,119 in Egypt (in Panel A).
Throughout the paper we emphasize productivity differences between registered and unregistered
firms and between small and big firms. Critically, whereas firms in the Informal survey are typically
unregistered, firms in the Micro survey are typically registered. The average Informal survey has 32
registered firms out of a total of 151 firms, while the average Micro survey has 78 registered firms out of
a total of 109 firms. To examine differences in size, we group Enterprise-survey firms in three categories
according to the number of employees: (1) fewer than 20 employees (“Small”); between 20 and 99
employees (“Medium”); and 100 employees or more (“Big”). When assessing some of our results on
productivity, it is worth keeping in mind that the distribution of firms across these three categories is
fairly uneven. For example, there is one Big firm with non-missing sales data (out of 93) in the 2006
control group for firms in Cape Verde but 411 (out of 1,119) in the control group for firms in Egypt (see
Panel A). Related to the small number of observations, there are few extreme outliers in the data (most
likely resulting from errors in currency units). To mitigate the role of outliers, we cap at the 95th
percentile the value of sales, sales per employee, and value added per employee in each country and in
each survey. Capping does not qualitatively change the results we present.
The most striking fact in Table 1 is that the average sales of firms in the Informal and Micro
surveys is tiny even in comparison with the average annual sales of Small firms in the Enterprise survey.
10

Specifically, average sales are $28,077 for Informal firms but $1,142,822 for Small Enterprise firms in
the control group. Similarly, average sales are $65,884 for Micro firms but $449,324 for Small Enterprise
firms in the control group. Typically, unregistered firms are even smaller than the average firm in the
Informal and Micro surveys (Cape Verde in 2006, Mauritania, and Niger are exceptions to this pattern).
For example, in the Informal survey sample, average sales for unregistered Tanzanian firms are $9,212
compared to $19,260 for registered firms. Looking across countries, registered firms in the Informal
survey sample have average sales $4,877 higher than those of unregistered firms. Similarly, registered
firms in the Micro survey sample have sales $32,458 higher than those of unregistered firms. It is natural
to worry that the reported sales of unregistered firms may be low because respondents lie about their
output. We address this issue in Section V.
What do unregistered firms do? Tables 2 and 3 shed light on some of the basic characteristics of
firms in the Informal and Micro surveys, respectively. Both Tables have a similar –but not identical-structure since there are small differences between the two questionnaires. For each variable, we present
the mean for each group (e.g., unregistered, registered, Small, Medium, and Big) as well as t-statistics for
the difference between the means of different groups of interest (e.g. Small vs. unregistered). To avoid the
possibility that the results are driven by the country with the most observations, we first average all
observations within a country and then compute means and t-statistics across countries.
We discuss both tables in order, beginning with Table 2. The first block of variables shows some
general characteristics of the firms. Unregistered firms, although younger (10.1 years) than the average
firm in the control group (18.7), have been operating for quite a long time. By definition, unregistered
firms are not registered with the central government. Yet, 35.1% of them are registered with a local
government agency and 14.3% are registered with an industry board or agency.
The next four variables describe the assets owned by firms in the Informal survey. The ownership
of land, although higher among Enterprise survey firms than Informal survey ones, is not significantly
different among the two groups (45.6% vs. 66.6%). Similarly, firms in the Informal survey own a smaller
fraction of the buildings that they occupy than firms in the Enterprise survey (46.2% vs. 52.9%) but this
difference is not statistically significant. The ownership of electric generators –a key asset in poor
countries – is significantly different across firms. Few unregistered and registered firms own a generator
(2.7% and 5.6%, respectively). In contrast, 24.6% of the Small firms in the Enterprise survey and 80.5%
of Big firms in that survey own a generator. Capacity utilization rates do not vary much between
unregistered and Enterprise survey firms (56.4% vs. 65.2%, respectively). The evidence suggests that
firms in the Informal and Enterprise survey may not share the same clients. Only 1.8% of the firms in the

11

Informal survey make the largest fraction of their sales to large firms. In contrast, large firms are the
main client of 13.9% of the firms in the Enterprise survey.
The next block of variables describes the employees and their human capital in the Informal
survey. Unsurprisingly, unregistered firms have the smallest average number of employees (3.0). The key
fact regarding informal firms is that –consistent with the dual view but not with the other two views-their top managers have low human capital. For example, the probability that the top manager of a firm
has some college education is only 7.2% if the firm is unregistered compared to 8.5% for registered firms
and 66.9% for all firms in the Enterprise survey. To summarize the differences in human capital, we
create an index ranging from 1 to 4 according to whether the top manager attended primary school,
secondary school, vocational school, or college. This index equals 1.8 for managers of unregistered firms
and 2.9 for managers of Enterprise survey firms. We construct a similar index for the employees. Here
the pattern is strikingly different than for top managers. Employees of informal firms have very similar
levels of education as those of Enterprise survey firms (2.4 vs. 2.2).
Next, we turn to how firms are financed. Only 16.9% of the unregistered Informal survey firms
have ever had a commercial loan. Instead, they finance 66.8% of investment with internal funds and
10.4% with help from the family. The most striking fact about financing is that all small firms –and not
just unregistered ones--- lack access to finance. In fact, Small firms in the Enterprise survey finance
73.9% of their investment with internal funds and 2.8% with family funds. Big firms in the enterprise
survey have more access to external finance than small ones. For example, internal funds pay for 60.7%
of the investment of Big firms rather than for 66.8% as in the case of unregistered firms. Yet, the fact that
all Small firms lack access to finance suggests that it may be misguided to put access to finance for
unregistered firms at the center of the development agenda.
Finally, there is no evidence in the Informal survey that these young unregistered firms are
dynamic engines of employment creation. Specifically, the two-year average growth rate of employment
is 7.4% for unregistered firms, 8.9% for registered firms, and 7.8% for all Enterprise survey firms.
Moreover, the median the two-year average growth rate of employment is 0% for both unregistered and
registered firms, and 2.1% for all Enterprise survey firms.
Firms in the Micro sample show very similar patterns as those in the Informal sample (see Table
3). For this reason, we discuss them only briefly focusing on the questions that are only available on the
Micro questionnaire and on the few results that are different between the two questionnaires. The Micro
questionnaire gives us a bit more insight into the firms’ assets. Only 17.2% of the unregistered firms and
13.4% of the registered ones are located in the owners’ house. Most unregistered (71.4%) and registered
12

firms (80.4%) occupy a permanent structure. However, there is evidence of hardship resulting from the
lack of secure title (De Soto, 2000). Specifically, 11.3% of registered firms and 8.8% of unregistered
firms were forced to move in the previous year because of lack of secure title.
Much like their counterparts in the Informal survey, unregistered firms in the Micro sample are
significantly less likely to own a generator than all other firms. The shortage of generators is suggestive
of insufficient capital since only 60% of the unregistered firms have an electric connection to the grid.
Furthermore, unregistered firms are much less likely to use their own transportation equipment than
registered firms (6.6% vs. 22.9%, respectively). Consistent with the view that unregistered and Enterprise
survey firms may serve different clients, Big firms export 22.2% of their sales while unregistered firms
export only 0.8% of their sales. Finally, there is evidence that unregistered firms have less access to
computers than do other firms.

In particular, unregistered firms are less likely to use email to

communicate with their clients than either registered or Enterprise survey firms (3.2%, 9.1%, and 47.7%,
respectively). Similarly, unregistered firms are less likely to use a webpage to connect with clients than
either registered or Enterprise survey firms (0.9%, 2.8%, and 17.6%, respectively).
Unregistered firms in the Micro sample – unlike their counterparts in the Informal sample – have
a faster average growth rate of employment than firms in the Enterprise Survey. The average annual
employment growth rate of unregistered firms (17.1%), while not quite matching the growth rate of
registered firms (19.9%), exceeds that of Enterprise survey firms (13.4%). However, this finding needs to
be interpreted cautiously for two reasons. First, the median growth rate of employment is 0% for
unregistered firms and 11.8% for Enterprise survey firms. Second, the sales and employment levels of
unregistered firms remain very small despite having been around for 8 years.
To complement the evidence on growth rates, we examine how often registered firms initially
started operating as unregistered. The Enterprise survey files have available a question on whether firms
were registered when they started operations. Table 4 shows the available data regarding the initial legal
status of firms in twenty three African countries and, for comparison purposes, summary statistics for 14
Latin American countries. The fraction of firms that were registered initially ranges from 56.1 in Ivory
Coast to 96.1 in Eritrea, and averages 81%. Since 1.3% of the respondents did not answer the question,
we estimate that 18% of the firms registered after starting operations. For comparison, 90% of Enterprise
survey firms in Latin America were registered when they started operations. In sum, firms rarely start as
unregistered and later change their status. Bearing in mind that the number of unregistered firms in our

13

sample is likely to greatly exceed the number of registered firms, this is not the pattern that we would
expect to see if the informal sector were a reservoir of entrepreneurial talent. 2,3
We conclude this section by presenting some data on the institutional environment in which firms
operate. All observers of informality agree on the basic tradeoff faced by firms (i.e. taxes and regulatory
burden vs. public goods and finance). The previous literature has emphasized access to public goods as
one of the main attractions of operating in the formal sector. Table 5 presents data on the institutional
environment faced by firms and on how they operate in it. Panel A shows results for the Informal survey
and Panel B for the Micro survey.
Three facts stand out. First, unregistered firms enjoy tangible advantages. Specifically, managers
of unregistered firms in the Informal sample estimate that a typical firm in their sector evades 54.5% of its
tax liability. Tax evasion sharply decreases with firm size. For example, managers of Small firms in the
control group estimate that a typical firm in their sector evades 27.6% of its liability and tax evasion drops
to 18.2% for Big firms in the control group. Tax evasion by unregistered Micro firms and Small firms in
the control group follows a similar pattern (62.3% vs. 41.0%, respectively).
Likewise, the regulatory burden increases rapidly with firm size.

Whereas managers of

unregistered firms in the Informal (Micro) sample report spending 9.5% (4.5%) of their time dealing with
government regulations, that task requires 14.3% (11.4%) of time for managers of Big firms in the control
group.

Finally, the evidence regarding the relationship between formality and bribes is mixed.

Specifically, managers of unregistered firms in the Informal survey estimate that firms in their sectors pay
6.9% of their sales to “get things done” while managers of firms in the control group report that bribes
equal 3.4% of sales. In contrast, managers of unregistered firms in the Micro survey estimate that firms
in their sectors pay 3.4% of their sales to “get things done” while managers of firms in the control group
report that bribes equal 5.9% of sales. In sum, although perhaps partially offset by higher bribe payments,
lower taxes and less regulation confer a clear cost advantage to unregistered firms.
2

To get a benchmark that may be useful to calibrate the figures in Table 5, assume that there are 1,000,000 workers
and that half of them work for informal firms. Moreover, assume that the average informal firm has 2 employees
and that the average formal firm has 10 employees. Finally, assume that 10% of the firms go out of business in any
given year. Then, 25,000 informal firms and 5,000 formal firms are formed each year. If unregistered firms had a
yearly 2.2% (=(50,000/250,000)*0.1/(1-0.1)) probability of registering (and of increasing employment to 10
workers), all 50,000 registered firms started operations in the unofficial sector.
3

Interestingly, African firms that start operations without being registered take a long time do to do so. For
example, only 35.6% of the initially unregistered African firms had registered by the end of the sixth year of
operations (results not reported). This slow transition into the formal sector is inconsistent with theoretical models
where entry into the informal sector allows entrepreneurs to acquire information (e.g. about demand for the firm’s
products) at a lower cost than entry into the formal sector (Bennett and Estrin, 2007).

14

Second, the quality of public goods in our sample is very bad.

In the informal survey,

unregistered firms report that they experienced power outages on 45 days of the previous year.
Surprisingly, firms in the Enterprise survey fare even worse (65 days on average, difference not
statistically significant). On many days, firms experience multiple power outages. For this reason, the
number of power outages for the Micro survey is radically higher than the number of days without power
in the Informal survey. Specifically, unregistered firms in the Micro survey experienced 138.1 power
outages in the previous year.

This time, Enterprise survey firms do marginally better (96.4 days,

difference not statistically significant). In such an environment, only firms large enough to afford a
generator can be productive. Outages of water, phones, and transportation are also very high by the
standards of developed countries. As a result, the performance of firms that are too small to provide for
substitutes for public goods (e.g. use their own transportation equipment) may be severely impaired.
Third, outright theft is very prevalent in our sample, but small firms do not make much use of
police and of courts. Specifically, unregistered firms in the Informal survey report that, in a typical year,
losses from theft amount to 3.6% of annual sales, ranging from 0.4% in Burkina Faso to 13.6% in
Uganda. Small firms in the enterprise survey report smaller losses (1.8%, difference not statistically
significant). Somewhat surprisingly, losses as a result of theft appear to be lower for Micro firms (0.8%)
than for Small firms in the control group (1.8%). To put these figures in context, note that Enterprise
Survey respondents estimate losses as a result of theft equal to 0.6% of sales in Germany, 0.2% in Ireland,
and 0.1% in Spain.
In response to theft, firms spend heavily on security and make “protection” payments to
gangsters. For example, security and protection payments equal respectively 2.4% and 2.6% of the sales
of unregistered firms in the Informal sample. Firms in the control group spend a bit more on security
(2.9%) and much less on protection payments (0.2%). The police do not appear to play a central role in
addressing theft. In fact, most theft is not even reported to the police. Only 22.7% of the incidents
suffered by unregistered firms in the Informal survey are reported to the police. In contrast, 32.9% of the
incidents experienced by registered firms in the Informal survey are reported to the police–still a low
figure. This pattern is consistent with the view that unregistered firms may have trouble protecting their
property rights. Alternatively, the absolute value of the losses suffered by unregistered firms may be too
low to justify filing a police complaint. Firm size does play a role in reporting theft to the police.
However, even Big firms in the control group for the Informal sample only report to the police roughly
70% of the theft incidents.

15

Interestingly, small firms do not make much use of courts to adjudicate disputes, either. Only
29.2% of unregistered and 33.2% of registered firms in the Micro sample used courts to resolve
commercial disputes during the previous year. In the control group, the use of courts to solve commercial
disputes rises quickly with firm size from 51.3% for Small firms to 81.8% for Big firms. Surprisingly,
courts appear to work in a reasonably efficient manner. It takes roughly 80 days to resolve a commercial
dispute in the Informal sample countries and approximately 26 days in the Micro sample countries. The
fact that unregistered firms and Small firms in the control group behave similarly regarding how they
solve commercial disputes suggests that inadequate access to courts is unlikely to explain differences in
productivity between the two groups of firms. The same argument applies to lack of police protection.
The tentative picture that emerges from this section supports the dual view of informality.
Unregistered firms have been around for a long time (8 to 10 years), but their sales are still trivially small.
Moreover, the overwhelming majority of formal firms registered when they started. The small size of
unregistered firms is symptomatic of uneducated management and low-quality assets. As we argued in
the previous section, this also leads to lower quality. When public goods are unreliable, unregistered
firms are too small to afford owning generators, computers, or transportation equipment. They do not
have large firms as clients. They do not export. Despite De Soto’s (2000) emphasis on access to credit as
the key to igniting the growth of unregistered firms, lack of external finance appears to be an attribute of
all small firms in poor countries – not just of unregistered firms. In sum, the limitations of unregistered
firms appear to be far more severe than acknowledged by their champions.

IV. Productivity of unregistered firms.
In this section we examine the productivity of unregistered firms and present the key findings of
the paper. In measuring the productivity of unregistered firms, we face severe data limitations. In
particular, we do not have information on how much capital these firms have. The Informal and Micro
questionnaires do not collect such information since unregistered entrepreneurs typically lack detailed
records to estimate the value of their assets. We thus have to measure productivity without capital.
To this end, we use two crude measures of productivity: (1) sales per employee; and (2) (gross)
value added per employee, where (gross) value added is defined as sales net of expenditure on raw
materials and energy.4 Thus, we define value added per employee for firm i in industry s:

4

Data on wages is unavailable for most countries in the Informal sample. For this reason, we are unable to remove
labor costs from our measure of value added.

16

VA si 

Psi Ysi  Pm M si - PE E si
L si

where PsiYsi is the level of sales, PmMsi is expenditure on raw materials, PEEsi is expenditure on energy,
and Lsi is the number of employees. The definition of employees includes both full- and part-time
workers but not seasonal workers.

To the extent that seasonal employment is more prevalent in

unregistered firms than in the formal sector, we overstate the productivity of unregistered firms. We use
expenditure on production inputs (e.g., energy) and machines as crude proxies for capital invested.5

V.A Measurement error
Even aside from the theoretical concerns, we need to deal with the fact that our sales numbers
come from unofficial firms, raising concerns about measurement error. There is good reason to worry
that our productivity measures may be biased since unregistered entrepreneurs may choose to hide output
not only from the government but also from the World Bank contractors.

For example, de Mel,

McKenzie, and Woodruff (2007) find that micro-enterprises underreport profits by 30% to researchers,
although they attribute this more to lack of recall than to intentional understatement.
We offer two pieces of evidence that support the view that biases are unlikely to drive the main
results in the paper. First, Table 6 shows the available information regarding expenditure on various
production inputs (scaled by sales). If unregistered entrepreneurs lied only about sales, inputs as a
fraction of sales would be higher for unregistered firms than for other firms. Moreover, such differences
should be very large given that, on average, the sales of small Enterprise survey firms are roughly 40 (10)
times larger than the sales of firms in the Informal (Micro) survey. In fact, unregistered firms do spend
more on inputs than firms in the control group but such differences are small in economic terms and
generally not statistically significant. For example, expenditure on raw materials by Small firms in the
control group is 2.1 percentage points lower than for unregistered firms in the Informal sample and 0.1
percentage points higher than for unregistered firms in the Micro sample (differences are not statistically
significant).

Differences in expenditure on energy are the only statistically significant difference

5

This approach to productivity measurement has recently received considerable criticism, since the sales measure
obviously combines physical output and prices. We obtain qualitatively similar results by following the
methodology proposed by Hsieh and Klenow (2009) to address this issue and model the equilibrium prices that
should prevail in a competitive equilibrium (results not reported). Moreover, Foster et al. (2008) gather data on both
sales and prices and find that the correlation between the sales-based and corrected measures of productivity is
incredibly high, well over 0.9.

17

consistent with the hypothesis that unregistered firms lie. Specifically, expenditure on energy by Small
firms in the control group is 4.9 percentage points lower than for unregistered firms in the Informal
survey and 0.3 percentage points lower than for unregistered firms in the Micro sample. In contrast,
expenditure on machines by Small firms in the control group is 4.1 percentage points higher than by
unregistered firms in the Micro sample but essentially equal to that by unregistered firms in the Informal
sample. Finally, there is weak evidence that unregistered firms in the Informal survey spend more on
labor and land than Small firms in the control group. In sum, there is no evidence that the enormous
differences in size between unregistered firms and Small firms in the control group that we see in Table 1
are the result of underreporting by unregistered firms.
Second, Table 7 shows the available data on wages per employee. Under the dual hypothesis,
unregistered firms should pay low wages (Harris and Todaro 1970). These low wages may be consistent
with some on-the-job home production by workers in unregistered firms. Alternatively, workers in
unregistered firms may be less skilled that those in registered firms. Either way, the dual view predicts
that the measured output of unregistered firms should be low relative to the output of workers in the
control group. In contrast, wages in the formal and informal sectors should be comparable if observed
differences in productivity are due only to measurement error. Panel A shows wages per employee in
Burkina Faso, Cameroon, and Cape Verde – the only African countries in the Informal sample with wage
data. Panel B shows wages per employee for the countries covered by the Micro sample. Wages are
scaled by income per capita.
Three facts stand out. First, there is no clear correlation between size and wages within the
control group. For example, Big firms pay higher wages than do Small firms in Cameroon and Togo.
The reverse is true in Burkina Faso and Rwanda. On average, wages in Big and Small firms are
indistinguishable from each other. Second, unregistered firms consistently pay lower wages than Small
firms in the control group. Burundi illustrates this point. Wages in unregistered firms equal 1.76 times
per capita income. In contrast, wages in the control group of Small firms equal 5.84 times per capita
income. On average, in the Micro sample, wages are 1.96 times per capita income in unregistered firms
and 3.32 times per capita income in Small firms. Third, although there is considerable heterogeneity
across countries, the workers of unregistered firms are not the poorest among the poor. In Rwanda, for
example, wages for the employees of unregistered firms exceed GDP per capita by 29%. Similarly, in the
Micro sample, the average wage of unregistered workers is roughly equal to twice GDP per capita. Taken
at face value, the large wedge in wages between unregistered firms and the control group is strongly
consistent with the dual view of unregistered firms. Of course, we cannot rule out the alternative

18

interpretation that respondents shrewdly lie to the World Bank about sales, inputs, and wages. However,
the findings on inputs and wages should allay some of the concerns regarding data quality.
As a final point, it seems to us that concerns about intentional understatement of revenues should
not be exaggerated for our data. Firms participating in the surveys do so voluntarily. Virtually all of
them answer questions about sales, even though they do not have to. They also give answers suggesting
massive underpayment of taxes and bribe payments by “firms like theirs.” This is not behavior of those
fearful that World Bank contractors will turn them in (or that authorities would do anything about it). Our
view is that most informal firms operate in the open, that they have done so for years, that they pay the
police and other authorities to leave them alone, and that fear of reprisals for truly reporting revenues to
the World Bank is very far from their minds. This particular concern is a rich-country fear rather than a
poor country reality.

IV.B Productivity of unregistered firms
Table 8 presents the main findings in the paper. Panel A shows estimates of (log) value added
per employee for the Informal sample and its Enterprise Survey control group. Panel B shows analogous
data for the Micro sample. Two key facts stand out. First, consistent with the anecdotal evidence in
Section II, unregistered firms are significantly less productive than the Enterprise Survey firms. The
productivity gap between unregistered firms and even the Small firms in the control group is truly
enormous. Firms in Egypt in the 2008 Informal survey illustrate this pattern. Value added per employee
for Small firms is 180% higher than for unregistered firms. The example of Egypt is representative of the
results for other countries although differences in value added per employee are not statistically
significant in 7 out of 18 cases. On average, based on the Informal sample, the productivity of Small
Enterprise Survey firms is around 120% higher than for unregistered firms. Similarly, based on the Micro
sample, the productivity wedge between Enterprise Survey Small firms and unregistered firms is 80%.
Second, Big firms are significantly more productive than Small ones. Continuing with the
example of Egypt in 2008, value added per employee is 60% higher for Big firms than for Small firms.
This large heterogeneity in firm productivity is consistent with work by Hsieh and Klenow (2009)
showing sizable gaps in the marginal products of labor and capital across plants within narrowly-defined
industries in China and India. On average, depending on the sample, value added per employee is
between 90% and 110% higher for Big firms than that of Small ones.

19

The cumulative effect of these productivity differences is large. Returning to the example of
Egypt in 2009, Big firms are 240% more productive than unregistered firms. On average, value added per
employee is 250% higher for Big firms in the Informal survey than for the unregistered ones. Similarly,
value added per employee is 230% higher for the Big firms in the Micro sample than for the unregistered
ones.
To illustrate what these differences in productivity mean in practice, consider the average
unregistered firm in Egypt’s informal survey. It has value added of $1,138 per employee on sales of
$1,480 per employee. In contrast, an average Small firm in the control group has value added of $7,169
per employee and sales of $16,318 per employee. If the unregistered firm could achieve the value added
level of a Small firm only by registering, would it choose to do that? By assumption, changing its legal
status would generate $6,031 (=$7,169-$1,138) per employee in additional cash flow. However, the firm
would have to pay registration fees and taxes as well as comply with regulations. The registration fee –
including the value of the entrepreneurs’ time – would probably amount to roughly $1,740 (Djankov et
al., 2002). The firm would also need to pay labor taxes (25.6%), corporate taxes (13.8%), and VAT
(10.0%). To keep things simple, assume that wages are 20% of sales and that there are no additional
costs. Moreover, to bias the example against the firm choosing to register, assume that the firm would
evade all taxes if unregistered but comply fully if registered. Under these assumptions, wages for the
Small firm equal $3,264 (=0.20*$16,318) and the hypothetical firm would owe additional payments of
$835 (=0.256*$3,264) in labor taxes, $539 in corporate taxes (=0.138*($7,169-$3,264)), and VAT of
$391 (=0.10*($7,169-$3,264). Thus, the firm would have to disburse $3,505 per employee in taxes and
fees.

In this back-of-the-envelope calculation, the firm would pocket $2,526 (=$6,031-$3,505) per

employee by registering.

Of course, the gains would be even larger if the unregistered firm could –merely by registering -duplicate the value added per employee of Big firms in the control group. On average, such firms have
value added per employee of $12,440 on sales of $29,733. Calculations similar to the preceding ones
suggest that the unregistered firm would gain $6,494 per employee if -- only by registering-- it could
duplicate the level of value added per employee of Big firms.

A similar set of calculations illustrates that unregistered entrepreneurs can simply not afford to
pay taxes unless sales sharply increase from merely registering. Under the assumption that wages equal
20% of sales (=$296), the average unregistered firm has a pre-tax profit per employee of $842 (=$1,138-

20

$296) and owes taxes of $276 per employee.6 Unless sales dramatically increase as a result of registering,
the average unregistered firm would have considerable difficulty paying $1,740 to register.

Given the very large difference in productivity between unregistered firms and the control group,
the cost of complying with government regulations would have to be implausibly high to justify operating
as an unregistered firm. A more realistic scenario is that –consistent with the dual view -- unregistered
firms would not be able to achieve the performance of Small firms just by registering. Perhaps, for
example, unregistered firms lack the human capital necessary to match the quality of the goods produced
by formal firms. The image of unregistered firms consistent with their observed levels of productivity is
not that of predators but rather that of relics of the past.
What accounts for the large difference in productivity between unregistered firms and the control
group? We begin by running simple OLS regressions and discuss self-selection issues later. In principle,
the productivity differences that we document in Table 8 could be driven by industry effects, by
differences in inputs, including human capital, or by differences in size. The goal of the OLS regressions
that follow is to examine whether unregistered firms remain unusually unproductive after we control for
these factors. In simple terms, we interpret the estimated coefficient on the unregistered dummy as a
measure of our ignorance regarding the production function of unregistered firms.

Killing the

unregistered dummy would not mean that unregistered firms are as productive as registered ones, but that
differences in productivity are captured by differences in inputs and scale, as in Rauch’s (1991) selection
story.
All specifications include the following four dummy variables: (1) the firm is in the Informal
survey; (2) the firm is registered and in the Informal survey; (3) the firm is in the Micro survey; and (4)
the firm is registered and in the Micro survey. Firms in the Enterprise survey are the omitted category.
We then add –one at a time – (log) income per capita, eight industry dummies, expenditure on raw
materials, expenditure on energy, expenditure on machines, the index of manager education, and (log)
sales.7 All three expenditure variables are scaled by employees.

6

Such firm owes $76 in labor taxes (=0.17*$296), $116 in corporate taxes (=0.138*($1,138-$296)), and $84 in
VAT (=0.10*(1,138-$296)).
7
Errors are clustered at the country level. We do not include country fixed effects since the frequency of
unregistered firms in our sample may not reflect the incidence of unregistered firms in the population.

21

Table 9 shows OLS regressions using (log) value added per employee as the dependent variable.8
The first regression only includes dummies for whether the firm is in the Informal sample or in the Micro
sample, and the interactions between each of those two variables and whether the firm is registered.
The regression results confirm the findings in Table 8. The estimated coefficients equal -1.57 for
the Informal sample and -1.29 for the Micro one. Moreover, the interactions of Informal and Micro with
registered equal 0.16 and 0.49, respectively. All four dummies are highly statistically significant except
for the interaction between Informal and registered. Adding GDP per capita does not change the basic
pattern. Similarly, the estimated coefficients for the four dummies barely change as we add industry
controls. Coefficients do change when we add expenditure on raw materials. Specifically, the estimated
coefficients on the dummies for the Informal and Micro surveys drop to -0.81 and -1.00, respectively,
while the estimated coefficient for the interaction between Micro and registered drops to 0.33. Adding
expenditure on energy further lowers the estimated coefficients on the four dummies but not significantly
so. The four coefficients barely change as we add expenditure on machinery. The coefficients for
expenditure on raw materials, energy, and machines are not only statistically significant but also
economically important. For example, increasing raw materials by one standard deviation is associated
with a 47% increase in value added. Similar increases in expenditure on energy and machines have
somewhat smaller effects (31% and 15% percentage points, respectively). Coefficients fall another notch
when we add manager education. Interestingly, ignoring selection issues, the estimated coefficient on
manager education suggests that a top manager with some college education increases value added per
employee by 44 percentage points (=0.1452 X 3) relative to a top manager with some lower school
education. Finally, there is no evidence that unregistered firms are unusually unproductive once we
control for (log) sales. Specifically, the estimated coefficients on both Informal and Micro switch signs
when we add (log) sales to the regression. In fact, the coefficients on both Informal and Micro are not
only positive but also significant. The interaction between registered and Micro is the only interaction
dummy that remains statistically significant.

Finally, in the regressions that control for sales, the

estimated coefficient on the education of the top manager is significant but has the “wrong” sign.

IV.C Selection
The OLS results in this section suggest that unregistered firms are not unusually unproductive
once we take into account their expenditure on inputs, the human capital of their top managers, and their
8

We obtain qualitatively similar results using (log) sales per employee or a measure of (log) real output based on
Hsieh and Klenow (2007).

22

small size.

Of course, these are all endogenous variables.

Indeed, the dual view of informality

emphasizes the sorting process that matches able managers with good assets. High quality managers are
willing to pay taxes and bear the cost of government regulation in exchange for being able to advertise
their products, raise outside capital, and access public goods. In contrast, low quality managers avoid
taxes and regulations since the benefits of operating in formal economy are less valuable for small firms.
Table 10 examines the sorting process. Specifically, we examine the relationship between the
quality of the firm’s assets and the human capital of its top manger –our only proxy for managers’ ability.
The dependent variables fall into two categories: dummy variables (Panel A) and continuous variables
(Panel B). The dummy variables include indicators for whether: (1) the firm is registered; (2) the firms
has ever had a loan; (3) the main buyers are large firms; (4) the firm occupies a permanent structure; (5)
the firm is located in the owner’s house; (6) the firm owns the building it occupies; (7) the firm owns the
land it occupies; (8) the firm uses its own transportation equipment; (9) the firm owns a generator; (10)
the firm uses email to communicate with clients; (11) the firm uses a website to communicate with
clients; and (12) the firm has an electrical connection. Finally, we use five continuous variables as
dependent variables: (1) the percentage of investment that is financed internally; (2) expenditure on raw
materials as a fraction of sales; (3) expenditure on energy as a fraction of sales; (4) expenditure on
machines as a fraction of sales; and (5) capacity utilization. All regressions control for income per capita
and include eight industry dummies.
Many –but not all—the correlations in Table 10 are consistent with sorting on managers’ ability.
Specifically, the results in Panel A show that managers who attended college are more likely to work for
firms that are registered, have borrowed from banks, sell to large firms, communicate with clients through
email, have a webpage, and have an electric connection. Along the same lines, managers who attended
college are more likely to work for firms that own land, transportation equipment, and generators.
Moreover, the results in Panel B show that managers who attended college are more likely to work for
firms with more external finance and higher capacity utilization. The economic significance of these
coefficients is large. The probability of being registered increases by 69% if the top manager has some
college education (rather than some lower school education). Having a top manager with some college
also has large effects on the probability of ever having borrowed from a bank (+32.2%), the probability of
selling to large firms (+83.5%), the probability of owning buildings (+26.5%), the probability of owning
transportation equipment (+41.4%) and a the probability of having a generator (+84.9%), the probability
of using email (+126%), the probability of having a webpage (+101%), and the probability of having an
electrical connection (+121%). Similarly, having a top manager with some college education reduces the

23

fraction of investment financed with internal funds by 20 percentage points (the standard deviation is
32%), and increases capacity utilization by 20 percentage points (the standard deviation is 22.7%).
In contrast, the evidence regarding the probability of occupying a permanent structure is weak.
The only significant coefficient is for vocational schooling. Nor is there evidence that either expenditure
on raw materials or the probability of owning buildings increases with managers’ education. Finally, two
regressions have statistically significant coefficients with the “wrong” sign: the likelihood that the firm
operates in the house of the owner is higher when managers have attended secondary or vocational
schools rather than lower schools and expenditure on energy is lower if the top manager attended college
rather than lower schools.
These results suggest an explanation for the puzzling low productivity of unregistered firms. The
productivity gap between registered firms and the control group disappears once we take into account
crude proxies for physical and human capital and control for size. Of course, size is an endogenous
variable. These results on manager selection are broadly consistent with the view that part of the reason
why unregistered firms are small is that they are run by managers of low ability (Rauch 1991). These
managers do not find it worthwhile to pay the cost of running a formal firm. In sum, unregistered firms
are small because they are run by less able managers and, as such, face a high cost of capital, few
opportunities to advertise their products, and insufficient scale to own critical assets such as generators
and computers. The evidence from our visits suggests that, for all these reasons, they also produce low
quality products, which are not demanded by formal customers.

V. Obstacles to Doing Business.
As a final step, we present information on obstacles to doing business, as reported by respondents
in the Micro and Enterprise surveys.9 Table 11 reports the percentage of firms that identify each of 17
obstacles as the most important one for their firm.
Three findings stand out. First, the business obstacles facing firms in the Micro and Enterprise
Survey are similar. Second, there is considerable agreement that access to electricity and finance are
serious obstacles. Specifically, 32.9% of Big firms in the Enterprise Survey and 20% of the firms in the
Micro Survey regard access to electricity ranks as the most serious obstacle to doing business. Similarly,
access to finance ranks as the most serious obstacle to doing business for 14.4% of Big firms in the
Enterprise Survey and 23.1% of firms in the Micro Survey. Third, beyond access to electricity and
9

Results for firms in the Informal survey and their control group are qualitatively similar.

24

finance, there is considerable disagreement regarding the importance of the other obstacles to doing
business. For example, only 9.8% of Big firms in the Enterprise Survey and 5.4% of the firms in the
Micro Survey identify tax rates as the most serious obstacle to business. Neither the Micro Survey firms
nor the Enterprise survey firms consider access to land, labor regulations, business licensing and permits,
the legal system, tax administration, corruption, crime, transportation, customs and trade regulations,
political instability or the education of the workforce to be major obstacles to doing business.
We can also use the information on obstacles to shed light on the McKinsey Global Institute view
that informal firms compete unfairly with formal ones. Respondents provide an assessment of whether
the “practices of competitors in the informal economy” are an obstacle to their business. Contrary to the
McKinsey view, “practices of competitors in the informal economy” are perceived as the top obstacle by
roughly 9% of the managers of firms in either the Micro or the Enterprise survey. Moreover, the
perception of informal practices as a top business obstacle by managers of firms in the Enterprise Survey
is a significant concern only in four countries: Swaziland (28%), Mauritius (18%), Mauritania (16%), and
Togo (16%). Second, the answer is slightly lower for the Enterprise Survey firms than for the informal
Micro firms (8.9% vs. 9.7%), which is not consistent with the view that the informal firms undercut
formal ones. Third, one might have guessed that it is the Small registered firms in the Enterprise survey
that would be mostly severely affected by the informal firms. However, informal practices are an equally
serious obstacle for both groups of firms (9.4% vs. 9.3%). None of this evidence is supportive of unfair
competition.
A final piece of evidence comes from perceptions regarding the benefits and costs of registering.
Specifically, five Informal survey questionnaires include questions regarding the benefits of registration
while fourteen Micro survey questionnaires include questions regarding obstacles to registration. Panel A
in Table 12 reports the percentage of respondents who rank each possible answer as either the most
important or second most important benefit of registration. The main benefits of registering are improved
access to financing (67%), raw materials (27%), and markets (12%)– broadly consistent with the previous
findings about the obstacles to doing business faced by informal firms. Better access to workers (1%),
infrastructure services (2%), property rights (5%), government services (8%), opportunities with formal
firms (9%), and lower bribes (12%) are not nearly as important.
On the cost side, Panel B in Table 12 reports the percentage of respondents who rank each
possible answer as either a “very serious obstacle” or a “major obstacle” to register a business. The main
obstacles to registration are the financial (34%) and administrative (26%) burden of taxes as well as the
cost of registering (29%) and the need to comply with minimum capital requirements (25%). There is

25

also suggestive evidence that, at least in some countries, firms perceive the bribes that registered firms
pay as a reason to remain informal. Specifically, 85% of the respondents in Ivory Coast rate the bribes
that registered firms pay as a top obstacle. Unfortunately, Madagascar is the only other country where the
Micro questionnaire asked about bribes as an obstacle to registering. In that country, 20% of the
respondents report that bribes in the formal sector are a top obstacle to registering. Labor regulation
(16%) and the difficulty of obtaining information about how to register (18%) are seen as somewhat less
important. Here as well, the picture that emerges is one in which the formal firms have better access to
markets, services, and finance, and hence can be much more productive, but need to pay taxes (and,
perhaps, bribes). Presumably, for the unregistered firms, the tax price is too high to justify registration.
In summary, between their extreme inefficiency and operation in very different markets, informal
firms do not appear to pose much of a threat to the formal firms, at least as perceived by the latter.
Informal firms clearly recognize the many benefits of being official, including access to markets and to
finance (although it is far from clear that they would gain the latter even if they registered). They do not
seem to think that regulation, or the cost of registration, and the biggest obstacles to registration. On the
other hand, they do see taxes as a huge problem. Overall, the do not seem to be productive enough for the
benefits of formality to justify the costs.

VI. Conclusion.
Our most basic finding is that in Africa, as in other parts of the world, high productivity comes
from formal firms, and in particular large formal firms. Productivity jumps sharply if we compare small
formal firms to informal firms, and rises rapidly with the size of formal firms. To the extent that
productivity growth is central to economic development, the formation and growth of formal firms is
necessary for economic growth (see also Lewis 2004, Banerjee and Duflo 2005).
Formal firms appear to be very different animals than informal firms, which accounts for their
sharply superior productivity. Perhaps most importantly, they are run by much better educated managers.
As a consequence, besides being larger, they tend to use more capital, have different customers, market
their products, and use external finance to a greater extent than do the informal firms. Our visits to
Madagascar, Mauritius, and Kenya suggest that formal firms also produce higher quality products, which
may account for substantial market segmentation between formal and informal firms. There is no
evidence that informal firms become formal as they grow. Rather, virtually none of the formal firms had

26

ever been informal. It does not appear from the available evidence that informal firms would sharply
increase their productivity if only they registered.
This interpretation raises the crucial question of what happens to informal firms as the economy
develops. After all, the most basic fact about the informal economy is that its role diminishes sharply as
incomes grow. How does this happen? Do informal firms register or do they die? We do not have a
definitive answer to this question, but what we have points in the direction of death rather than
registration. It is still possible of course that a minority of informal firms, and especially the most
productive ones, end up joining the formal economy, perhaps by supplying formal firms. But there is no
evidence, at least in our data, that this is the typical story. The vast majority of informal firms appear to
begin and to end their lives as unproductive informal firms.
Informal firms nonetheless play a crucial role in developing economies. They represent over half
of the economic activity in Africa. They provide livelihood to billions of poor people. Because these
firms are so inefficient, taxing them or forcing them to comply with government regulations would likely
put most of them out of business, with dire consequences for their employees and proprietors. If
anything, strategies that keep these firms afloat and allow them to become more productive, such as
microfinance, are probably desirable from the viewpoint of poverty alleviation. But these are not growth
strategies: making unofficial firms official will not yield substantial improvements in productivity.
Growth strategies, then, need to focus on formal firms, especially the larger ones.

Surely

reducing the costs of formality, such as registration costs, is a good idea, but this is not the whole story.
Likewise, some of the almost-standard proposals for development, such as improving land rights, the
legal environment, and even the human capital of the employees appear to be relatively minor factors
from the viewpoint of official entrepreneurs. The main obstacles to the operations of formal firms,
according to our data, are: 1) human capital of entrepreneurs, 2) taxation, 3) electricity, and 4) finance.
Improvements in each of these areas can promote the growth of large firms, and thus growth overall.

27

References
Banerjee, Abhijit, and Esther Duflo. 2005. “Growth Theory through the Lens of Development
Economics.” In Handbook of Economic Growth, 1A, edited by Steve Durlauf and Philippe Aghion,
473–552. Holland: Elsevier Science.
Banerjee, Abhijit, and Esther Duflo. 2007. “The Economic Lives of the Poor.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 21, no. 1: 141-68.
Banerjee, Abhijit, and Esther Duflo. 2008. “What is Middle Class about the Middle Classes around the
World?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 22, no. 2: 3-28.
de Mel, Suresh, David John McKenzie, and Christopher M. Woodruff. 2007.
Microenterprise Profits: Don't Ask How the Sausage is Made.”

“Measuring

World Bank Policy Research

Working Paper No. 4229. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=985001.
de Soto, Hernando. 2000. The Mystery of Capital. Why Capitalism Triumphs in the West and Fails
Everywhere Else. New York: Basic Books.
Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2002. “The
Regulation of Entry.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, no. 1: 1–37.
Farrell, Diana. 2004. “The Hidden Dangers of the Informal Economy.” McKinsey Quarterly 2004, no. 3:
26–37.
Forster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and Chad Syverson.

2008.

“Reallocation, Firm Turnover, and

Efficiency: Selection on Productivity or Profitability?” American Economic Review 98, no. 1: 394425.
Friedman, Eric, Simon Johnson, Daniel Kaufmann, and Pablo Zoido. 2001. “Dodging the Grabbing
Hand: The Determinants of Unofficial Activity in 69 Countries. Journal of Public Economics 76, no.
3: 459-93.
Harris, John, and Michael Todaro. 1970. “Migration, Unemployment and Development: A Two-Sector
Analysis.” American Economic Review 60, no. 1: 126-142.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai, and Peter Klenow. 2009. “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and India.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 124, no. 4: 1403-48.
La Porta, Rafael, and Andrei Shleifer. 2008. “The Unofficial Economy and Economic Development.”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Fall: 275-352.
Lewis, William. 2004. The Power of Productivity: Wealth, Poverty, and the Threat to Global Stability.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Murphy, Kevin, and Andrei Shleifer. 1997. “Quality and Trade.” Journal of Development Economics 53:
1-15.

28

Murphy, Kevin, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 1989. “Industrialization and the Big Push.” Journal
of Political Economy 97, no. 5: 1003-26.
Rauch, James. 1991. “Modeling the Informal Sector Formally.” Journal of Development Economics 35,
no. 1: 33-47.

29

Table 1. Sales of the Informal and Micro Survey Sample Firms
Panel A: Informal Survey

Burkina Faso
Cameroon
Cape Verde
Cape Verde
Egypt, Rep.
Kenya
Niger
Senegal
Tanzania
Uganda
Average

Year
2009
2009
2006
2009
2008
2003
2005
2003
2003
2003

Unregistered
Sales
Obs.
18,262
111
19,839
121
29,917
85
83,190
82
19,572
159
20,297
149
15,169
48
24,944
153
9,212
285
35,082
91
27,549
128

Informal Survey
Registered
Sales
Obs.
.
.
18,922
18
.
29,346
28
30,712
36
14,927
58
29,827
41
19,260
23
45,341
23
26,905
32

Enterprise Survey
Small

All
Sales
18,262
19,839
27,996
83,190
21,035
22,323
15,037
25,976
9,963
37,152
28,077

Obs.
111
121
103
82
187
185
106
194
308
114
151

Sales
1,226,313
309,663
374,308
498,339
1,335,882
1,675,268
4,999,650
433,291
278,088
297,418
1,142,822

Obs.
196
144
69
66
350
49
34
86
77
107

Medium
Sales
4,590,659
2,996,489
1,738,857
2,548,385
5,160,261
6,070,552
4,416,983
4,542,087
3,754,425
3,222,021
3,904,072

Big
Obs.
105
124
23
50
358
65
16
90
62
58

Sales
10,800,000
44,300,000
4,149,963
3,860,018
28,800,000
31,800,000
14,700,000
18,400,000
15,700,000
10,700,000
18,320,998

All
Obs.
56
70
1
21
411
41
3
35
38
28

Sales
3,719,511
10,400,000
752,375
1,761,825
12,600,000
11,500,000
5,371,892
5,169,733
4,796,542
2,681,279
5,875,316

Obs.
357
338
93
137
1,119
155
53
211
177
193
283

Panel B: Micro Survey

Country
Angola
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde
Congo, Dem. Rep.
Gambia, The
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Ivory Coast
Madagascar
Mauritania
Mauritius
Namibia
Rwanda
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Uganda
Average

Year
2006
2006
2009
2006
2009
2009
2006
2006
2006
2006
2009
2009
2006
2009
2006
2006
2006
2006
2009
2006

Unregistered
Sales
Obs.
22,524
8
27,192
27
177,476
115
31,950
16
19,671
3
68,171
31
20,150
40
12,955
47
93,345
27
22,532
29
6,128
47
21,715
3
56,070
69
50,159
18
5,392
49
8,295
22
5,658
34
30,093
25
134,510
139
43,584
38
42,879
39

Micro Survey
Registered
Sales
Obs.
46,153
107
105,688
73
.
44,336
121
92,758
110
50,890
73
32,891
64
20,307
76
129,568
77
48,451
108
36,858
45
108,928
98
38,977
53
102,087
60
31,419
47
46,821
106
52,230
83
48,327
40
.
93,144
59
62,768
78

Enterprise Survey
All
Sales
44,509
84,494
177,476
42,889
90,817
56,041
27,991
17,498
120,164
42,965
21,159
106,338
48,644
90,104
18,134
40,199
38,696
41,314
134,510
73,729
65,884

Small
Obs.
115
100
115
137
113
104
104
123
104
137
92
101
122
78
96
128
117
65
139
97
109

Sales
219,543
1,054,364
1,226,313
262,566
309,663
498,339
156,191
191,976
180,759
155,735
291,630
602,681
258,159
1,193,050
665,167
344,204
391,593
326,825
296,217
361,505
449,324

Obs.
353
212
196
219
144
66
258
118
194
97
247
128
181
168
225
143
207
259
81
367
193

Medium
Sales
440,131
4,027,974
4,590,659
1,313,305
2,996,489
2,548,385
779,580
975,985
979,018
441,720
2,648,291
2,818,355
2,287,588
3,533,822
2,917,353
2,071,016
2,418,694
3,430,273
6,774,754
1,609,611
2,480,150

Big
Obs.
64
86
105
43
124
50
71
47
19
16
100
160
44
128
82
53
55
111
42
149
77

Sales
826,909
9,497,498
10,800,000
2,923,213
44,300,000
3,860,018
1,675,336
3,564,678
2,246,573
.
11,400,000
8,207,987
8,216,648
16,900,000
9,329,198
7,671,968
6,982,505
16,400,000
27,000,000
5,885,212
10,404,618

All
Obs.
6
39
56
8
70
21
11
7
7
43
67
5
58
17
16
32
44
17
36
29

Sales
261,533
2,790,306
3,719,511
508,740
10,400,000
1,761,825
335,518
543,472
315,430
196,228
2,121,482
3,036,662
819,408
4,608,373
1,689,759
1,328,946
1,488,191
2,866,305
5,484,240
1,058,645
2,266,729

Obs.
423
337
357
270
338
137
340
172
220
113
390
355
230
354
324
212
294
414
140
552
299

Table 2. Attributes of firms in the Informal Survey Sample
Informal Survey
General Characteristics:
Age of the firm (in years)
% of firms that are registered with a central government agency
% of firms that are registered with a local government agency
% of firms that are registered with an industry board or agency
% of occupied land that is owned by the firm
% of occupied buildings that is owned by the firm
% of firms that own a generator
Average capacity utilization (%)
% of firms for which the main buyer are large firms

Unregistered Registered

Enterprise Survey
All

Small

Medium

Big

All

Enterprise vs
Informal

10.1
0.0%
35.1%
14.3%
41.8%
44.8%
2.7%
56.4%
1.6%

10.7
100.0%
57.6%
23.7%
56.0%
52.9%
5.6%
63.7%
2.9%

9.9
15.5%
37.2%
16.9%
45.6%
46.2%
2.9%
57.7%
1.8%

16.0
.
.
.
60.6%
43.8%
24.6%
62.2%
10.0%

20.2
.
.
.
69.2%
58.7%
54.2%
66.0%
18.7%

24.8
.
.
.
73.9%
69.8%
80.5%
67.4%
12.7%

18.7
.
.
.
66.6%
52.9%
44.9%
65.2%
13.9%

8.8
.
.
.
21.0%
6.7%
42.0%
7.6%
12.1%

a

Average number of employees
Index of education of top manager
% of top managers with primary education
% of top managers with secondary education
% of top managers with vocational education
% of top managers with college education
Index of education of average employee
% of employees with primary education
% of employees with secondary education
% of employees with college education

3.0
1.8
47.3%
23.7%
13.2%
7.2%
2.4
52.4%
36.9%
10.7%

4.6
1.9
42.1%
14.8%
23.9%
8.5%
2.4
48.3%
40.0%
11.7%

3.1
1.8
47.2%
22.9%
14.0%
7.4%
2.4
51.4%
38.0%
10.7%

9.9
2.5
48.6%
51.1%
45.7%
54.7%
2.1
44.1%
34.7%
20.6%

41.8
3.1
38.7%
42.8%
42.5%
76.0%
2.2
39.6%
30.7%
29.8%

389.0
3.6
34.3%
36.1%
36.6%
93.0%
2.4
39.5%
25.3%
31.0%

94.6
2.9
44.1%
45.6%
43.5%
66.9%
2.2
41.6%
33.8%
24.7%

91.4
1.1
-3.1%
22.7%
29.5%
59.5%
-0.2
-9.8%
-4.2%
14.1%

a

Finance
%firms that have ever had a loan
% of financing from internal funds
% financing from family
% of financing from banks

16.9%
68.6%
10.4%
4.2%

26.6%
74.8%
5.8%
4.8%

18.6%
70.7%
8.6%
4.2%

.
73.9%
2.8%
11.3%

.
66.4%
1.6%
16.5%

.
60.7%
0.8%
21.4%

.
69.8%
1.9%
14.4%

.
-0.9%
-6.7%
10.2%

Growth
Avg two-year employment growth
Median two-year employment growth

7.4%
0.0%

8.9%
0.0%

7.7%
0.0%

6.5%
1.0%

8.8%
2.6%

9.2%
4.0%

7.8%
2.1%

0.1%
2.1%

a
c
a

Differences
Registered vs
Small vs
Unregistered
Unregistered
0.6
100.0%
22.5%
9.4%
14.2%
8.1%
2.9%
7.3%
1.3%

b

5.9
.
.
.
18.7%
-1.0%
21.9%
5.8%
8.4%

a

7.0
0.7
1.3%
27.3%
32.5%
47.5%
-0.3
-8.3%
-2.2%
10.0%

a

a

b

Big vs Small
8.8
.
.
.
13.4%
26.1%
55.9%
5.1%
2.7%

a

379.1
1.1
-14.3%
-14.9%
-9.1%
38.3%
0.3
-4.6%
-9.5%
10.3%

a

a

Employees

Notes: a significant at the 1% level.

b

significant at the 5% level. c significant at the 10% level.

a

c
a

b

c
a
a

a

1.7
0.2
-5.3%
-8.9%
10.8%
1.3%
0.0
-4.1%
3.0%
1.1%

b

9.7%
6.2%
-4.6%
0.6%

.
5.3%
-7.5%
7.1%

1.5%
0.0%

1.0%
1.0%

a

b
b
a

b

a
c

.
-13.2%
-2.0%
10.1%

2.4%
3.0%

a

a

b
b
a

Table 3. Attributes of firms in the Micro Survey Sample
Micro Survey

Enterprise vs
Micro

Differences
Registered vs
Small vs
Unregistered Unregistered

12.6
.
.
.
.
37.8%
.
42.2%
.
.
60.2
.
5.6%
47.7%
17.6%

4.4 a
.
.
.
.
0.2 a
.
0.3 a
.
.
-1.4
.
4.1% a
40.6% a
15.3% a

0.4
100.0% .
.
-3.9%
9.0%
-0.1%
-2.5%
9.0% c
19.2% c
16.3% a
-39.9%
2.3% a
0.2%
5.9% a
2.0% b

.
0.2
.
.
-5.0
.
1.7%
33.7%
9.8%

306.0
3.7
3.0%
8.7%
8.0%
80.3%
2.5
31.2%
52.8%
16.0%

46.9
2.8
20.5%
20.8%
14.6%
44.0%
2.3
44.8%
45.8%
9.4%

42.9 a
0.7 a
-20.7% a
-4.1% c
1.6%
23.2% a
0.0
-1.2%
-1.1%
2.4%

0.9
0.4
-13.5%
-1.7%
3.1%
12.1%
0.1
-3.7%
0.0%
3.9%

6.1
0.8
-26.1%
-2.2%
4.9%
23.3%
0.0
-0.2%
-4.9%
5.2%

.
66.5%
2.9%
12.1%

.
62.9%
0.7%
16.6%

.
72.5%
3.8%
8.5%

.
-7.0% b
-1.8%
4.8% b

5.1%
-1.2%
-0.5%
-0.1%

14.3%
9.8%

10.8%
6.1%

13.4%
11.8%

-4.4%
11.8%

Enterprise Survey

Unregistered

Registered

All

Small

Medium

Big

All

8.0
0.0%
45.9%
17.2%
71.4%
22.7%
11.3%
9.3%
60.0%
6.6%
62.3
0.1%
0.8%
3.2%
0.9%

8.4
100.0%
82.9%
13.4%
80.4%
22.6%
8.8%
18.3%
79.2%
22.9%
61.9
2.4%
1.0%
9.1%
2.8%

8.2
72.4%
71.5%
13.8%
77.0%
22.7%
9.8%
14.4%
73.6%
18.2%
61.5
1.6%
1.4%
7.1%
2.2%

10.4
.
.
.
.
30.7%
.
30.4%
.
.
57.4
.
2.5%
37.0%
10.7%

15.4
.
.
.
.
53.0%
.
47.9%
.
.
58.6
.
6.6%
63.7%
24.8%

20.6
.
.
.
.
67.4%
.
71.4%
.
.
74.9
.
22.2%
82.3%
43.7%

Employees
Average number of employees
Index of education of top manager
% of top managers with primary education
% of top managers with secondary education
% of top managers with vocational education
% of top managers with college education
Index of education of average employee
% of employees with primary education
% of employees with secondary education
% of employees with college education

3.2
1.8
50.8%
26.7%
10.7%
11.8%
2.2
48.0%
47.7%
4.1%

4.1
2.2
37.2%
25.0%
13.9%
23.9%
2.3
44.3%
47.7%
8.0%

3.9
2.1
41.3%
25.0%
13.0%
20.8%
2.3
46.0%
46.9%
7.0%

9.3
2.6
24.7%
24.5%
15.7%
35.1%
2.2
47.8%
42.9%
9.3%

38.7
3.1
14.9%
14.9%
13.8%
56.4%
2.3
41.8%
49.8%
8.4%

Finance
%firms that have ever had a loan
% of financing from internal funds
% of financing from family
% of financing from banks

7.3%
79.1%
6.5%
3.8%

12.5%
77.9%
5.9%
3.7%

10.9%
79.4%
5.7%
3.7%

.
75.5%
4.3%
6.3%

Growth
Avg two-year employment growth
Median two-year employment growth

17.1%
0.0%

19.9%
4.0%

17.8%
0.0%

13.4%
11.8%

General Characteristics:
Age of the firm (in years)
% of firms that are registered with a central government agency
% of firms that are registered with a local government agency
% of firms located in the owners home
% of firms located in a permanent structure
% of occupied land that is owned by the firm
% of firms forced to move last year because of lack of secure title
% of firms that own a generator
% of firms with an electrical connection
% uses own transportation equipment
Hours per week that the firm operates
% of firms for which the main buyer are large firms
%exports
% of firms that use email to connect with clients
% of firms that use a webpage to connect with clients

Notes: a significant at the 1% level.

b

significant at the 5% level. c significant at the 10% level.

a

2.7%
4.0%

b

a

b

b

2.4
.
.
.
.

b

a

c
a
a

a
a
a

b
a

c

.
-3.6%
-2.2%

-3.8%
11.8%

a

Big vs Small
10.3
.
.
.
.
0.4
.
0.4
.
.
17.5
.
19.8%
45.4%
33.0%

a

a

a

a

a
a
a

296.7
1.0
-21.7%
-15.8%
-7.6%
45.1%
0.3
-16.5%
9.9%
6.6%

a

-12.6%
-3.5%
10.3%

a

-2.6%
-5.7%

a
a
a
a
a

b

a
a

a

Table 4. Legal Status of Enterprise Survey Firms in Africa

Country

Number of Observations

Benin
Burkina Faso
Cameroon
Cape Verde
Chad
Congo Rep
Eritrea
Gabon
Ghana
Ivory Coast
Lesotho
Liberia
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritius
Mozambique
Niger
Senegal
Sierra Leone
South Africa
Togo
Zambia
Average Africa
Average Latin America

149
381
360
147
148
142
152
179
615
524
150
150
442
148
619
393
597
127
625
150
1056
153
602

% Registered
at Start

% Does not
know

83.3%
79.1%
82.4%
81.4%
79.3%
78.8%
96.1%
64.2%
63.6%
56.1%
86.8%
73.3%
95.7%
88.0%
80.9%
81.9%
86.3%
90.7%
75.8%
86.7%
88.1%
75.5%
88.1%
81.0%
90.0%

0.7%
1.8%
0.3%
1.9%
1.3%
8.6%
3.9%
1.7%
0.2%
3.2%
1.3%
1.3%
0.2%
0.0%
0.0%
2.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.6%
0.0%
1.3%
1.3%

Table 5. Indicators of the Institutional Environment Facing Informal and Micro Survey Firms
Panel A: Informal Survey
Informal Survey

Enterprise Survey
Enterprise vs
Informal

Unregistered

Registered

All

Small

Medium

Big

All

54.5
9.5
6.9

37.6
7.3
6.3

51.4
8.4
7.1

27.6
10.9
3.7

24.0
16.1
3.1

18.2
14.3
2.2

24.8
13.5
3.4

-26.7
5.1
-3.7

Public goods
Days last year with power outages
Days last year with water outages
Days last year with telephone outages
Days last year with transportation outages

45.0
60.2
7.2
60.0

63.2
70.1
42.6
46.9

47.5
62.6
32.5
58.9

58.9
47.8
27.7
17.0

69.6
50.5
20.5
19.0

74.4
44.1
21.9
17.3

65.0
50.5
23.1
18.0

17.5
-12.0
-9.4
-40.9

Property rights
% of sales lost last year owing to theft
% of sales spent on security expenses
% of sales spent on "protection payments"
% of incidents reported to the police
Days it took a typical court case to be resolved

3.6
2.4
2.6
22.7
70.6

5.3
1.9
1.8
32.9
105.8

3.9
2.2
2.5
28.2
79.7

1.8
2.3
0.1
46.6
90.3

1.3
3.2
0.2
55.1
73.4

0.4
3.2
0.3
70.2
95.7

1.4
2.9
0.2
55.7
83.8

-2.5
0.7
-2.3
27.5
4.1

Compliance with government regulations
% of tax liability evaded by "typical" firm
% of management's time spent dealing with government regulations
% of sales a "typical" firm pays in informal gifts or payments to get things done

a
c
a

c

Differences
Registered vs
Small vs
Unregistered
Unregistered
-16.9
-2.2
-0.6

-26.9
1.4
-3.2

18.1
9.9
35.3
-13.1

13.8
-12.5
20.5
-43.1

1.8
-0.5
-0.8
10.2
35.2

-1.8
-0.2
-2.4
23.9
19.8

b

b

c

c

Big vs Small
-9.4
3.4
-1.5

15.6
-3.6
-5.8
0.3

-1.4
1.0
0.1
23.6
5.4

Panel B: Micro Survey
Micro Survey

Enterprise Survey
Enterprise vs Micro

Unregistered

Registered

All

Small

Medium

Big

All

62.3
4.5
3.4

52.6
5.0
3.2

53.5
5.0
2.9

41.0
8.7
6.1

32.4
10.1
6.4

29.7
11.4
4.8

38.2
9.3
5.9

-15.2
4.3
3.0

Public goods
Number of power outages in the last year
Days last year with water outages

138.1
.

110.5
.

118.3
.

92.9
78.6

101.6
71.0

103.4
59.1

96.4
69.2

-21.9
.

Property rights
% of sales lost last year owing to theft
% of sales spent on security expenses
% of firms that had payment dispute in last 2 years
If there was a payment dispute, % of firms that used court to resolve it
Days it took a typical court case to be resolved

0.8
3.2
6.0%
29.2%
.

0.6
3.9
8.4%
33.2%
25.7

0.6
3.6
7.5%
30.1%
25.7

1.8
2.3
9.5%
51.3%
.

1.3
1.9
16.6%
67.6%
.

1.1
1.2
19.4%
81.8%
.

1.7
2.0
11.4%
58.3%
.

1.1
-1.6
4.0%
28.3%

Compliance with government regulations
% of tax liability evaded by "typical" firm
% of management's time spent dealing with government regulations
% of sales a "typical" firm pays in informal gifts or payments to get things done

Notes: a significant at the 1% level.

b

significant at the 5% level. c significant at the 10% level.

b
a
a

b

c
a

Differences
Registered vs
Small vs
Unregistered
Unregistered
-9.6
-21.3 a
0.5
4.2 b
-0.2
2.7 b

-27.6
.

-45.2
.

-0.1
0.7
2.3%
4.1%
.

1.1
-0.9
3.5%
22.1%
.

Big vs Small
-11.3
2.7
-1.3

c
c

10.5
-19.5

c

c

-0.8
-1.1
9.9%
30.5%

b
a
a

Table 6. Expenditure on Production Inputs by Informal and Micro Survey Firms
Panel A: Informal Survey
Enterprise Survey

Informal Survey

Expenditure on raw materials / Sales (%)
Expenditure on energy / Sales (%)
Expenditure on labor / Sales (%)
Expenditure on machines / Sales (%)
Expenditure on land / Sales (%)

Unregistered

Registered

All

Small

Medium

Big

All

39.5%
9.4%
22.4%
7.3%
5.3%

43.4%
8.0%
21.8%
9.5%
14.4%

39.5%
8.7%
22.8%
7.3%
6.8%

37.3%
4.6%
18.3%
6.9%
3.2%

37.6%
3.2%
15.6%
8.1%
1.4%

39.3%
4.0%
13.0%
6.2%
2.2%

36.9%
5.3%
16.3%
7.4%
3.0%

Notes: a significant at the 1% level.

b

Enterprise vs
Informal

Registered vs
Unregistered

Small vs
Unregistered

Big vs Small

-2.6%
-3.4%
-6.4% c
0.1%
-3.8%

3.9%
-1.4%
-0.6%
2.2%
9.2%

-2.1%
-4.9% a
-4.1%
-0.4%
-2.1%

1.9%
-0.5%
-5.2% c
-0.6%
-1.0%

Enterprise vs
Micro
2.3%
-0.7%
-1.3%
2.7% c
-0.4%

Differences
Registered vs
Small vs
Unregistered
Unregistered
-0.2%
0.1%
-0.1%
-0.3% c
-2.2%
-1.7%
-0.6%
4.1% b
-1.6%
-1.4%

Panel B: Micro Survey
Enterprise Survey

Micro Survey

Expenditure on raw materials / Sales (%)
Expenditure on energy / Sales (%)
Expenditure on labor / Sales (%)
Expenditure on machines / Sales (%)
Expenditure on land / Sales (%)

Differences

Unregistered

Registered

All

Small

Medium

Big

All

37.8%
3.9%
23.5%
4.5%
2.5%

37.6%
3.8%
21.3%
4.0%
0.9%

36.2%
4.1%
22.0%
5.2%
1.4%

37.9%
3.6%
21.8%
8.6%
1.2%

39.6%
3.3%
20.3%
9.0%
0.9%

38.9%
3.2%
15.9%
6.1%
1.1%

38.5%
3.5%
20.8%
7.9%
1.0%

significant at the 5% level. c significant at the 10% level.

Big vs Small
1.0%
-0.4%
-5.9%
-2.6%
-0.1%

a

Table 7. Ratio of wages per employee to GDP per capita
Panel A: Informal Survey
Enterprise Survey

Informal Survey
Country
Burkina Faso
Cameroon
Cape Verde
Cape Verde

Year

Unregistered

Registered

All

Small

Medium

Big

All

0.95
0.96
0.90
0.76

.
.
1.25
.

0.95
0.96
0.96
0.76

3.46
1.90
2.92
0.66

4.46
2.39
4.03
0.81

3.06
3.84
.
0.60

3.70
2.50
3.19
0.71

0.89

1.25

0.91

2.24

2.92

2.50

2.52

2009
2009
2006
2009

Average

Panel B: Micro Survey
Enterprise Survey

Micro Survey
Country

Year

Unregistered

Registered

All

Small

Medium

Big

All

Angola

2006

.

2.23

2.17

3.26

3.02

.

3.20

Botswana

2006

0.35

0.58

0.52

0.89

1.05

1.03

0.95

Burkina Faso
Burundi

2009

2.76

2006

1.76

.
3.13

2.76
2.97

3.48
5.84

4.51
7.29

3.06
.

3.73
6.04

Differences
Enterprise vs Registered vs
Small vs
Big vs Small
Informal
Unregistered Unregistered
2.75 a
-0.40
.
2.50 a
1.54 a
.
0.95 a
1.94 a
a
a
2.23
0.35
2.03
.
-0.05
.
-0.10
-0.06
1.62

b

0.35

a

0.23

0.97

b

.

3.07

a

1.37
.

.

-0.19

-0.43

b

-0.05

2.62

a

1.01

0.98

a

.

0.47

a

.

3.53

c

.

1.14

a

0.98

2009

.

1.98

1.95

1.90

2.39

3.84

2.50

0.54

Cape Verde

2009

1.08

0.89

0.95

0.65

0.80

0.60

0.70

-0.25

b

3.41

a

0.94

a

0.15

c

2.29

b

0.34
.

Gambia, The
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau

5.64

2006

0.54

2006

0.83

2006

6.11

5.45
1.04
1.23
7.21

5.52
0.85
1.13
6.97

8.25
1.52
1.30
9.64

11.35
2.41
1.13
6.92

9.26
.
.
.

8.93
1.78
1.27
9.25

0.49
0.40

b

1.10

2009

0.53

0.87

0.69

1.67

2.90

2.64

2.09

1.40

Madagascar

2009

.

1.11

1.11

2.44

2.66

2.31

2.52

1.40

a

1.80

a

-0.02

0.19

a

0.06

1.94

a

2.89

a

0.92

a

Mauritius
Namibia
Rwanda
Swaziland

2.12

2009

0.39

2006

0.27

2006

1.29

2006

0.50

2.10
0.45
0.79
1.52
1.20

2.11
0.44
0.55
1.47
1.05

3.88
0.56
2.48
4.01
1.92

3.98
0.68
2.56
5.70
2.21

.
0.68
2.30
3.12
1.88

3.91
0.62
2.49
4.36
1.97

Tanzania

2006

1.44

1.59

1.53

3.59

5.07

5.72

4.21

2.68

a

Togo

2009

4.61

.

4.61

4.89

12.35

7.74

7.59

2.98

a

0.85

b

1.48

b

Uganda

2006

3.08

Average
Notes: a significant at the 1% level.

1.96
b

3.93
2.07

3.60
2.15

4.32
3.32

significant at the 5% level. c significant at the 10% level.

4.90
4.19

3.91
3.43

4.45
3.63

0.54

a

0.72
c

a

Ivory Coast

2006

a

-0.18

a

Mauritania

0.49

0.43

Cameroon

2006

c

Differences
Enterprise vs Registered vs
Small vs
Big vs Small
Micro
Unregistered Unregistered
1.03 a
.
.
.

b

Congo, Dem. Rep.

1.34

b

4.08

-0.42
a

0.12

2.21

-0.19

2.72

a

-0.89

1.42

a

-0.04

0.16

2.15

a

2.13

.

0.28

0.23
0.69

0.85
0.40

a

a

.

a

0.51

a

-0.12
a

0.17
a

.
1.94

.
1.76

0.14

2.85

1.24

b

-0.42

1.51

c

0.50

a

Table 8. Productivity of Firms in the Informal and Micro Sector Survey
Panel A: Log value added per employee for firms in countries covered by the Informal Survey
Informal Survey
Enterprise Survey
Country

Year

Burkina Faso
Cameroon
Cape Verde
Cape Verde
Egypt
Kenya
Niger
Senegal
Tanzania
Uganda
Average

2003
2006
2006
2009
2009
2009
2003
2003
2003
2003

Unregistered Registered
8.3
7.9
8.1
8.4
7.0
7.8
.
7.2
6.2
7.2
7.6

.
.
7.85
.
7.40
8.04
.
7.22
.
7.92
7.69

All

Small

Medium

Big

All

8.3
7.9
8.1
8.4
7.1
7.8
8.2
7.2
6.2
7.3
7.7

9.5
8.3
8.5
9.0
8.9
9.6
11.4
9.1
.
8.7
9.2

10.0
9.3
9.2
9.7
9.4
10.0
10.0
9.8
.
9.3
9.6

10.5
10.3
.
.
9.4
10.3
.
10.0
.
10.0
10.1

10.0
9.3
8.8
9.1
9.2
9.9
10.8
9.5
8.9
9.1
9.5

Differences

Enterprise vs Registered vs
Small vs
Informal
Unregistered Unregistered
1.6
1.4
0.7
0.7
2.1
2.1
2.6
2.3
2.6
1.8
1.8

a
a
a
c
a
a
b
a
a
a
a

.
.
-0.3
.
0.4
0.3
.
0.0
.
0.8
0.2

1.2
0.4
0.4
0.6
1.8
1.8
.
1.9
.
1.6
1.2

a

a
a

a

a
a

Big vs Small
1.0
2.0
.
.
0.6
0.7
.
0.9
.
1.3
1.1

b
a

a
a

a

a
a

Big vs
Unregistered
2.2
2.4
.
.
2.4
2.5
.
2.8
.
2.9
2.5

a
a

a
a

a

a
a

Panel B: Log value added per employee for firms in countries covered by the Micro Survey
Micro Survey
Country

Year

Angola
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde

2006
2006

Congo, Dem. Rep.
Gambia, The
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Ivory Coast
Madagascar
Mauritania
Mauritius
Namibia
Rwanda
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Uganda
Average

Unregistered Registered

2009
2006
2009
2009
2006
2006
2006
2006
2009
2009
2006
2009
2006
2006
2006
2006
2009
2006

Notes: a significant at the 1% level.

Differences

Enterprise Survey
All

Small

Medium

Big

All

.
.
8.7
.

8.3
8.8
.
7.8

8.3
8.9
8.7
7.9

9.0
9.5
9.5
8.2

8.9
10.0
10.0
9.2

.
9.5
10.5
.

9.0
9.6
10.0
8.5

.
8.6
6.9
6.9
8.0
.
6.7
.
8.4
8.3
.
.
.
7.9
.
8.2
7.9

8.4
9.0
7.6
7.4
8.7
8.3
7.8
8.4
.
8.8
7.8
8.4
8.6
8.2
.
8.4
8.3

8.4
8.8
7.4
7.3
8.5
8.3
7.2
8.3
8.2
8.7
7.5
8.3
8.5
8.1
8.4
8.3
8.2

8.9
9.0
8.2
8.3
8.3
8.2
8.3
8.2
8.7
9.2
9.8
9.1
9.8
8.9
8.8
8.7
8.8

9.8
9.7
8.9
8.8
8.7
8.4
9.1
8.6
9.2
9.4
10.2
9.4
9.5
9.7
.
9.0
9.3

10.9
.
8.5
.
.
.
10.7
8.6
.
10.4
10.4
9.1
9.6
10.4
.
9.8
9.9

9.9
9.1
8.5
8.5
8.4
8.3
8.9
8.5
8.9
9.5
10.0
9.2
9.6
9.3
9.6
8.8
9.1

b

significant at the 5% level. c significant at the 10% level.

Small vs
Enterprise vs Registered vs
Unregistered Unregistered
Informal
0.7
0.8
1.3
0.6
1.4
0.3
1.1
1.2
-0.1
0.0
1.7
0.1
0.8
0.8
2.5
0.9
1.1
1.2
1.1
0.5
0.9

a
b
a
a
a

a
a

a

a
a
a
a
a
a

a
a

.
.
.
.
.
0.4
0.7
0.5
0.6
.
1.0
.
.
0.5
.
.
.
0.3
.
0.3
0.6

b
c
c

a

a

.
.
0.8
.
.
0.5
1.3
1.4
0.3
.
1.5
.
0.3
0.9
.
.
.
1.0
.
0.5
0.8

a
a

a

b

a

a
a

Big vs Small
.
0.0
1.0
.
2.0
.
0.3
.
.
.
2.4
0.3
.
1.2
0.6
0.0
-0.2
1.4
.
1.0
0.9

b

a

a

a
b

a

a
a

Big vs
Unregistered
.
.
1.8
.
.
.
1.6
.
.
.
4.0
.
.
2.1
.
.
.
2.5
.
1.6
2.3

a

a

a

a

a

a
a

Table 9. Regressions explaining value added per employee

Informal Survey

-1.5729a
(0.2536)

-1.5943a
(0.2290)

-1.4886a
(0.2000)

-0.8088a
(0.2770)

-0.7199a
(0.2295)

-0.7308a
(0.2356)

-0.6424a
(0.2255)

0.2841c
(0.1503)

Informal Survey & Registered

0.1565
(0.1408)

0.1554
(0.1382)

0.1253
(0.1153)

-0.0902
(0.1566)

-0.0347
(0.1641)

-0.0299
(0.1644)

-0.0678
(0.1566)

0.0081
(0.0754)

Micro Survey

-1.2945a
(0.2440)

-1.2717a
(0.2357)

-1.2814a
(0.2411)

-0.9916a
(0.2324)

-0.7465a
(0.1997)

-0.7311a
(0.1979)

-0.6541a
(0.1841)

0.3645a
(0.0854)

Micro Survey & Registered

0.4895a
(0.1694)

0.4768a
(0.1586)

0.4092b
(0.1487)

0.3347a
(0.1050)

0.3037a
(0.1053)

0.2920b
(0.1051)

0.2632b
(0.1047)

0.1057b
(0.0479)

0.1957
(0.1300)

0.1796
(0.1236)

0.1818c
(0.1036)

0.1594
(0.0950)

0.1537
(0.0912)

0.1718c
(0.0877)

0.0672
(0.0686)

0.2810a
(0.0896)

0.2273
(0.0863)

LN (GDP Per Capita)

Ln(Raw Materials / Employee)

b

0.2212
(0.0866)

a

0.1637
(0.0322)

Ln(Energy/Employee)

Ln(Expenditure Machines / Employee)

b

0.2133
(0.0858)

0.1535
(0.0309)

a

0.0280a
(0.0064)

Manager's Education

b

0.0278
(0.0406)

0.1440
(0.0299)

a

0.0333
(0.0140)

0.0248a
(0.0063)

-0.0012
(0.0038)

0.1452a
(0.0337)

-0.0599a
(0.0175)
0.5648a
(0.0381)

Ln(Sales)

Constant

Observations
Adjusted R-Squared
Industry Dummies
Notes: a significant at the 1% level.

b

b

8.9910a
(0.1174)

7.5627a
(1.0042)

7.2358a
(0.9944)

3.7778b
(1.3749)

2.9736b
(1.1439)

3.0406b
(1.1158)

2.7195b
(1.0716)

0.6590
(0.6269)

4,075
14%
No

4,075
15%
No

3,955
19%
Yes

3,955
34%
Yes

3,955
38%
Yes

3,955
39%
Yes

3,955
40%
Yes

3,955
66%
Yes

significant at the 5% level. c significant at the 10% level.

Table 10: Manager ability and self-selection
Panel A: Probit regressions

Registered
Firm has ever Main buyer
with central
had a loan are large firm
government

Occupies a
permanent
structure

Located in
owner's
house

Owns building
it occupies

Owns the
land it
occupies

Owns
transportatio
n equipment

Owns a
generator

Uses website
Uses email to
to
communicate
communicate
with clients
with clients

Firm has
electrical
connection

Secondary

0.2869c
(0.1644)

0.2544a
(0.0806)

0.2416
(0.2254)

0.1396
(0.1673)

0.2473
(0.0825)

a

-0.1292
(0.1439)

0.0570
(0.1141)

0.0118
(0.1979)

0.3022
(0.1692)

c

0.4325a
(0.0975)

0.4411a
(0.1041)

0.6632a
(0.1407)

Vocational

0.3932a
(0.1453)

0.4450a
(0.1627)

0.5228b
(0.2379)

0.3674b
(0.1840)

0.3561a
(0.1301)

-0.1547
(0.1772)

0.1156
(0.1287)

0.4289
(0.1937)

b

0.2733c
(0.1657)

0.5421a
(0.1389)

0.5302a
(0.1127)

0.7607a
(0.2246)

College

0.6917a
(0.1916)

0.3228a
(0.0994)

0.8350a
(0.2682)

0.2853
(0.2122)

0.0354
(0.1164)

0.2301
(0.2500)

0.2650
(0.1036)

b

0.4140a
(0.1097)

0.8488a
(0.2269)

1.2567a
(0.1452)

1.0111a
(0.1113)

1.2099a
(0.2204)

Ln(GDP/POP)

0.0447
(0.1959)

-0.0294
(0.0588)

0.0508
(0.1215)

-0.2605a
(0.0992)

-0.1220
(0.1251)

-0.1010
(0.2550)

-0.1077
(0.0859)

0.0375
(0.0870)

-0.1220
(0.1199)

0.1119
(0.1160)

0.1004
(0.0891)

-0.0630
(0.1660)

Constant

-0.9911
(1.5093)

-0.8918b
(0.4245)

-2.8640a
(0.9284)

2.8888a
(0.8811)

-0.4320
(0.9311)

0.5201
(1.8687)

0.2025
(0.6188)

-1.6668
(0.7875)

b

-0.2655
(0.8682)

-1.7767
(0.9104)

c

-2.5397a
(0.6832)

1.0422
(1.3772)

2,390

2,224

1,288

1,429

1,439

1,494

7,375

1,438

5,308

8,069

8,112

1,439

8%

3%

11%

4%

2%

11%

5%

3%

11%

13%

9%

13%

Obs
Pseudo R

2

Notes: a significant at the 1% level.

b

significant at the 5% level. c significant at the 10% level.

Table 10 -- Manager ability and self-selection (continued)
Panel B: OLS Regressions

%Investment
financed with
internal funds

Dependent Variables
Expenditure on Expenditure on Expenditure on
raw materials / energy / Sales machines / Sales
Sales

%Capacity
utilization

Secondary School

-0.9120
(2.1722)

-0.0237
firms

-0.4084
(0.5400)

-0.7236
(0.7365)

0.9662
(2.0966)

Vocational School

-0.6260
(1.6657)

-0.0100
(0.0187)

-0.5316
(0.4066)

0.6415
(0.7915)

4.6005c
(2.3397)

College

-6.6813a
(1.9788)

0.0044
(0.0236)

-1.1386b
(0.4958)

0.3194
(0.8975)

6.7849a
(2.2222)

Ln(GDP/POP)

-4.3642a
(1.2611)

-0.0157
(0.0182)

0.1985
(0.2470)

0.8420
(0.6951)

0.7082
(0.6239)

106.7237a
(9.1257)

0.4942
(0.1581)

a

3.7011
(1.8890)

c

-0.2367
(4.8612)

56.7218a
(5.0422)

8641

4729

7780

7472

3578

3%
12.15a
Yes

2%
7.16a
Yes

4%
31.34a
Yes

2%
8.19a
Yes

30%
69.77a
Yes

Constant

Obs
Adj R2
F-test
Industry Dummies

Notes: a significant at the 1% level.

b

significant at the 5% level. c significant at the 10% level.

Table 11. Obstacles to Doing Business in the Informal and Micro Survey Samples
Micro Survey
Unregistered Registered

Differences
Registered vs
Small vs
Big vs Small
Unregistered Unregistered

Enterprise Survey
All

Small

Medium

Big

All

Enterprise
vs Micro

Obstacles (% of firms identifying an obstacle as the most important)
Macro Instability

4.0%

8.0%

7.0%

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

Telecommunications

2.0%

1.9%

2.0%

.

.

.

.

.

-0.1%

.

Electricity
Access to Financing

17.1%
29.2%

23.4%
20.0%

20.0%
23.1%

30.0%
20.0%

31.3%
17.7%

32.9%
14.4%

30.4%
18.6%

10.4%

6.3%

-4.5%

-9.1%

c

.
.

12.9%

c

2.9%

-9.2%

b

-5.6%

b

-1.1%
-0.1%

Tax Rates
Practices of competitors in the informal economy

4.5%
9.7%

6.3%
7.9%

5.4%
8.5%

10.9%
9.4%

7.6%
7.7%

9.8%
9.3%

10.1%
8.9%

4.7%
0.4%

c

Uneducated Workforce

0.8%

0.8%

0.8%

2.3%

3.4%

5.8%

2.8%

2.0%

c

Political instability

2.8%

2.2%

2.9%

4.5%

6.7%

5.3%

5.0%

2.1%

-0.5%

1.7%

0.8%

Customs and Trade Regulations

1.5%

1.7%

1.7%

2.0%

2.5%

4.8%

2.3%

0.7%

0.1%

0.5%

2.7%

Transportation

6.3%

6.4%

6.5%

3.5%

4.2%

3.8%

3.8%

-2.7%

0.1%

-2.8%

0.3%

Crime

3.4%

4.8%

4.9%

4.7%

4.3%

3.8%

4.6%

-0.3%

1.3%

1.3%

Corruption

1.8%

2.3%

2.0%

4.1%

4.9%

3.0%

4.4%

2.4%

Tax Administration

1.4%

1.6%

1.4%

1.7%

2.4%

2.8%

2.1%

0.7%

Legal System

0.0%

0.2%

0.2%

0.4%

1.2%

1.4%

0.8%

0.6%

Business licensing and permits

3.8%

2.6%

2.8%

2.5%

2.4%

1.2%

2.3%

-0.4%

Labor Regulations
Access to Land

0.0%
7.6%

0.3%
4.7%

0.2%
5.4%

0.5%
3.5%

1.2%
2.4%

1.1%
0.5%

0.7%
3.1%

c

b

a

6.3%
-0.3%

0.0%

1.5%

3.6%

0.5%

2.3%

0.2%

0.2%

0.2%

0.4%

-1.2%

0.5%
-2.3%

1.7%
-1.8%

0.3%
c

-2.8%

-0.9%
b

-1.2%
1.1%

b

-1.4%
c

c

1.0%
-1.2%

0.5%

b

0.6%

-4.0%

b

-3.0%

a

Table 12: Costs and benefits of registering
Panel A: Percentage of Informal Survey respondents rating the following as either the most important or second most important benefit that their firm could obtain from
registering
Burkina Faso
Cape Verde
Mauritius
Madagascar
Nepal
Average
Better access to financing
63%
70%
72%
67%
64%
67%
Better access to raw materials
27%
32%
46%
25%
6%
27%
Better access to markets
13%
14%
17%
14%
4%
12%
Less bribes to pay
26%
15%
2%
16%
0%
12%
Better opportunities with formal firms
5%
10%
15%
3%
10%
9%
More access to government programs or services
8%
1%
9%
9%
12%
8%
Better legal foundations on the property
3%
3%
6%
10%
4%
5%
Better access to infrastructure service
2%
0%
4%
6%
0%
2%

Table 12: Costs and benefits of registering (continued)
Panel B: Percentage of Micro Survey respondents that indicate that the following present either a "major obstacle" or a "very serious obstacle" with respect to registering a business

Bribes that registered firms need to pay
Financial burden of taxes
Financial cost of completing registration
Administrative burden complying with
taxes
Minimum capital requirements
Other administrative burdens
Time to complete registration
Difficulty of getting information
Labor market rules

Angola

Burundi

Botswana Ivory Coast Gambia Guinea Bissau Guinea

Madagascar Mauritius Namibia Rowanda Swaziland Tanzania Uganda

Average

.
12%

.
28%

.
12%

85%
79%

.
27%

.
34%

.
55%

20%
46%

.
19%

.
15%

.
30%

.
20%

.
37%

.
60%

52%
34%

22%

28%

13%

70%

24%

40%

42%

30%

14%

26%

4%

22%

28%

48%

29%

17%
26%
16%
28%
14%
4%

20%
20%
17%
12%
1%
18%

7%
8%
11%
15%
14%
9%

63%
48%
76%
63%
58%
48%

14%
13%
10%
9%
12%
6%

43%
32%
35%
13%
17%
23%

43%
19%
34%
25%
30%
41%

37%
25%
27%
20%
19%
9%

23%
18%
16%
11%
10%
23%

8%
25%
7%
18%
22%
3%

9%
29%
2%
3%
5%
1%

12%
25%
9%
18%
14%
20%

31%
26%
20%
11%
9%
9%

35%
38%
23%
31%
23%
7%

26%
25%
22%
20%
18%
16%

