                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    PROCYCLICALITY AND MONETARY AGGREGATES

                                           Hyun Song Shin
                                            Kwanho Shin

                                        Working Paper 16836
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16836


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2011




This paper was presented at the 2010 Bank of Korea Research Conference (May 31 – June 1, 2010)
and at the NBER EASE meetings under its former title “Macroprudential Policy and Monetary Aggregates”.
 We are grateful to our discussants Kyungsoo Kim, Mark Spiegle, Michael Devereux and Somchai
Jitsuchon and to the other participants at the two meetings for their comments. We also thank Andrew
Rose and Takatoshi Ito for their guidance in preparing the current version of our paper. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Hyun Song Shin and Kwanho Shin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Procyclicality and Monetary Aggregates
Hyun Song Shin and Kwanho Shin
NBER Working Paper No. 16836
February 2011
JEL No. E32,E44,E52

                                             ABSTRACT

Financial intermediaries borrow in order to lend. When credit is increasing rapidly, the traditional
deposit funding (core liabilities) is supplemented with other funding (non-core liabilities). We explore
the hypothesis that monetary aggregates reflect the size of non-core and core liabilities and hence convey
information on the stage of the financial cycle. In emerging economies with open capital markets,
non-core liabilities of the banking system take the form of short-term foreign exchange liabilities,
increasing the vulnerability to the outbreak of “twin crises” where a liquidity crisis is compounded
by a currency crisis.


Hyun Song Shin
Princeton University
Department of Economics
Princeton
NJ 08544
hsshin@princeton.edu

Kwanho Shin
Korea University
Department of Economics
Seoul 136-701
Korea
khshin@korea.ac.kr
Introduction

The financial system channels funds from savers to borrowers. Some of the funding
flows directly, such as through the direct sale of marketable securities to households, but
much of the credit is channeled through the banking system. Far from being passive
entities, we were reminded again by the recent financial crisis that banks are active
players in the propagation of the financial cycle.

As intermediaries who borrow in order to lend, banks must raise funding in order to lend
to their customers. The most important source of funding available to the banking sector
is retail deposits of household savers. However, retail deposits grow in line with the
aggregate wealth of the household sector. In a boom when credit is growing very rapidly,
the pool of retail deposits is not sufficient to fund the increase in bank credit. Other
sources of funding must then be tapped to fund the increased bank lending. In this way,
the state of the financial cycle is reflected in the composition of the liabilities of the
banking sector.

In this paper, we examine to what extent monetary aggregates can serve as an indicator of
the stage of the financial cycle by providing a window on the size and changing
composition of banks’ liabilities. Key monetary aggregates such as M2 track the size of
the short-term deposit base of the domestic banking system, and hence can serve as a
proxy for the claim of the household sector on the banking sector, or the intermediary
sector more generally encompassing money market funds and other short-term claims
held by the household sector.

Indeed, Borio and Lowe (2004) have argued that the ratio of total credit to money can
serve as an informative signal of the stage of the financial cycle and hence of the
vulnerability of the financial system to a shock to the economy. The ratio of total credit
to money serves such a role since when credit is increasing faster than money, the
composition of the liabilities of the banking system is shifting away from deposit funding
toward non-deposit funds to finance the growth of lending.

In this way, monetary aggregates open a window on the possibility of macroprudential
policy that take cues from the money stock. Central banks that continue to give some
attention to monetary aggregates have emphasized the financial stability properties of
monetary aggregates for this reason. For instance, the European Central Bank (ECB) has
shifted in recent years to interpreting their monetary pillar increasingly as a financial
stability pillar.

However, monetary aggregates are not always well-suited for macroprudential policy.
Traditional classifications of monetary aggregates focus on the transactions role of
money as a medium of exchange. As such, the criterion is based on how close to cash –
how “money-like” – a particular financial claim is. Demand deposits are the archetypal
money measure, since such liabilities of the banking sector can be quickly transferred
from one person to another. Savings deposits are less money-like, and hence figure
broader notions of money, such as M2, but even here they fall outside the M2 measure if



                                             2
the depositor faces restrictions on easy access to the funds. In this way, the traditional
hierarchy of monetary aggregates goes from cash to the very liquid claims such as
demand deposits going out to more illiquid claims on the banking sector such as term
savings deposits. The criterion is how easily such claims can be used to settle
transactions.

However, for financial stability purposes, the distinction between core- and non-core
liabilities of the banking sector is not always captured by the ease of settlement of
transactions. Overnight repurchase agreements (repos) between financial institutions are
claims that are short-term and highly liquid. However, the financial crisis of 2008
demonstrated through the near-failure of Bear Stearns and the bankruptcy of Lehman
Brothers that repos can be highly destabilizing when the collateral requirements on the
repos rise through higher imposition of higher margins charged by creditors, setting off a
spiral of distress in the financial system as a whole (Adrian and Shin (2007), Morris and
Shin (2009), Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009), Gorton (2009, 2010)).

An important dimension that is not addressed in the traditional hierarchy of monetary
aggregates is who holds the claims. The same claim can have very different financial
stability implications if they are held by different entities. The cash deposits of a
leveraged hedge fund at its prime broker are similar to demand deposits of household
savers in the banking system in terms of how liquid the claim is. However, they have
very different systemic implications. At the other end of the spectrum in terms of
liquidity, a covered bond issued by a bank is an extremely illiquid, and long-term claim
that is not money-like. However, a covered bond held by long-term investors such as a
pension fund is similar to retail deposits in that the funding provided to the banking
sector is more “sticky” – i.e. stable – than a mortgage backed security or a collateralized
debt obligation (CDO) held by a securities firm.

The relevant distinction between core- and non-core liabilities can be seen as having to
do with whether the claim is held by the ultimate domestic creditors (the domestic
household sector). Repos and other claims held by banks on other banks can be regarded
as non-core liabilities which are more volatile.

For countries with open capital markets, the role of international capital flows plays a
particularly important role in financial stability, and hence on macroprudential policy.
During a boom when bank assets are growing rapidly, the funding required outstrips the
growth of the domestic deposit base, and is often met by capital flows from the
international banks and is reflected in the growth of short-term foreign currency-
denominated liabilities of the domestic banking system. As such, short-term foreign
currency-denominated bank liabilities can also be seen as the volatile non-core liabilities
of the banking sector.

The non-core liabilities of the banking sector provide a window on the willingness of the
banking sector to increase exposures. As such, the relative size of the non-core liabilities
can be conjectured to reflect the stage of the financial cycle and the degree of
vulnerability to setbacks.



                                              3
Our task in this paper is to examine the empirical properties of non-core liabilities of the
Korean banking sector and to examine the link between the relative size of non-core
liabilities and stage of the financial cycle. To anticipate our results, we find that non-core
liabilities (defined as the sum of foreign exchange liabilities of the banking sector and
wholesale bank funding) have undergone substantial changes over the financial cycle and
trace out dramatic patterns over the two financial crises in recent years – the 1997 Asian
financial crisis and the 2008 crisis following the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers.
Moreover, we demonstrate that our measure of non-core liabilities is closely related to
market measures of the capacity to take on risk, such as key credit spreads and other
market indicators.

The plan of our paper is as follows. We begin by outlining the conceptual and
accounting frameworks that can help us navigate the distinctions between core and non-
core liabilities. We then move on to more concrete definitions, especially for the case of
Korea. We outline the empirical properties of our non-core liabilities measure and show
that it has close affinities with market-based signals of risk-taking. We conclude with
some implications of our results for the financial regulatory reform debate.


Balance Sheet Capacity and Risk Premia

We begin with a brief overview of the rationale for focusing attention on the liabilities of
the banking sector.

Figure 1 depicts a stylized credit system, which channels savings from ultimate creditors
– the household sector and financial institutions such as mutual funds and pension funds
that lend on behalf of the households – to the ultimate borrowers, such as non-financial
firms or young households who wish to borrow to buy a house.

                               Figure 1: Stylized Financial System


                                               Banks
                            Intermediated                     Debt
                                Credit        (Active         Claims
                end-user                     Investors)                Households
                borrowers
                                                                        (Passive
                                    Directly granted credit            Investors)




The lending can be channeled through two routes. Credit could be granted directly. For
example, households buy corporate bonds and equity issued by non-financial firms
directly. Alternatively, the credit can be granted indirectly through the financial
intermediary sector, which borrows from the household sector in order to lend to the
ultimate borrowers.


                                                4
In world where the Modigliani and Miller (MM) theorems hold, we can separate the
decision on the size of the balance sheet (selection of the projects to take on) from the
financing of the projects (composition of liabilities in terms of debt and equity). In
textbook discussions of balance sheets, the set of positive net present value (NPV)
projects is taken as given. In such a setting, the size of the balance sheet would be fixed,
and determined exogenously. The remaining focus is on the liabilities side of the balance
sheet, in determining the relative mix of equity and debt. Even when the conditions for
the MM theorems do not hold, the textbook discussion starts with the assets of the firm as
given, in order to focus on the financing decision alone.

However, the distinguishing feature of banking sector assets is that they fluctuate over the
financial cycle. Credit increases rapidly during the boom but increases less rapidly (or
even decreases) during the downturn. Some of the variation in the size of banking assets
could be accounted for by the fluctuations in the size of the pool of positive NPV projects,
but some part of the fluctuations in banking sector assets may be due to shifts in the
banks’ willingness to take on risky positions over the cycle.

Figure 2, taken from Adrian and Shin (2010), shows the scatter chart of the weighted
average of the quarterly change in assets against the quarterly change in leverage of the
(then) five stand-alone US investment banks.3 Leverage is the ratio of total assets to
equity.

                Figure 2. Leverage Growth and Asset Growth of US Investment Banks
                               (Source SEC; Adrian and Shin (2010))


                                                                 Leverage and Total Assets Growth
                                                                Asset weighted, 1992Q3-2008Q1, Source: SEC
                                  .2        .1
                     Total Assets (log change)




                                                                                     2008-1
                                                                                                       2007-3
                                 0




                                                                                              2007-4
                    -.1




                                                       1998-4            Constant Equity Line
                                  -.2




                                                 -.2               -.1               0                   .1     .2
                                                                           Leverage (log change)



The first striking feature is that leverage is procyclical in the sense that leverage is high
when balance sheets are large, while leverage is low when balance sheets are small. This
is the opposite relationship to that for household balance sheets, whose leverage is high
when balance sheets are small. For instance, if a household owns a house that is financed

3
    Bear Stearns, Goldman Sachs, Lehman Brothers, Merrill Lynch and Morgan Stanley


                                                                                 5
by a mortgage, leverage falls when the house price increases, since the equity of the
household is increasing at a much faster rate than assets.

The horizontal axis in Figure measures the (quarterly) change in leverage, as measured by
the change in log assets minus the change in log equity. The vertical axis measures the
change in log assets. Hence, the 45-degree line indicates the set of points where equity is
unchanged. Above the 45-degree line equity is increasing, while below the 45-degree
line, equity is decreasing. Any straight line with slope equal to 1 indicates constant
growth of equity, with the intercept giving the growth rate of equity. Formally, we have:

           Asset growth = log A(t+1) – log A(t)

           Leverage growth = log A(t+1) – log A(t) – (log E(t+1) – log E(t))

The 45% line therefore represents the set of points where

           log E(t+1) – log E(t) = 0

and so represents the constant equity line. Any straight line with slope 1 in Figure 2
represents the set of points where equity is growing at a constant rate, where the growth
rate is given by the intercept.

In Figure 2 the slope of the scatter chart is close to 1, implying that we can describe
equity as increasing at a constant rate on average. Thus, unlike the textbook discussion
of the Modigliani-Miller theorem, it is equity that seems to play the role of the exogenous
variable and total assets (the size of the balance sheet) is the endogenous variable that is
determined by the willingness of banks to take on risky exposure. Although the
illustration in Figure 2 is taken from US investment banks, a similar picture holds for
other intermediaries, albeit in less stark form.4

There is a useful perspective on this feature that comes from the risk management
policies of financial intermediaries. Banks aim to keep enough equity capital to meet its
overall value at risk (VaR). If we denote by V the value at risk per dollar of assets, and A
is total assets, then equity capital E must satisfy E = V  A, implying that leverage L
satisfies

L = A/E = 1/V

If value at risk is low in expansions and high in contractions, leverage is high in
expansions and low in contractions – leverage is procyclical. Total assets are determined
once the leverage of the firm is applied to the given equity.

The above discussion suggests that there is a well-defined notion of balance sheet
capacity for financial intermediaries that depends on (i) the size of its capital base (its
equity) and (ii) the amount of lending that can be supported by each unit of capital. Total
assets are then determined by the multiplication of the two.

4
    Shin and Shin (2010) exhibit similar evidence for Korean banks.


                                                      6
Balance sheet capacity increases during a boom, since the greater profitability of the
banks adds to the capital base. In addition, measured risks are low during a boom,
implying that the banks’ willingness to lend for each unit of capital is also high.

A high balance sheet capacity translates into a higher supply of credit. In the stylized
credit system depicted in Figure 1, the greater supply of credit by the banking sector
means that the size of the banking sector becomes large relative to the total credit system.
An increased supply of loans may also imply a narrowing of risk spreads and/or the
lowering of lending standards (see Adrian and Shin (2010) and Shin (2010) for a more
formal development of the argument).

When boom turns to bust, the balance sheet capacity of the banking sector shrinks for two
reasons. First, loan losses lower bank capital, while the greater measured risks lower the
lending that is available for each unit of capital. When the downturn is severe, the lower
balance sheet capacity may result in a credit crunch. Central bank intervention in the
financial market such as the direct purchase of risky assets is one way to make up for the
shortfall in private sector balance sheet capacity.

An Accounting Framework

So far, we have considered the banking sector in terms of an aggregate balance sheet, but
we now turn to a basic accounting framework for claims between banks in order to
introduce our discussion of core and non-core liabilities.

The domestic financial system consists of ultimate borrowers (domestic firms and
households) and ultimate creditors (domestic households). The domestic banking sector
channels funds from ultimate creditors to ultimate borrowers. There is also a foreign
creditor sector who stands ready to supply funds to the domestic banking sector.

Suppose there are n banks in the domestic banking system. The term “bank” should be
interpreted widely, to include securities firms and other intermediaries. We denote the
banks by an index that takes values in the set {1, 2, …, n}.

The domestic household creditor sector is given the index n +1. The foreign creditor
sector is given the index n +2.

Bank i has two types of assets. First, there are loans to end-users such as corporates or
households. Denote the loans by bank i to such end users as yi . Next, there are the
claims against other financial institutions. Call these the “interbank” assets, although the
term covers all claims on other intermediaries. The total interbank assets held by bank i
are

                                           n

                                          x 
                                          j 1
                                                 j   ji




                                                 7
where x j is the total debt of bank j and  ji is the share of bank j’s debt held by bank i.
Note that  i , n 1 is the proportion of the bank’s liabilities held by the domestic creditor
sector (e.g. in the form of deposits), while  i , n  2 is the proportion of the bank’s liabilities
held by foreign creditors (e.g. in the form of short-term foreign currency-denominated
debt)

Since “banks” n+1 and n+2 are not leveraged, we have xn 1  xn  2  0 . The balance sheet
identity of bank i is given by

                                            n
                                      yi   x j ji  ei  xi
                                           j 1



The left-hand side is the total assets of the bank. The right-hand side is the sum of equity
and debt. Letting x  x1  xn  and y   y1  yn  , we can write in vector notation
the balance sheet identities of all banks as

                                          y  x  e  x

where  is the matrix whose i, j  th entry is  ij . Solving for y,

                                         y  e  x I   

Define leverage as the ratio of total assets to equity, given by

                                                  ai
                                                      i
                                                  ei

Then defining  as the diagonal matrix with i along the diagonal,

                                     y  e  e  I I   

where  is the matrix of interbank liabilities. By post-multiplying the above equation by
the unit vector

                                                     1
                                                u  
                                                     1

We can sum up the rows of the vector equation above, and we have the following balance
sheet identity.




                                                    8
                                  y   e   e z   1
                                  i
                                      i
                                          i
                                              i
                                                      i
                                                          i i   i


where is given by the i th row of I   u . Here, zi has the interpretation of the
proportion of the bank’s liabilities that come from outside the banking sector – i.e. the
proportion of funding that comes either from the ultimate domestic creditors (e.g.
deposits) or the foreign sector (e.g. foreign-currency denominated banking sector
liabilities).

Therefore, we can re-write the aggregate balance sheet identity in the following way.

        Total Credit = Total Equity of Banking Sector
                      + Liabilities to Non-bank Domestic Creditors
                      + Liabilities to Foreign Creditors

The accounting framework outlined above helps us to understand the connection between
(i) the procyclicality of the banking system, (ii) systemic risk spillovers, and (iii) the
stock of non-core liabilities of the banking system. Let us define the core liabilities of a
bank as its liabilities to the non-bank domestic creditors (such as through deposits). Then,
the non-core liabilities of a bank is either (i) a liability to another bank, or (ii) a liability
to a foreign creditor.

In a boom when credit is growing very rapidly, the growth of bank balance sheets
outstrips the growth in the pool of retail deposits. As a result, the growth of bank lending
results in greater lending and borrowing between the intermediaries themselves, or results
in the sucking in of foreign debt.


First, consider the simple case where there is no foreign creditor sector. The following
figure depicts a stylized financial system with two banks – Bank 1 and Bank 2. Both
banks draw on retail deposits to lend to ultimate borrowers. They can also hold claims
against each other, if they so choose.




                                              Bank 1                Deposits
                                 Loans

                                                      Interbank
                     Ultimate
                    Borrowers                          Claims            Depositors

                                 Loans        Bank 2                Deposits




Imagine a boom where the assets of both banks double in size, but the pool of retail
deposits stays fixed. Then, the proportion of banking sector liabilities in the form of


                                                  9
retail deposits must fall. In other words, rapidly expanding bank assets is mirrored by the
increased cross-claims across banks. The growth in bank assets and increased systemic
risk are two sides of the same coin. The relationship between banking sector assets and
increased cross-exposure across banks holds more generally in the accounting identity
derived above. On the assumption that the total domestic deposit claims of the banking
sector is constant, if the leverage of all banks increases, then the proportion of liabilities
that are due to domestic non-bank creditors must fall. In this way, the cross-claims
across banks must increase.

More generally, in the presence of a foreign creditor sector, the increase in bank lending
will result both in increased cross-lending between banks, but also will result in the
sucking in of foreign debt.

In this way, there are close conceptual links between procyclicality, systemic risk
spillovers and the stock of non-core liabilities of the banking system. The stage of the
financial cycle is reflected in the composition of the liabilities of the banking sector. In a
boom, we have the conjunction of three features:

   Total lending increases rapidly
   Non-core (especially foreign currency) liabilities increase as a proportion of total
    liabilities
   Systemic risk increases through greater cross-holdings between intermediaries

Two features distinguish non-core liabilities. First, non-core liabilities include claims
held by intermediaries on other intermediaries. Second, they include liabilities to foreign
creditors. Short-term foreign currency liabilities of the banks have both features. Even for
liabilities to domestic creditors, if the creditor is another intermediary, the claim tends to
be short-term. The distinction between core and non-core liabilities becomes meaningful
once there are differences in the empirical properties of the two types of liabilities.

In what follows, we will argue that core liabilities are more stable (or “sticky”) than non-
core liabilities. Non-core liabilities vary more over the cycle and are a form of funding
that is used most during financial booms. Therefore, the composition of the liabilities
gives useful information on the stage of the financial cycle.

To the extent that our ultimate interest is in reading the stage of the financial cycle, an
alternative route would have been to examine the asset side of the balance sheet. One
approach might be to look at the ratio of total assets to GDP. However, the liabilities side
of the balance sheet conveys additional useful information on the stickiness of funding,
and hence the vulnerability to a liquidity crisis. In this way, the focus moves away from
simply looking at the declining quality of bank assets and future default towards the
likelihood of financial crises that are driven by the withdrawal of funding. For the
Korean context, the latter perspective is very important in the light of the events of the
1997 Asian financial crisis, as well as the more recent 2008 crisis triggered after the
bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers.


                                              10
Defining Non-core liabilities.

As a preliminary discussion, we outline some issues in defining non-core liabilities of the
banking sector.

Banks are intermediaries who borrow in order to lend, and hence they must raise funding.
The most important source of funding available to a bank is retail deposits of household
savers. However, retail deposits grow in line with the aggregate wealth of the household
sector. In a boom when credit is growing very rapidly, the pool of retail deposits is not
sufficient to fund the increase in bank credit. Other sources of funding must then be
tapped to fund the increased bank lending.

                                         Figure 3: Northern Rock’s Liabilities (1998 – 2007)

                                   120
                  Billion pounds




                                   100


                                    80                         Equity

                                                               Other Liabilities
                                    60                         Securitized notes
                                                               Retail Deposits
                                    40


                                    20


                                     0
                                         Jun-98
                                                  Dec-98
                                                           Jun-99
                                                                    Dec-99
                                                                             Jun-00
                                                                                      Dec-00
                                                                                               Jun-01
                                                                                                        Dec-01
                                                                                                                 Jun-02
                                                                                                                          Dec-02
                                                                                                                                   Jun-03
                                                                                                                                            Dec-03
                                                                                                                                                     Jun-04
                                                                                                                                                              Dec-04
                                                                                                                                                                       Jun-05
                                                                                                                                                                                Dec-05
                                                                                                                                                                                         Jun-06
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Dec-06
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Jun-07




Figure 3 taken from Shin (2009) shows the composition of the liabilities of Northern
Rock, the UK bank whose failure in 2007 heralded the global financial crisis. In the nine
years from 1998 to 2007, Northern Rock’s lending increased 6.5 times. This increase in
lending far outstripped the funds raised through retail deposits (in yellow), with the rest
of the funding gap being made up with wholesale funding (in red and light blue).

Although Northern Rock was an outlier in terms of the aggressive use of wholesale
funding to increase lending, Northern Rock’s case illustrates the general lesson that
during a credit boom, the rapid increase in bank lending outstrips the core deposit
funding available to a bank. As the boom progresses, the bank resorts to alternative, non-
core liabilities to finance its lending. Therefore, the proportion of non-core liabilities of
banks serves as a useful indicator of the stage of the financial cycle and the degree of
vulnerability of the banking system to a downturn of the financial cycle. The larger is the
proportion of non-core liabilities, the greater is the boom, and hence the greater is the
vulnerability to a setback.




                                                                                                                    11
In the case of Northern Rock, there was also a run by its depositors. However, it is
important to bear in mind the sequence of events that led up to the run by its depositors.
The drying up of short-term funding for Northern Rock started on August 9th 2007, which
led Northern Rock to seek liquidity support from the Bank of England. The depositor run
happened in mid-September of 2007 once the liquidity shortage began to be reported
widely in the media. The Northern Rock episode illustrates that even “sticky” liabilities
such as retail deposits may become unstable once the problems with an institution
becomes sufficiently serious.

Figure 4 plots data from the United States, and is taken from Adrian and Shin (2009). It
charts the stock of repurchase agreements of US primary dealers5 plus the stock of
financial commercial paper expressed as a proportion of the M2 money stock.

                          Figure 4. Repos and Financial CP as Proportion of M2
                                      (Source: US Federal Reserve)


                   90%
                                                                                                                                                  Aug 8 2007

                   80%
                                                                                                                                                          Sep 10 2008

                   70%

                                                                              Aug 12 1998
                   60%

                                                                                                  Sep 12 2001
                   50%
                                                                                                                                                    Apr 29 2009
                   40%

                   30%

                   20%
                      0   1   1   2   2   3   3   4   5   5   6   6   7   7   8   9   9   0   0   1   2   2   3   3   4   4   5   6   6   7   7   8   8
                      9   9   9   9   9   9   9   9   9   9   9   9   9   9   9   9   9   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0
                      9   9   9   9   9   9   9   9   9   9   9   9   9   9   9   9   9   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0
                      1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   2   2   2   2   2   2   2   2   2   2   2   2   2   2   2   2
                      4   0   8   5   1   9   5   3   8   6   3   0   8   4   2   7   5   2   8   6   2   1   6   4   1   7   5   1   9   7   3   0   6
                      l   3   2   2   2   1   1   1   b   p   r   3   2   2   2   1   1   1   v   n   n   3   2   2   2   1   1   1   g   r   t   3   2
                      u
                      J   n   g   r   t   y   c   l   e   e   p   t   y   c   l   b   p   r   o   u   a   l
                                                                                                          u   b   p   r   v   n   n   u   a   c   r   v
                          a   u   a   c   a   e   u
                                                  J   F   S   A   c   a   e   u
                                                                              J   e   e   p   N   J   J   J   e   e   p   o   u   a   A   M   O   p   o
                          J   A   M   O   M   D                   O   M   D       F   S   A                   F   S   A   N   J   J               A   N




M2 consists of retail deposits and holdings in money market mutual funds, and thus can
be regarded as retail depositors’ claim on the broader banking system. It is apparent from
Figure 2 that as recently as the early 1990s, repos and financial CP were only a quarter of
the size of M2. However, the ratio rose rapidly and reached over 80% by August 2007,
only to collapse with the onset of the financial crisis.

The growth in non-core liabilities is often accompanied by the shortening of maturity of
the liabilities. Figure 5 plots three series: the size of the overnight repo stock, the total
stock of financial commercial paper and M2, all normalized to equal 1 on July 6th, 1994.

We see that the stock of M2 grew by a factor of 2.4 since 1994, but the stock of overnight
repos grew almost seven-fold up to March 2008, before collapsing with the onset of the

5
 US primary dealers are US banks and securities firms that have a daily trading relationship with the
Federal Reserve, and which are permitted to bid at the auctions of US Treasury securities.


                                                                                      12
Bear Stearns crisis in 2008. Indeed, the use of overnight repos became so prevalent
among US investment banks that, at its peak, the five Wall Street investment banks were
rolling over a quarter of their balance sheets every night.

                      Figure 5. Overnight Repos and M2 (weekly data)
                  (Normalized to 1 on July 6th 1994. Source: Federal Reserve)

                     8.0


                     7.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Mar 19 2008
                                                                                                                   Overnight repo
                     6.0
                                                                                                                   Financial CP

                     5.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Aug 8
                                                                                                                   M2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2007

                     4.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Apr 29 2009



                     3.0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2.37
                     2.0


                     1.0


                     0.0
                           Jul 6 1994
                                        Jan 18 1995
                                                      Aug 2 1995
                                                                   Feb 14 1996
                                                                                 Aug 28 1996
                                                                                               Mar 12 1997
                                                                                                             Sep 24 1997
                                                                                                                           Apr 8 1998
                                                                                                                                        Oct 21 1998
                                                                                                                                                      May 5 1999
                                                                                                                                                                   Nov 17 1999
                                                                                                                                                                                 Jun 7 2000
                                                                                                                                                                                              Dec 20 2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Jul 4 2001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Jan 16 2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Jul 31 2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Feb 12 2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Aug 27 2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Mar 10 2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Sep 22 2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Apr 6 2005
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Oct 19 2005
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        May 3 2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Nov 15 2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   May 30 2007
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Dec 12 2007
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Jun 25 2008
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Jan 7 2009
The increased use of short-maturity liabilities can be seen as the mirror image of the
increased proportion of non-core liabilities in the banking system.


                                                                   Figure 6: Short Intermediation Chain

                                                                                                       mortgage                                                                                                                        deposits
                                    households                                                                                                        mortgage bank                                                                                                              households




Figure 6 depicts a traditional deposit-taking bank that collects deposits and holds
mortgage assets against household borrowers. All banking sector liabilities are core
liabilities in such a system. However, greater use of non-core liabilities is associated with
lengthening intermediation chains, as illustrated in Figure 7.

In this illustration, the mortgage asset is held in a mortgage pool, a passive firm whose
sole role is to hold mortgage assets and issue liabilities (mortgage-backed securities,
MBSs) against those assets. The mortgage-backed securities might then be owned by an
asset-backed security (ABS) issuer who pools and tranches the MBSs into another layer
of claims, such as collateralized debt obligations (CDOs). Then, a securities firm might
hold CDOs on their own books for their yield, but finances such assets by collateralized
borrowing through repurchase agreements (repos) with a larger commercial bank. In


                                                                                                                                                                          13
turn, the commercial bank would fund its lending to the securities firm by issuing short
term liabilities, such as financial commercial paper. Money market mutual funds would
be natural buyers of such short-term paper, and ultimately the money market fund would
complete the circle, since household savers would own shares to these funds.

                                Figure 7: Long Intermediation Chain

                        households                                       households
                                                                               MMF shares
                              mortgage

                                                                        money market fund
                      mortgage pool
                                                                                Short-term
                              MBS                                                 paper
                                         ABS                     Repo
                        ABS issuer             securities firm          commercial bank




The illustration in Figure 7 is a simple example of potentially much more complex and
intertwined relationships. What is noticeable from the institutions involved in Figure 5 is
that they were precisely those institutions that were at the sharp end of the financial crisis
of 2007 and 2008. Subprime mortgages cropped up in this chain, and the failure of Bear
Stearns and Lehman Brothers owed to problems in the smooth function of this chain.

At each stage of the intermediation chain, the funding interest rate must be lower than the
asset interest rate. As the intermediation chain becomes longer, more short-term funding
must be used to support the chain, as short-term funding tends to be the cheapest. In this
way, the growth of non-core liabilities and the increased use of short-term debt are all
consequences of the rapid growth of bank assets during a boom.

The discussion so far suggests that the definition of core and non-core liabilities should
focus on whether the liability is to an ultimate domestic creditor. In particular, we should
distinguish between:

1. Liability due to an ultimate domestic creditor

2. Liability due to an intermediary

3. Liability due to a foreign creditor

The principle would be that we classify (1) as a core liability and (2) and (3) as non-core
liabilities. In practice, the classification is not so clear-cut. For instance, the claims held
by domestic non-financial firms are not easy to classify. For a small and medium sized
enterprise with an owner-manager, the bank deposits of that firm could be seen as
household deposits. However, the firm could be a major firm with access to market
finance, who can issue bonds and then deposit the proceeds of the bond sale in the
banking system. This is what happened in Japan in the 1980s, for instance. This latter
case should not be counted as a core liability, since the creditor firm is acting like an
intermediary who borrows in the financial markets to lend to the banks.



                                                     14
There are other ambiguities that are presented by items such as trust liabilities of the
banking sector. Much of the trust liabilities are to non-financial corporates and face
many of the definitional hurdles.

As a practical matter, it may be better to have a more graduated distinction between core
and non-core liabilities, allowing an intermediate category to take account of such
ambiguities.

The following table is a two-way classification that takes account of the traditional
concern with the liquidity of monetary aggregates together with the question of whether
the liabilities are core- or non-core. While acknowledging that some differences of views
could lead to alternative classifications, we use the distinction to examine the case of
Korea.

For Korea, we define non-core liabilities as the sum of (i) bank liabilities to foreign
creditors (ii) bank debt securities, (iii) promissory notes (iv) repos and (v) certificates of
deposit. The inclusion of CDs is motivated by the fact that CDs are often held by
financial institutions engaged in the carry trade, who use CDs as an alternative to holding
Korean government securities in their carry trade. However, we recognize that we are
missing some demand from domestic depositors who hold CDs as a higher-yielding
substitute for bank deposits.



                            Core liability     Intermediate       Non-core liability
                                                                        Repos
           Highly liquid




                                Cash
                                             Demand deposits
                                                                      Call loans
                                              (non-financial
                           Demand deposits
                                                corporate)
                            (households)                             Short-term
                                                                    FX bank debt
           Intermediate




                                                                    Time deposit
                            Time deposit       Time deposit
                                                                      & CDs
                               & CDs             & CDs
                                                                 (banks & securities
                            (households)      (non-financial
                                                                       firms)
                                                corporate)


                            Trust accounts
                                              Trust accounts       Long-term bank
                             (households)
                                              (non-financial        debt securities
           Illiquid




                                                corporate)       (banks & securities
                           Covered bonds
                                                                        firms)
                            (households)
                                                                    ABS & MBS


                                                15
Non-core Liabilities for Korea

The chart for the non-core liabilities in Korea is given in Figure 8. In an open emerging
economy, rapid increases in non-core liabilities of the banking sector shows up as capital
inflows through the increased FX liabilities of the banking sector. The segment in red
shows the bank liabilities to foreign creditors.

                                 Figure 8. Non-Core Liabilities of Korean Banking Sector
                                 800
                  Trillion Won




                                 700


                                 600
                                                                                                                                  [Other] FX borrowing

                                 500
                                                                                                                                  [Lf] Debt Securities

                                 400
                                                                                                                                  [Lf] Repos

                                 300
                                                                                                                                  [M2] Promissory Note 2

                                 200
                                                                                                                                  [M2] Promissory Note 1

                                 100
                                                                                                                                  [M2] Certificate of Deposit
                                  0
                                       Jan-91

                                                Jan-93

                                                         Jan-95

                                                                  Jan-97

                                                                           Jan-99

                                                                                    Jan-01

                                                                                             Jan-03

                                                                                                       Jan-05

                                                                                                                Jan-07

                                                                                                                         Jan-09




We see that the first peak on non-core liabilities comes during the 1997 financial crisis.
After a lull in the early 2000s, non-core liabilities increase rapidly up to the 2008
financial crisis. Figure 7 plots the non-core liabilities of the Korean banking sector as a
fraction of M2. We see that there has been substantial variation in the weight on non-
core liabilities over the years, ranging from around 15% to a peak of 50% during the
crisis of 2008.




                                                                                                      16
                                   Figure 9. Non-core liabilities as a proportion of M2

                                                                                Non-Core Liabilities as Fraction of M2
                   0.55
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Jan-09
                   0.50

                   0.45

                   0.40

                   0.35
                                                                                         Jan-98
                   0.30

                   0.25

                   0.20

                   0.15

                   0.10
                          Jan-91

                                         Jan-92

                                                     Jan-93

                                                              Jan-94

                                                                       Jan-95

                                                                                Jan-96

                                                                                         Jan-97

                                                                                                  Jan-98

                                                                                                           Jan-99

                                                                                                                    Jan-00

                                                                                                                             Jan-01

                                                                                                                                      Jan-02

                                                                                                                                               Jan-03

                                                                                                                                                         Jan-04

                                                                                                                                                                  Jan-05

                                                                                                                                                                           Jan-06

                                                                                                                                                                                    Jan-07

                                                                                                                                                                                             Jan-08

                                                                                                                                                                                                        Jan-09

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Jan-10
From 2005 to mid-2008, the foreign currency liabilities of Korean banks and foreign
bank branches in Korea increased rapidly, before falling rapidly with the onset of the
financial crisis after the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy.



            Figure 10. Foreign currency liabilities of foreign bank branches in Korea
                                   (Source: Bank of Korea)
                                                                       F
                                                                       X
                                                                       L
                                                                       i
                                                                       a
                                                                       b
                                                                       i
                                                                       l
                                                                       i
                                                                       t
                                                                       i
                                                                       e
                                                                       s
                                                                       o
                                                                       f
                                                                       F
                                                                       o
                                                                       r
                                                                       e
                                                                       i
                                                                       g
                                                                       n
                                                                       B
                                                                       a
                                                                       n
                                                                       k
                                                                       B
                                                                       r
                                                                       a
                                                                       n
                                                                       c
                                                                       h
                                                                       e
                                                                       s
                                                                       i
                                                                       n
                                                                       K
                                                                       o
                                                                       r
                                                                       e
                                                                       a
                            1
                            0 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
                            0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0




              $ Billion




                                                     222222222222222222221111111111
                                                     000000000000000000009999999999
                                                     000000000000000000009999999999
                                                     998877665544332211009988776655
                                                     qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
                                                     313131313131313131313131313131

                                                    Short-Term FX Liabilities                                                                           Long-Term FX Liabilities




Foreign bank branches in Korea played an important role in channeling foreign currency
funding to local borrowers. Figure 10 plots the foreign currency liabilities of the foreign
bank branches in Korea. Foreign bank branches raise funding either from their
headquarters through the interoffice account or by borrowing unsecured in the interbank
market. They then enter the FX swap market in Korea, selling dollars to buy Korean won


                                                                                                                     17
on the spot market and simultaneously buying dollars in the forward market. Before the
swap matures, foreign banks hold Korean government bonds, Bank of Korea bonds and
other fixed income instruments denominated in Won to engage in the “carry trade” of
lending at the higher Korean interest rate by borrowing at the lower dollar or yen interest
rate.

Although local banks also held dollar assets, such assets were claims on Korean firms,
and hence not usable to meet maturing dollar liabilities. Non-financial firms in Korea
had dollar receivables, such as the receivables of the shipbuilders, but they were long-
term dollar receivables. By hedging the exchange rate risk in these long-term dollar
receivables, the non-financial companies could transfer to the banking sector the long-
term dollar claims, but the banks then would engage in maturity transformation by
borrowing short in dollars. In this way, although the currency mismatch could be
eliminated, there was still a maturity mismatch.

Capital flows associated with foreign currency liabilities of the banking sector played a
key role in the crisis of 2008. Figure 9 shows the capital inflows and outflows for two
sectors – the equity sector and the banking sector.

                   Figure 11. Net Capital Flows of Equity and Banking Sector
                           (Billion Dollars) (Source: Bank of Korea)


                              15
                  $ Billion
                              10

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Bank FX
                               5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               liabilities
                               0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Equity
                              -5

                          - 10

                          - 15

                          - 20

                          - 25
                                   2005/ 01
                                              2005/ 04
                                                         2005/ 07
                                                                    2005/ 10
                                                                               2006/ 01
                                                                                          2006/ 04
                                                                                                     2006/ 07
                                                                                                                2006/ 10
                                                                                                                           2007/ 01
                                                                                                                                      2007/ 04
                                                                                                                                                 2007/ 07
                                                                                                                                                            2007/ 10
                                                                                                                                                                       2008/ 01
                                                                                                                                                                                  2008/ 04
                                                                                                                                                                                             2008/ 07
                                                                                                                                                                                                        2008/ 10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2009/ 01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2009/ 04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2009/ 07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2009/ 10




We see that the equity sector actually saw net inflows during the crisis in the autumn of
2008. Thus, contrary to the common misperception that the exit of foreign investors from
the Korean stock market is the main reason for capital outflows, flows in the equity sector
was net positive immediately after the crisis. The reason for this net positive flow was
that selling by foreigners was more than matched by the repatriation flow of Korean
investors who sold their holdings of foreign equity.

Equity outflows also have two mitigating factors. During a crisis, stock prices fall and
there is a steep depreciation of the domestic currency. For both reasons, foreign investors
suffer a “double whammy” if they withdraw from the stock market. Provided that the


                                                                                                                                 18
exchange rate is allowed to adjust, equity outflows are not the main culprit in the draining
of foreign currency reserves.

However, the banking sector is different. First, foreign currency liabilities of the banks
have a face value that must be met in full, and the face value is in foreign currency. For
both reasons, the deleveraging of the banking sector is associated with precipitous capital
outflows. Second, deleveraging sets off amplifying effects through price changes.
Unlike long-term investors, such as pension funds and life insurance companies,
leveraged institutions are vulnerable to erosion of their capital, and hence engage in
substantial adjustments of their assets even to small shocks. The feedback loop generated
by such reactions to price changes amplifies shocks.

The banking sector in Korea saw very substantial capital outflows in the aftermath of the
Lehman crisis. In the three months following the Lehman bankruptcy, there was an
outflow of 21.6 billion dollars in October, 11.9 billion dollars in November and 15.5
billion dollars in December. In these three months, the outflow from the banking sector
was 49 billion dollars, which accounts for the decrease in Korea’s foreign exchange
reserves from over 240 billion dollars before the Lehman crisis to 200 billion at the end
of 2008.

Deleveraging by banks and the associated amplification effects figured prominently in
emerging economy financial crises. As such, policies to moderate volatile capital flows
must be linked with banking sector regulation.

Although there are common threads between the crises of 1997 and 2008, there are also
notable differences. In 1997, the currency mismatch was on bank balance sheets
resulting from lending to the borrowing by large non-financial corporations (the chaebol)
in Korea. In contrast, in 2008, the mismatch arose from the selling of long-dated dollar
receivables of the shipbuilders and other exporting firms. The banks, who bought the
long-dated dollars as forward contracts would then hedge the currency exposure by
taking on short-term dollar-denominated debt. The large volume of dollar forward
contracts sold by exporting firms accounted for a substantial portion of the increase in
short-term foreign currency denominated liabilities of the banking system.



Exchange Rate Movements

For open economies such as Korea, changes in non-core liabilities can be expected to be
closely related to the movement of the exchange rate since, as emphasized before, sudden
changes in capital flows are primarily associated with changes in non-core liabilities of
the banking sector. Figure 10 illustrates the exchange rate of the Korean won against the
US dollar and the fraction of non-core liabilities of the Korean banking to M2. Before
the Asian crisis in 1997, the Korean government intervened heavily in the foreign
exchange market and the exchange rate was quite stable. However, after the Asian crisis,
the Korean government officially adopted a floating exchange rate, and the exchange rate




                                            19
has been more or less allowed to move freely and determined by the market forces since
then.



                        Figure 10. Non-Core Liabilities and the Exchange Rate of Korea


            1800                                                                                         0.5


                                                                                                         0.45
            1600

                                                                                                         0.4

            1400
                                                                                                         0.35


            1200                                                                                         0.3    exchange rate (left)
                                                                                                                NCL share (right)
                                                                                                         0.25
            1000

                                                                                                         0.2

             800
                                                                                                         0.15


             600                                                                                         0.1
                   91   92 93   94   95 96   97   98 99   00   01 02   03 04   05   06 07   08   09 10




In the graph,we can clearly see that the two peaks of the fraction of the non-core
liabilities were followed immediately by the two exchange rate crises in 1997 and 2008.
After the crises, as the exchange rate stabilized, the fraction of the non-core liabilities
also decreased. However, if we let the crisis and after-crisis adjustment periods aside, the
exchange rate and the fraction of the non-core liabilities generally moved in the opposite
directions. Especially during the period of January 2001 to September 2008, while the
exchange rate mostly appreciated, the fraction of the non-core liabilities almost always
increased. The simple correlation coefficient between the two is -0.76 during that period.
This is because, since increases in non-core liabilities reflected capital inflows through
foreign borrowings of the banking sector, they put pressure on the Korean won to
appreciate.6

Forecasting Exchange Rate Growth

Recently Adrian, Etula and Shin (2009) present evidence that the short-term credit
aggregates of US financial intermediaries such as repurchase agreements (Repos) or
commercial paper (CP) forecast exchange rate growth for a number of countries. Since
repos and CP can provide a window on funding liquidity, the “risk appetite” of dollar
funded intermediaries is closely linked to fluctuations of such short US dollar credit
aggregates. In particular, when the US dollar funding liquidity is high, the risk premium

6
 As emphasized by Adrian, Etula and Shin (2009), this negative contemporaneous correlation between the
exchange rate and the fraction of non-core liabilities plays a crucial role in the next subsection in
forecasting the future exchange rate changes.


                                                                        20
required on risky holdings of foreign currency is low, implying a depreciation of such
risky currency. In other words, US dollar funding increases are expected to be followed
by subsequent appreciation of the dollar. They call this empirical regularity a funding
liquidity channel and provide a theoretical foundation for this by using an intertemporal
equilibrium pricing model.

We apply the same logic to forecasting the Korean won exchange rate. Since a major
source of non-core liabilities is foreign borrowings, increases in non-core liabilities are
expected to reflect high risk appetite of foreign intermediaries and hence can be used to
forecast the exchange rate. In Table 1 we report the regression results. The baseline
specification with and without the lagged dependent variable is displayed in columns (1)-
(2). We see that the monthly growth rate of non-core liabilities last month has
explanatory power for the current exchange rate growth: higher growth of non-core
liabilities last month is followed by depreciation of the Korean Won this month. This
finding is robust to variation in the regression specification (columns (3)-(5)) where
other control variables are included such as the one-month lags of the monthly growth
rate of industrial production, the monthly growth rate of stock index and the interest rate
difference between Korea and the U.S. The estimated coefficients of the lagged growth
rate of non-core liabilities are stable across different specifications with statistical
significance at the 5% level except for in column (5) where it is significant at the 10%
level. The estimated coefficients are also economically significant, suggesting that a one
standard deviation increase in the growth rate of non-core liabilities forecasts a roughly
0.8% depreciation of the exchange rate.

   Table 1. Forecasting Monthly Exchange Rate Growth of the Korean Won against the US Dollar
       Dependent Variable: Monthly
                                          [1]      [2]       [3]      [4]         [5]
       Exchange Rate Growth
       Exchange rate Growth (-1)                         0.007     -0.007      0.003       -0.038
                                                         [0.071]   [0.081]     [0.080]     [0.084]
       Non-core Liabilities Growth (-1)      0.213** 0.209**       0.260**    0.263**      0.241*
                                             [0.092]     [0.099]   [0.124]     [0.123]     [0.123]
       Interest Rate Difference (-1)                                0.003      -0.037       -0.05
                                                                   [0.090]     [0.090]     [0.090]
       Industrial Production Growth (-1)                                      -0.340**    -0.324**
                                                                               [0.140]     [0.140]
       Stock Index Growth (-1)                                                             -0.069*
                                                                                           [0.040]
       Constant                               -0.001      -0.001    -0.001      0.002       0.003
                                             [0.003]     [0.003]   [0.005]     [0.005]     [0.005]
        Observations                                229       229       182         182        182
        Adjusted R-squared                         0.019     0.014     0.011       0.037      0.048
Note: The dependent variable is the monthly growth of the Korean Won exchange rate against the US
dollar. Forecasting variables are the one-month lags of the exchange rate growth, the monthly growth rate
of non-core liabilities, the interest rate difference between Korea and the US, the monthly growth rate of
industrial production and the monthly growth rate of stock index. We use the end of month value for all



                                                    21
monthly variables. We use the policy interest rates for the interest rate and the KOSPI for the stock index.
The values in parenthesis are standard errors. * and ** denote statistical significance at the 10% and 5%
levels respectively.

In spite of the encouraging empirical evidence from the regressions, we should also be
mindful of the potentially non-linear effects associated with the build-up to a crisis and its
subsequent outbreak. During tranquil times, the capital inflows associated with greater
foreign currency denominated bank liabilities is more likely to be associated with an
appreciation of the Korean Won. However, conditional on high levels of foreign
currency denominated liabilities, the probability of a crisis outbreak is high. In this
respect, a more thorough investigation of the empirical evidence will need to disentangle
the dynamics during tranquil periods from the dynamics around the time of crises.



Explaining Credit Spreads

We can also apply the same idea of the risk appetite to forecasting the credit spread.7
While Adrian, Etula and Shin (2009) focus on the asset side of the financial
intermediaries, we now switch our attention to the cost of the liabilities. Since a high risk
appetite of the financial intermediaries implies that they are willing to borrow even at a
higher interest rate, we expect the credit spread for debt securities issued by financial
intermediaries to increase as the non-core liabilities of them increase. We can investigate
if this implication of the same theory holds by relying on the same type regression but
replacing the exchange rate growth with the credit spread.8

We report the regression results in Table 2. The credit spread is defined as the difference
between the three-year yield on the debt securities issued by (Korean) AAA-rated
commercial banks and the government bond yield of the same maturity. An increase in
the credit spread is interpreted that commercial banks are willing to borrow with higher
interest premiums, reflecting a higher risk appetite.

We find that the increase in the growth rate of the non-core liabilities last month
increases the credit spread this month. This evidence is quite strong as the estimated
coefficients of the one-month lag of the credit spread are highly significant at the 1%
level in all columns except in column (1). In contrast, all other control variables are not
statistically significant even at the 10% level, indicating that only the growth rate of the
non-core liabilities has explanatory power for the future credit risk.




7
  Since the risk appetite is related to the future return or cost, we are more interested in the impact of
increased risk appetite on the future credit spread.
8
  Since the dependent variable is not the growth rate, but the level of credit spread, we also used the non-
core liabilities as a fraction of M2 instead of the growth rate of the non-core liabilities.


                                                      22
                 Table2. Forecasting Credit Spread of Korean Commercial Banks
    Dependent Variable: Credit Spread        [1]       [2]      [3]       [4]                      [5]
    Credit Spread (-1)                                  0.948*** 0.952*** 0.956*** 0.960***
                                                         [0.036]  [0.038]  [0.039]  [0.040]
    Non-core Liabilities Fraction (-1)           -0.003 0.029*** 0.030*** 0.029*** 0.030***
                                                [0.013]  [0.005]  [0.005]  [0.005]  [0.006]
    Interest Rate Difference (-1)                                 -0.004   -0.003   -0.003
                                                                  [0.011]  [0.011]  [0.011]
    Industrial Production Growth (-1)                                       0.003    0.003
                                                                           [0.006]  [0.006]
    Stock Index Growth (-1)                                                          0.001
                                                                                    [0.002]
    Constant                                   0.006***     0        0        0        0
                                                [0.000]  [0.000]  [0.000]  [0.000]  [0.000]
     Observations                                  130         129           129          129        129
     Adjusted R-squared                           0.0073      0.8444       0.8433       0.8423      0.8415
Note: The dependent variable is the credit spread in Korea. Forecasting variables are the one-month lags of
the credit spread, the monthly growth rate of non-core liabilities, the interest rate difference between Korea
and the US, the monthly growth rate of industrial production and the monthly growth rate of stock index.
We use the end of month value for all variables except for the credit spread for which we use the monthly
average. The credit spread is defined as the difference between the three-year yield on the government
bond and that on the bonds issued by (Korean) AAA-rated commercial banks. The values in parenthesis are
standard errors. **** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level.




Role of Monetary Aggregates

In a hypothetical world where deposit-taking banks are the only financial intermediaries,
and their liabilities (deposits) can be identified with a broad definition of “money”, then
the money stock would be a good indicator of the aggregate size of the balance sheets of
leveraged institutions. To this extent, the growth of the money stock would play a useful
role in signaling changes in the size of the aggregate balance sheet of the leveraged sector.

However, it is clear that we cannot readily identify money with the aggregate size of the
liabilities of leveraged institutions. This is so for two reasons.

 Many of the leveraged institutions (investment banks, hedge funds, off-balance sheet-
  vehicles and others) do not conform to the textbook ideal of the deposit-funded bank.
  Hence, their liabilities are not counted as “money”.

 Even for mainly deposit-funded banks, not all items of liabilities qualify as money.
  In particular, the liabilities of banks to foreign creditors need to be considered.

The first bullet point is important for financial systems such as that in the United States
that rely on securitization and capital markets, rather than traditional banking. Perhaps
we could speculate that the divergent empirical results for the United States and some


                                                     23
European countries on the role of money in financial cycles can be attributed to the fact
that the capital markets play a much bigger role in the former.

The second bullet point is also important, especially when we consider the components of
a bank's liabilities that fluctuate over time. The recent run on the U.K. mortgage bank
Northern Rock shows how even very previously conventional deposit-funded mortgage
banks may come to rely more heavily on market funding rather than deposits. Thus, the
money supply as conventionally defined will fail to capture the size of the aggregate
balance sheet of even the conventional banking sector, let alone the non-bank financial
institutions that have an impact on the financial cycle.

If the financial system is dominated by deposit-taking banks, so that the aggregate
liabilities of the financial system as a whole are well-captured by the stock of deposits,
then excess liquidity corresponds to excessive growth of the money stock. Deposits fall
under conventional broad notions of money, such as M2. However, the ideal of a
financial system dominated by deposit-funded bank may have never existed in its purest
form, and is becoming less relevant over time. Certainly, empirical evidence from the
U.S. since the 1980s detects very little role for the money stock in explaining
macroeconomic fluctuations (see, for example, Friedman 1988).

If the financial system is organized around the capital market, conventional measures of
money represent only a small proportion of aggregate size of the leveraged sector. Nor is
the quantity of deposits the most volatile component of the total aggregate liabilities of
the financial system. In such a world, money is less useful for macroprudential policy.
The rapid move toward a market-based financial system in recent years has accelerated
the trend toward greater reliance on non-traditional, non-deposit based funding, toward
greater use of the interbank bank market, the market for commercial paper, and asset-
backed securities (itself sub-divided in many categories). Most of all, for an open
financial system such as Korea’s, the foreign liabilities of the banking sector emerges as
an important balance sheet aggregate.

Link with Reform of Bank Regulation

The global financial crisis exposed weaknesses in the existing regime for bank capital
regulation. The recognition of these flaws set in train a major upheaval of bank capital
regulation through the G20 process. The Financial Stability Board (FSB) and the Basel
Committee are examining two key strands in the proposed reform, which are:

   Capital requirements that vary over the financial cycle

   Capital surcharge for systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs)

Additionally, the G20 has mandated the IMF to examine financial sector burden sharing
whereby the costs of government intervention during the financial crisis can be imposed
on the financial industry itself.




                                            24
So far, these initiatives have been conducted largely independently of each other in spite
of the close conceptual affinities between them. There is a danger that each initiative is
developed in isolation, to be piled on top of each other at the implementation stage in
cumulative fashion. Such an outcome would be unfortunate, since the resulting regime
will suffer from conceptual inconsistencies. There is also the danger that the cumulative
application of the new charges will result in double- or triple-taxation of the same
activities.

We have seen above that there are intimate connections between:

 Procyclicality

 Systemic risk spillovers, and

 Stock of non-core liabilities of the banking system.


Therefore, if systemic risk is to be taxed, it must be done in procyclical fashion. Merely
slapping on a time-invariant “systemic surcharge” is not sufficient. By the same token, a
procyclical capital requirement can, by itself, serve as a tax on systemic risk spillovers.
A levy on non-core liabilities has a similar effect to both, but is easier to implement.


Concluding Remarks

The non-core liabilities of the banking sector can be regarded as a measure both of the
stage of the financial cycle, and of the vulnerability to systemic risk spillovers. In
addition, in an open emerging economy, the stock of foreign currency liabilities of the
banking sector is an indicator of excess liquidity and of the vulnerability to capital
outflows driven by deleveraging.

For these reasons, the non-core liabilities of the banking sector is an especially useful
measure for macroprudential policy. Further research should be directed in two
directions. First, there is a need for better-designed monetary aggregates that addresses
the issues of financial stability, rather than the traditional preoccupations that have
motivated the definition of traditional monetary aggregates. Secondly, there is greater
need for further analytical work on the relationship between non-core liabilities and
financial stability.




                                            25
References


Adrian, T. and H. S. Shin (2010) "Liquidity and Leverage", Journal of Financial
Intermediation 19 (3), 418-437.

Adrian, T. and H. S. Shin (2009) "Financial Intermediaries and Monetary Economics"
draft chapter for the Handbook of Monetary Economics

Adrian, T., E. Etula and H. S. Shin (2009) "Risk Appetite and Exchange Rates" Federal
Reserve Bank of Staff Reports.

Brunnermeier, Markus, Andrew Crockett, Charles Goodhart and Avinash Persaud (2009)
Geneva Report on the World Economy 11: The Fundamental Principles of Financial
Regulation June 2009

Friedman, Benjamin. 1988. "Monetary Policy Without Quantity Variables." American
Economic Review, v. 78, iss. 2, pp. 440-45.

Gete, Pedro (2008) “Housing Markets and Current Account Dynamics” working paper,
University of Chicago, Booth School of Business.

Geanakoplos, John. (2009) “The Leverage Cycle” forthcoming in the NBER
Macroeconomics Annual

Gorton, Gary (2008) “The Subprime Panic” Proceedings of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Kansas City Symposium at Jackson Hole

Gorton, Gary and Andrew Metrick (2009) “Haircuts” working paper, Yale School of
Management, Yale University
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1447438

Greenlaw, David, Jan Hatzius, Anil Kashyap and Hyun Song Shin (2008) “Leveraged
Losses: Lessons from the Mortgage Market Meltdown” US Monetary Policy Forum
Report No. 2.
http://research.chicagogsb.edu/igm/events/docs/USMPF-final.pdf

Hattori, Masazumi, Hyun Song Shin and Wataru Takahashi (2009) “A Financial System
Perspective on Japan’s Experience in the Late 1980s” paper presented at the 16th Bank of
Japan International Conference, May 2009, Bank of Japan IMES discussion paper
http://www.imes.boj.or.jp/english/publication/edps/2009/09-E-19.pdf

International Monetary Fund (2008a) Global Financial Stability Report, October 2008.

International Monetary Fund (2008b) “Divergence of Current Account Balances across
Emerging Economies” World Economic Outlook, Chapter 6, October 2008.




                                          26
Morris, Stephen and Hyun Song Shin (2008) "Financial Regulation in a System Context,"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall 2008, 229-274.

Shin, Hyun Song (2009) "Reflections on Northern Rock: The Bank Run that Heralded
the Global Financial Crisis" Journal of Economic Perspectives, 23(1),

Shin, Hyun Song (2010) Risk and Liquidity, 2008 Clarendon Lectures in Finance, Oxford
University Press.

Shin, Hyun Song (2009) “Financial Intermediation and the Post-Crisis Financial System”,
paper prepared for the 8th BIS Annual Conference.




                                          27
