                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         DEDUCTIONS FROM THE EXPORT BASKET:
                           CAPABILITIES, WEALTH AND TRADE

                                              John Sutton
                                             Daniel Trefler

                                         Working Paper 16834
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16834


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2011




We are indebted to Daron Acemoglu, Philippe Aghion, Bernardo Blum, Kunal Dasgupta, Gilles Duranton,
Penny Goldberg, Avner Grief, Elhanan Helpman, Amit Khandelwal, Peter Morrow, Nathan Nunn,
Steve Redding, Peter Schott, Bob Staiger, and Eric Verhoogen as well as seminar participants at CIFAR,
Columbia, CREI, Michigan, Toronto, Stanford, and Yale. Trefler gratefully acknowledges funding
from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada (SSHRC) and the tremendous
support of the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research (CIFAR). The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by John Sutton and Daniel Trefler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Deductions from the Export Basket: Capabilities, Wealth and Trade
John Sutton and Daniel Trefler
NBER Working Paper No. 16834
February 2011
JEL No. F12,O10

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper re-explores the relation between a country's level of wealth and the mix of products it exports.
We argue that both are simultaneously determined by countries' capabilities i.e. by countries' productivity
and quality levels for each good. Our theoretical setup has two features. (1) Some goods have fewer
high-quality producers/countries than others i.e. there is Ricardian comparative advantage. (2) Imperfect
competition allows high- and low-quality producers to coexist, which we refer to as 'product ranges'.
These two features generate a very particular non-monotonic, general equilibrium relationship between
a country's export mix and its wage (GDP per capita). We show that this non-monotonicity permeates
the 1980-2005 international data on trade and GDP per capita. Our setup also explains two other facets
of the data: (1) Product ranges are huge and (2) for the poorest third of countries, changes in export
mix substantially over-predict growth in GDP per capita. This suggests that the main challenge for
low-income countries is to raise quality and productivity in their existing product lines.


John Sutton
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE, UK
j.sutton@lse.ac.uk

Daniel Trefler
Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3E6
CANADA
and NBER
dtrefler@rotman.utoronto.ca
                                          1. Introduction

Rich and poor countries export very different baskets of goods. Our knowledge of this
relationship between a country’s mix of exports and its income dates back at least to
the discussion of ladders of development by Chenery (1960) and Leamer (1984); and its
implications for industrial policy have been fleshed out by Michaely (1984), Lall, Weiss and
Zhang (2006), and most forcefully by Hausmann, Hwang and Rodrik (2007).
   Running parallel to this literature, but disconnected from it, is a literature on the relation-
ship between export quality and income. Schott (2004) observed that within finely disag-
gregated products, U.S. import prices are positively correlated with exporter incomes. The
implication is that richer countries producer higher-quality goods. Related observations
appear in Hallak (2006), Schott (2008), Hallak and Schott (2008), and Khandelwal (2010).
Given that quality is an important component of productivity (e.g. Foster, Haltiwanger
and Syverson 2008) and given that productivity is a key driver of the wealth of nations
(e.g. Hall and Jones 1999 and Helpman 2004), there is most certainly a link between a
country’s wealth and its ability to produce high-quality goods.
   This paper brings together these two literatures by introducing a model in which inter-
national differences in the capabilities of firms in different countries drive differences both
in their export mix and their incomes. A firm’s capability, though not directly observable,
is revealed by three observable outcomes: the set of goods the firm produces, the quality
of these goods, and productivity in their production.1 In this paper, our primary focus
is on quality and the product mix. Correspondingly, we suppress productivity differences
across firms (and countries). The ideas here are closely related to work by Sutton (1991,
1998, 2007b). In that work there is a homogeneous good that is vertically differentiated
i.e. differentiated only by quality. Equilibrium is characterized as a Nash equilibrium in
quantities (Cournot equilibrium). The key feature of the equilibrium is that firms with dif-
fering levels of quality will co-exist in equilibrium and will set prices that are proportional

 1. Productivity can be thought of as a ‘cost shifter’, and quality as a ‘demand shifter’, so that these two
influences encompass all proximate determinants of current (gross) profits.
to qualities.
   We graft this feature onto a Ricardian model of comparative advantage. Comparative
advantage here means that quality capabilities are not only scarce, but scarcer for some
products than others.2           In particular, we assume that products can be ordered by the
scarcity of capabilities, as reflected by product quality. If a country has high quality in
good g then it has high quality in all goods ranked below g. Restated, low-g goods are ones
for which most countries have high quality. These goods are ‘easy’ to make. In contrast,
high-g goods are ones that are ‘hard’ to make.
   For clarity, we summarize the two key features of our model:
   1. There is Ricardian scarcity of quality capabilities; and,
   2. Differing levels of quality will co-exist in equilibrium, with prices increasing in quality.
These two features generate a correlation between a country’s income and its export mix. A
country with high quality in just a few goods will only be able to survive in a few markets
i.e. in the low-g or ‘easy’ markets. As a result, derived demand for its labour will be low
and wages will be low. Thus, low-wage countries will export low-g goods. A country with
high quality in many goods will have a high derived demand for its labour and have high
wages. High wages will make the country a high-cost producer of low-g goods. Hence,
a high-wage country will only be able to survive in high-g markets. Drawing together
these observations about low- and high-wage countries, income will be correlated with the
export mix and this correlation will be driven by underlying quality capabilities.
   We use our two features to derive a host of implications about observables. That is,
our analysis employs the minimal theoretical structure needed to generate a series of
implications about observables. In particular, using 1980 and 2005 export data by exporter

 2. We can motivate this idea of relatively scarce capabilities by reference to a key idea in the modern ‘market
structure’ literature: if firms must incur fixed and sunk outlays to develop their capabilities, then the number
of firms that find it profitable to develop these capabilities will be limited: the greater the elasticity of quality
(or productivity) responses to R&D or other fixed outlays, the greater the degree to which firms ‘escalate’
their R&D spending in competing with rivals, and the fewer the number of producers that survive in the
market. For a concise review, see Sutton (2007a). Thus, even if all firms in all countries were symmetric, some
capabilities will remain scarce and valuable. In a world with inherited historical asymmetries, where firms in
one country face different costs of building capabilities, then these effects may be accentuated. In this paper,
we simply take as a given that some capabilities are relatively scarce; for a general equilibrium analysis of the
mechanism of entry and R&D competition leading to this see Sutton (2007b).



                                                         2
and detailed product, we examine four predictions of the model.
  First, when looking at a single finely disaggregated product, it will be produced both
by rich and poor countries. Such quality ranges have been documented by Schott (2004);
however, we take a different approach than Schott, one that is motivated by our theory,
and show that quality ranges are more pervasive than previously understood.
  Second, within a finely disaggregated product there will be a range of prices charged by
exporters. Under our assumption of homogeneous goods and vertical (quality) differenti-
ation, consumers care only about quality and thus care only about quality-adjusted prices.
As a result, high-quality producers will charge high prices. Further, general equilibrium
considerations discussed shortly imply that high-quality producers will be rich. Thus,
high-quality countries will have high export quality, high export prices and, in general
equilibrium, high incomes.
  Predictions about markups are more subtle. Markups will be correlated with incomes,
but only when looking across products. Looking across exporters of a single product,
markups will first increase and then decrease in exporter income.
  Third, for a single good g, there will be an inverted-U relationship between income and
a country’s share of world exports. Consider a country whose wages increase because its
quality increases first in good g and then in good g + 1. As the country’s quality improves
in good g the country grabs a larger share of the world good-g market. But as its quality
then improves in good g + 1 its wages continue to increase, thereby reducing the country’s
competitiveness in good g. This standard general equilibrium effect and the resulting non-
monotonic relationship between income and export market shares has not been exploited
in the quality-and-trade literature, but is a pervasive feature of the data.
  Fourth, our framework highlights the conditions necessary to rigorously justify the
product-mix diagrams that have been used to great effect by Hausmann et al. (2007). They
use a country’s export basket to predict its GDP per capita. They do this in two stages. First,
pick a product and calculate the export-weighted average GDP per capita of exporting
countries. Call this the product’s ‘score’. Second, pick a country and calculate the weighted



                                               3
average of the scores of the products that the country exports. The weights used are based
on the country’s export basket. Call this weighted average the country’s ‘implied GDP per
capita’. A country’s implied GDP per capita may be plotted against its actual GDP per
capita and figure 4 below provides an example of such a ‘product-mix’ plot.
   Two features of the figure 4 product-mix diagram are striking. First, the relationship is
very ‘flat’ relative to the 45◦ line. Flatness can be explained easily by aggregation bias.3
Second, the figure 4 relationship is ‘diffuse’. By this we mean, for example, that even
though Greece’s GDP per capita is over 20 times that of the Philippines, the two countries
have almost identical implied GDPs per capita. Diffuseness is most naturally explained
by quality. A country can become rich in two ways: either by improving its capabilities
and so the quality (and/or productivity) of its existing goods, or by moving to higher-g
goods. Hausmann et al. (2007) have emphasized the role of moving to higher-g goods.
But suppose a low-income country moves into higher-g goods at a low level of quality.
Then the country will be inappropriately credited with the average score for that product.
In terms of figure 4, the Philippines is such a country: its implied GDP per capita is much
higher than its actual GDP per capita. Diffuseness, then, results when low-income countries
produce high-g goods at low quality. This has important implications for industrial policy
in developing countries.
   Finally, we argue for some caution in making deductions from standard data sets in
respect of the relation between the export mix and incomes across countries. For most
products (four-fifths) in our data set, the range of countries (income levels) for whom the
good is a significant export is so broad as to make its presence in a country’s export basket
almost wholly uninformative about the country’s income.
   We conclude by noting that our paper is part of a larger literature on trade and quality.
Feenstra (1984), Schott (2004), Hummels and Klenow (2005), Hallak (2006), Verhoogen

 3. Consider a product such as LCD modules that appear both in hand-held calculators (easy to make) and
in 100-inch television screens (hard to make). Even the 10-digit Harmonized System classification does not
distinguish between these so that there is only a single or average ‘score’ for LCD modules. Poor countries,
which produce small LCDs, receive the average LCD score, thus raising their implied GDP per capita. Rich
countries, which produce large LCDs, also receive the average LCD score, thus lowering their implied GDP
per capita. As a result of this aggregation bias the figure 4 relationship is flatter than the 45◦ line.



                                                     4
(2008), Hallak and Schott (2008), Kugler and Verhoogen (2008) and Khandelwal (2010) have
made important contributions to the measure of international differences in quality. We
do not attempt to measure quality. These authors as well as Hummels and Skiba (2004),
Schott (2008), Choi, Hummels and Xiang (2009), Johnson (2009) and Baldwin and Harrigan
(forthcoming) examine the relationship between trade flows and quality. Verhoogen (2008)
explores the relationship between quality, trade and inequality, as does Goldberg and Pavc-
nik (2007). Amiti and Khandelwal (2009) explore the impact of trade restrictions on quality
upgrading. Hallak and Sivadasan (2009) and Bastos and Silva (2010) provide insights into
the role of quality and productivity heterogeneity. Finally, Grossman and Helpman’s (1991)
quality-ladder model provides a dynamic link between quality, trade, and growth.



                           2. Theory I: A Baseline Model

2.1. Consumer Choice

All countries are of the same size and composed of a unit mass of workers. All individuals
have identical Cobb-Douglas utility functions defined over G goods, indexed by g, and
labour:
                                                           1
                                   U=   ∏ ( u g x g ) δg − 2 l 2                           (1)
                                         g

where ∑ δg = 1, l denotes hours of labour supplied, and u g and x g denote the quality and
          g
quantity of good g consumed. It follows from the form of the utility function that each
consumer spends fraction δg of income on good g. We assume that all profits accrue to a
separate group of individuals, who also have a utility function of the form (1) but with l
constrained to zero. From this it follows that we can treat all firms in the global market for
g as facing a unit-elastic market demand schedule, i.e. the total global expenditure on good
g is a constant, which we denote as Sg , independently of equilibrium prices. We note that
the Sg are proportional to the δg . We will assume throughout that all the δg , and so all the
Sg , are equal, and so drop the product subscript, writing total expenditure on each good as
S.


                                               5
2.2. Equilibrium in the Product Markets

We characterize product market competition using the standard ‘Cournot model with
quality’ introduced in Sutton (1991). In this model, firms are characterized by a level of
capability, consisting of a quality level and a productivity parameter denoting the number
of worker hours per unit of output produced,4 together with a (‘local’) wage rate specific to
the country in which the firm is located. At equilibrium, some subset of firms are active in
the production of the good. For each active firm, indexed by i, its output level is related to
its productivity ci , its quality ui , and its (local) wage rate wi . Solving for a Nash equilibrium
in quantities (Sutton, 1998, Appendix 15), we obtain the firm’s quality-adjusted equilibrium
price,
                                            pi     1      wj cj
                                            ui
                                               =       ∑
                                                 Ng − 1 j u j
                                                                                                             (2)

and its quality-adjusted output level,
                                                                            
                                         Ng − 1                  wi ci /ui 
                               xi ui = S    wj cj   1 − ( Ng − 1)      wj cj                                 (3)
                                         ∑j   uj
                                                                 ∑j       uj
                                                                             

where Ng (≥ 2) denotes the total number of firms that are active in the global market for
good g, S is total expenditure on good g and the sum ∑ j is taken over all active firms. One
can see from equation (2) that pi /ui is the same for all active firms. The condition for firm i
to be active, i.e. to have strictly positive output at equilibrium, is that

                                wi c i     1      wj cj    Ng     wj cj
                                 ui
                                       <       ∑
                                         Ng − 1 j u j
                                                        =       (
                                                          Ng − 1 u j
                                                                        )                                    (4)


 4. Thus all costs are labour costs, and fixed costs are sunk, and so do not enter the present (short run)
analysis. Materials cost, though of crucial importance in general, are here ignored in order to keep the analysis
as clear as possible. This issue is examined in depth in Sutton (2007b) who shows that the key point is
this: in the absence of material cost, low-wage countries can become viable in world markets even at low
quality once their wage costs are sufficiently low: only the ratio of unit costs (wages times labour input)
to quality matters to viability, and shortcomings in quality can be offset by a low value of the wage. But
once material inputs as well as labour are required, a fall in the wage can only reduce unit costs to the
world-market value of the material input. This places a floor on price, and so establishes a corresponding
minimum quality level, independent of local wages, that is required for viability. Deficiencies in productivity
can always be compensated for by low wages, but deficiencies in quality cannot. This is an important reason
for emphasizing the role of quality in our present discussion.




                                                       6
          wj cj
where (    uj )   denotes the mean capability of all active producers. (This condition is equi-
valent to requiring that equilibrium price pi exceed marginal cost wi ci .) We will refer to
wi ci /ui as firm i’s ‘effective cost level’.
   In the special case where all the firms producing good g have the same w j , c j and u j the
output equation (3) takes the form

                                                   Ng − 1 1
                                          xi = S              .                                (30 )
                                                    Ng2 wi ci

   Finally, combining (2) and (3) we have the expression for the sales revenue of firm i,
                                                                
                                                   w c /u 
                          Ri ≡ pi xi = 1 − ( Ng − 1) i iw j c j i · S .                   (5)
                                                    ∑j          
                                                                  uj

   We now state three properties of the output function that follow from inspection of (3);
see Appendix A for proofs.

Lemma 1 On the domain where inequality (4) holds, so that xi > 0:
        ∂xi
   1.       < 0.
        ∂wi
        ∂xi
   2.       > 0.
        ∂ui

   3. A rise in ui and wi that leaves ui /wi unchanged implies a fall in xi .

   Note that the r.h.s. of equations (2) and (3) depend on ui and ci only through the ratio
ui /ci , which we refer to as the ‘capability’ of firm i. It follows that all relationships between
capabilities and wages developed below will depend only on firms’ or countries’ relative
qualities and productivities in the production of each good, and not on their absolute levels.
Since our empirical focus is on quality ui , without loss of generality we set ci = 1 for
the remainder of the paper and periodically remind the reader that our comments about
quality are also germane to productivity.


2.3. Cross-Country Production Patterns: The Perfect Sorting Baseline

We introduce a Ricardian model of comparative advantage. In our setup comparative
advantage derives from the relative scarcity of the capabilities required for producing some

                                                     7
goods; so that countries able to produce these goods tend to specialize in their production
at equilibrium. This generates an equilibrium relation between a country’s wealth and its
export mix.
   The model is as follows. The set of countries active in the production of each good g
at equilibrium depends on the value of the quality parameters and on equilibrium wage
rates. There are K countries. We divide these into T ‘types’ comprising identical countries,
                                           k=T
with Nk countries of type k so that         ∑     Nk = K. We divide the G goods into T equal-sized
                                           k =1
‘product groups’, where m denotes the number of goods in each group, so G = mT.
   We will construct a baseline case in which each country-type is associated at equilibrium
with the production of exactly one ‘product group’. In this special case, all producers of
any good will share the same quality level for all goods, and so the same equilibrium wage
level, and the same output level of each good. It follows that in this special case we may
use the country index k to label, also, the set of goods produced at equilibrium by country
k, which we denote as Gk , i.e. a good is produced by countries of type k iff g ∈ Gk .
   We assume there is (at most) one firm capable of producing any particular good, in each
country, so that if a good is produced (only) by countries of type k, then the number of
active producers of that good is Nk . We further assume that Nk ≥ 2 for all k, so that there
are at least two producers of every good.5
   We now introduce scarcity in capabilities i.e. in qualities. Countries in group k can
produce all goods in product groups 1 to k at a ‘standard’ level of quality u; but not goods
k + 1 and upward; the interpretation, as noted above, is that goods of a higher index require
capabilities that are ‘scarcer’. We will, in what follows, place restrictions on the number
of countries of type k, and so on the number of countries capable of producing goods in
product group k. Specifically, we assume that Nk ≥ Nk+1 + 4 for all k. It is shown below that
this restriction is sufficient to ensure that goods in group k are produced, at equilibrium,
only by countries of type k; and that all countries producing goods in this product group
are of type k.

 5. If Nk = 1, the equilibrium (monopoly) price is undefined (i.e. goes to infinity).




                                                       8
2.4. Labour Market Equilibrium in a Country of Type k

The set of goods Gk produced by the firms in country k comprise the m goods in product
group k, all of whose producers face the same country-specific wage rate, which we denote
wk , and have the same level of output (for each of the m products in product group k).
We denote the equilibrium level of output of each product g by the single firm in each
producing country k as x gk . It follows from equation (30 ), recalling that all productivity
parameters ci are set to unity, that

                                                             Ng − 1 S                      00
                                                x gk =                                   (3 )
                                                              Ng2 wk

so the total demand for labour in a country of type k is

                                                             Ng − 1 S   N −1 S
                            LkD =   ∑       x gk =   ∑          2
                                                              Ng wk
                                                                      =m k 2
                                                                         Nk wk
                                                                                          (6)
                                    g∈ Gk            g∈ Gk

where the sum over g ∈ Gk comprises the m products in Gk , and where Nk denotes the
(common) value of the number Ng of producers of any good g ∈ Gk , which in the present
special case equals the number of countries of type k, or Nk .
  We now turn to labour supply: it follows from the form of equation (1) and the fact that
there is a unit mass of workers in each country that the labour supply function for country
k takes the form of a ray through the origin, viz.

                                                   ug δ
                                                     
                                    Lk = wk ∏ δ
                                     S
                                                                                          (7)
                                              g    pg

where wk is the wage rate in country k and where δ corresponds, as before, to the share of
expenditure devoted to good g (which we have assumed to be equal for all goods).
                       00
  Since equations (3 ) and (6) already incorporate product market equilibrium, we may
characterize general equilibrium by equating the supply and demand for labour within
each country (type).
  Labour market equilibrium requires, given the form of the labour supply function (7),
that for any two country types k and k0 ,

                                                 LSk      wk   LkD
                                                        =     = D
                                                 LSk0     wk0  Lk0

                                                             9
whence on substituting in equation (6) for any two country types k and k0 we have
                                        s
                                 wk         Nk − 1 Nk0
                                     =            ·    .                                                   (8)
                                 wk0       Nk0 − 1 Nk

This equation serves to define the chain of wage ratios between country type k0 and country
type k.
   Up to this point, we have assumed that firms from country group k are the sole producers
of product group k. We now note that the restriction on the Nk introduced above, viz.
Nk ≥ Nk+1 + 4, ensures this is so. To do this, note that a necessary and sufficient condition
for this is that firms in each country k + i have wages wk+i > wk sufficiently high to render
them unviable in the production of good k. Using equation (4) with the inequality reversed
and recalling that u denotes the common standard of quality shared by all active firms in
the market, this requires that6
                                             wk +i    Nk
                                                   >        .
                                              wk     Nk − 1
From equation (8), a sufficient condition for this is that, for all k,
                                     s
                            w k +1     Nk+1 − 1 Nk            Nk
                                   =                    >            .
                             wk         Nk − 1 Nk+1         Nk − 1

It is easy to verify that, given our assumption that Nk ≥ 2 for all k, this inequality follows
from our assumption that Nk ≥ Nk+1 + 4 for all k.7
   This establishes that under our restrictions on the Nk s there will be perfect sorting in
equilibrium. That is, there will be a 1 : 1 mapping between country types and product
groups.
   The interpretation of this restriction on the Nk s, as noted in the Introduction, is that
higher-indexed products require relatively scarce capabilities; and that these higher-

  6. To derive this, in equation (4) we replace Ng by Nk + 1 because there is now one additional producer that
we must show is unviable. Also, ∑ j w j /u j is replaced by Nk wk /u + wk+i /u because all but one producer is
from type-k countries. Finally, on the l.h.s. of inequality (4), wi /ui is replaced with wk+i /u because we are
looking at an unviable producer from country k + 1, not country i. With these changes, equation (4) with the
inequality reversed can be simplified to wk+i > Nk−1 ( Nk wk + wk+i ) or wk+i /wk > Nk /( Nk − 1).
  7. In fact, the restriction Nk ≥ Nk+1 + 3 is sufficient; but the stronger assumption is needed in the next
section where we introduce one new entrant into some markets.




                                                      10
             Figure 1: The ‘Perfect Sorting’ Benchmark and the Flatness Property




                        Wage wk Implied by Product Basket
                                                                                  ◦
                                                                             ◦
                                                                    ◦
                                                                ◦
                                                            ◦




                                                                                 wk (actual wage)

Notes: The wage implied by the product basket, shown on the vertical axis, is the weighted mean income of
countries producing the products that are also produced by country k. The solid black dots on the 45◦ line
represent countries in our benchmark case of perfect sorting i.e. in the case where all countries of a given
type produce the same set of goods. The dashed line is explained later, in section 3.2.




indexed products are ones in which investment in capability building is relatively high,
thus implying a high level of industry concentration at the global level.8
   The first thing we do with our perfect sorting benchmark case is use it to provide analyt-
ical foundations for the product-mix diagram described in the Introduction. In the perfect
sorting benchmark case, the product-mix plot coincides with the 45◦ line. This follows from
the fact that the horizontal axis shows a country’s wage rate wk and the vertical axis shows,
for that country, the (weighted) mean wage of the countries producing the goods produced
by this country, which here are simply the goods in group k, all of whose producers have
the same wage rate wk . Here, the ‘implied wage’ coincides with the ‘actual wage’. This is
illustrated in figure 1. Each solid black dot represents a country type.

 8. We are here dealing with short run analysis, in the sense of the Industrial Organization Literature, in
which all costs of developing capabilities are sunk costs that were incurred in the past. The scarcity of
capabilities reflects the equilibrium outcome from an earlier (unmodelled) stage of ‘competing in capability
building’. The industries with few players are those for which a given proportionate increase in a firm’s
investment in capability building yields a relatively large return in terms of (global) market share (Sutton,
1991, 1998, 2007b).



                                                                        11
   In this section we set up a perfect sorting equilibrium. Note that the Cournot model
played no essential role in this. Its role is central however in the next section, where we
introduce quality differences across different firms (countries) operating in each industry.



                           3. Theory II: Quality Differences

In this section, we relax the assumption characterizing the baseline model, that all pro-
ducers in each industry have the same quality (and productivity.) The central aim is to
characterize the band of countries, in terms of their real wage rate (GDP per capita), that
will be active in a given industry at equilibrium. With this in mind, we examine a country
initially producing good k − 1, whose capability in the production of good k advances, in
the sense that its quality, denoted vk , rises from zero to the standard quality u. As vk rises,
the country’s mix of output will gradually shift from the production of goods of group k − 1
to goods of group k. This change will, in general, affect the equilibrium wage rate of all
countries of adjacent types. The general solution in this setting is analytically intractable,
and so we introduce a ‘small’ country approximation in order to permit a full solution.
The idea is as follows: we begin from the benchmark model of last section, but we now
introduce a new, additional, ‘small’ country (‘country K + 1’) whose initial capability level
is low. This country’s population is very small compared to the unit mass of workers in
every other country. Moreover, its capabilities are confined to only one of the m products in
each product group. The result will be that, in the limit m → ∞, this country’s presence (or
absence) from a single one of the m markets of type k will have a negligible influence on
the equilibrium wage of other (large) countries. Hence, we may investigate the fortunes of
this ‘small developing country’ while treating the wage rates of all other (‘large’) countries
as being (approximately) constant.9
   With this in mind, we proceed as follows: We begin from a situation in which the new
country has the standard level of quality in the first of the m products in each of the product

 9. We maintain here, as elsewhere, the assumption that the labour market faced by firms operating in
country k is competitive, i.e. the firm is a price taker in the labour market.



                                                 12
groups 1 to k − 1; and has zero quality in all other products. Since the small country’s
equilibrium wage falls monotonically as its worker population rises, we can choose its
worker population so that its equilibrium wage, when vk reaches the level u, coincides
with the equilibrium wage of type k countries. At equilibrium, it will be active in, and only
in, the first product of group k. Thus there are Nk + 1 producers in this market.


Phase I

We now examine the effect of allowing the small country’s quality in the first product of
group k, which we denote by vk , to rise from zero to the standard quality level u of existing
group-k producers. This is illustrated in the top panel of figure 2.
  The rise in vk has no effect on the new country’s wage until vk reaches the quality
threshold at which the new country is viable in market k. This level of vk , denoted vck ,
is defined by the equation (4) viability condition

                                      vck    N −1 u
                                          c = k  ·
                                     w(vk )   Nk   wk

where w(vck ) is the small country’s wage rate and wk is the wage rate of group-k countries.
vck appears on the horizontal axis of figure 2.
  We have thus established the following key result. For vk ∈ (vck ,u) there will be a ‘quality’
range, that is, type-k products will be produced at low quality vk by the new country and
at high quality u by all type-k countries.
  Once vk advances beyond vck , the new firm becomes active in both market k − 1 and
market k; and this continues to be the case up to a critical level of vk at which it ceases to
be active in market k − 1. (This corresponds to the boundary between phases I and II in
figure 2.) Its wage in phase I can be deduced as follows. Note that there are now Nk−1 + 1
producers in market k − 1, all with quality u, where Nk−1 producers have a local wage wk−1
and one has local wage w(vk ) > wk−1 . There are Nk + 1 producers in market k, of which Nk
have quality u and local wage wk , while one has quality vk and local wage w(vk ). The new



                                              13
                                               Figure 2: Advancing Quality



                                           I              II            III
  Goods k, k + 1




                                                          •        •           •    vk                v k +1
   Quality of




                                                  •

                                   •                               •

                                                          •

                                                                               •   w
           Wages




                                                          •        •

                                                  •


                                   •
  of good k
  Markups




                                                          •        •
                                                  •
                                                                               pk /w
                                   •                                           •
  Goods k − 1, k + 1
     Output of




                                   •   x k −1                                  •   x k +1



                                                  •                •
  Output of
   Good k




                                                          •        •

                                                  •
                                                                              xk

                                   •
                                                        vk = u vk = u
                                                                               •
                                                                                          vk = u               Quality
                       vk = 0   vk = vck
                                                      vk+1 = 0 vk+1 = vck+1              v k +1 = u

Notes: The top panel shows the new country’s quality in good k advancing from vk = 0 to vk = u, and then
its quality in good k + 1 advancing from vk+1 = 0 to vk+1 = u. The critical value of vk at which production
of good k becomes viable is labelled vck , and is marked by the first dot on the vk schedule. The second and
third panels show how the equilibrium wage and markup rise as qualities rise, while the bottom two panels
show how the output of goods k − 1, k, and k + 1 change. In the diagram, for ease of notation we have
suppressed the subscripts and arguments of w(vk ,vk+1 ), pk (vk ,vk+1 ), xk−1 (w(vk )), xk (w(vk ,vk+1 ),vk ,vk+1 ),
and xk+1 (w(vk+1 ),vk+1 ).

                                                           14
country’s output of the first good of type k − 1 is therefore (from equation 3)
                                                    (                             )
                      1              w(vk )/u                      w(vk )/u
           x k −1 =       SN                          1 − Nk−1
                    w(vk ) k−1 Nk−1 wk−1 + w(vk )                   w
                                                                Nk−1 k−1 +
                                                                           w(vk )
                                             u          u                 u       u

and its output of the first good of type k is
                                                                             
                            1        w(v )/v           w(v )/v
                                                                             
                   xk =          SNk w k w(kv ) 1 − Nk w k w(kv )  .
                          w(vk )    Nk k +   k 
                                                      Nk k +   k 
                                         u         vk               u    vk

These expressions define a pair of functions xk−1 (w(vk )) and xk (w(vk ),vk ) respectively. We
note that xk−1 and xk are monotonically decreasing in w (by property 1 of lemma 1).
  We now note that labour demand in the new country equals (recalling that the pro-
ductivity parameters have been set to unity),

                                L D = xk−1 (w(vk )) + xk (w(vk ),vk )

while labour supply is
                                             LS = λw(vk )

where λ is a constant, independent of vk , by our small country assumption (i.e. m is large).
  We measure the wage of the new country relative to the equilibrium wage of group-k
countries. We have, on equating L D to LS ,

                           λw(vk ) = xk−1 (w(vk )) + xk (w(vk ),vk ) .                      (9)

  We begin by showing that, as vk increases, w increases. To see this, differentiate (9) with
respect to vk to obtain

                                dw   ∂x      dw   ∂x dw  ∂x
                            λ       = k −1 ·     + k·   + k
                                dvk   ∂w     dvk  ∂w dvk ∂vk

whence
                                  dw       ∂x     ∂x     ∂xk
                                      [ λ − k −1 − k ] =
                                  dvk      | ∂w    ∂w
                                             {z } |{z}   ∂vk
                                                         |{z}
                                                 (−)        (−)   (+)

where the indicated signs on the derivatives follow from properties 1 and 2 of lemma 1. It
follows that dw/dvk is positive. This is illustrated in the second panel of figure 2.

                                                       15
  We next show that as vk , and hence w(vk ) rise, the ratio vk /w(vk ) rises i.e. the propor-
tionate rise in w is less than the proportionate rise in v. To show this, suppose the contrary
viz. that w rises proportionally more than vk . By property 1 of lemma 1, this implies a fall
in xk−1 . By properties 1 and 3 of lemma 1, this also implies a fall in xk . Thus, the r.h.s. of (9)
falls. However, the l.h.s. of (9) rises, a contradiction. It follows that, as vk increases, w rises,
but by a smaller proportional amount, so vk /w rises.
  Since w is rising, property 1 of lemma 1 implies that xk−1 falls. See the second-to-bottom
panel of figure 2. Since w is rising, but by less than vk , properties 2 and 3 of lemma 1 imply
that xk rises. See the bottom panel of figure 2.
  Finally, we examine how the price-cost markup for good k varies with vk . To see this,
note that for our small developing country all its competitors are k-type countries with
quality u and wage rate wk . The price-quality ratio, which is the same for our small
developing country and its rivals, can be written using equation (2) as
                                            wj
                                                                      
                 pk (vk )    pk (u)    1           1       wk w ( vk )
                                      Nk ∑
                          =         =           =       Nk    +
                    vk         u          j
                                             uj    Nk      u      vk

where pk (vk ) is the small developing country’s price and pk (u) denotes the price set by the
rival k-type firms, and so, multiplying through by vk /w(vk ), we obtain the markup

                                   pk (vk )  w vk       1
                                            = k       +   .                                    (10)
                                   w(vk )     u w(vk ) Nk

Since our small country approximation implies that wk /u is (approximately) constant, and
we have just seen that vk /w(vk ) is rising, it follows that the markup rises with vk . This is
illustrated in the third panel of figure 2.


Phase II

The first phase, labelled phase I in figure 2, ends when w(vk ) rises to the critical value at
which the new country is no longer viable in the production of goods of type k − 1. As
vk increases further, the new country specializes in the production of good k. Now labour
market equilibrium requires
                                     λw(vk ) = xk (w(vk ),vk )

                                                16
and w(vk ) rises to wk as vk rises to u.10
   This is an important observation: all the type-k countries with quality u have a common
wage wk > w(vk ). Thus, even though our new country produces the same product as
type-k countries, it is poorer. Restated, the new country is poor not because of what it
produces, but because of the quality of what it produces.
   Finally, since w is rising, xk = λw(vk ) must also be rising. This is shown in the bottom
panel of figure 2 in the phase II region.


Phase III

We now extend the analysis by allowing our small developing country to build capabilities
in the next group of products, i.e. in group k + 1. Specifically, we now denote by vk+1
the new country’s quality level in the first product of group k + 1, holding its quality in
products of group k at the standard quality level u. As before, there is no effect until its
quality rises to a threshold level, corresponding to the boundary between phases II and III
in figure 2. Thereafter, following the same argument as set out above, its wage rises with
vk+1 and output in market k now declines to zero as it becomes a ‘high quality’ but ‘high
wage’ producer relative to incumbent firms (phase III of figure 2).
   Finally, the markup earned by the small developing country in market k falls as we move
through phase III. (This can be confirmed by noting that, in the final term in the markup
equation (10), vk is constant at u and w(vk ) is replaced by w(vk+1 ), which is rising in vk+1 .)
   This completes our discussion of the several observable implications of the model. For a
                                                                                                       ∂xk −1 ∂xk
                                                                                              h           i
                                                            ∂xk ∂w       ∂xk
                                                   ∂w
10. Differentiating the previous equation yields λ ∂v   =   ∂w ∂vk   +   ∂vk   or   ∂w
                                                                                    ∂vk   =       λ−   ∂w     ∂vk .
                                                                                                                      ∂w
                                                                                                                      ∂vk   > 0
                                                      k
follows from this and properties 1 and 2 of lemma 1.




                                                    17
                                                             Figure 3: The Diffuseness Property




                         Wage wk Implied by Product Basket
                                                                                    •

                                                                          A   B
                                                                          ◦   •

                                                                      •

                                                                •


                                                                     w k −1   wk   w k +1         w


           Notes: The hatched and solid lines correspond, respectively, to phases I and II of figure
           2. A country that was initially in group k − 1 experiences an increase in vk , that is, in
           the quality of its group-k good. In phase I, it produces decreasing amounts of good
           k − 1 and increasing amounts of good k so that its wage implied by its product basket
           is increasing. This explains why the hatched line is upward sloping. In phase II, it
           only produces good k so that, even though its quality (and wage) are improving, its
           wage implied by its product basket is unchanged. This explains why the solid line is
           flat. Point A corresponds to the point at which production of good k − 1 ceases i.e. the
           border between Phases I and II. Point B corresponds to the point at which vk = u.




broader discussion of our choice of model, see on-line appendix E.11

11. Some readers will have noticed that the output-quality relationship in the bottom two panels of figure
2 look like the Heckscher-Ohlin output-capital or cones-of-diversification relationship (see Leamer, 1984;
Schott, 2003). One might wonder, then, why was our theory needed? For one, improvements in quality are
very different empirically from capital deepening. More importantly, this prediction is just one of several
predictions that arise in our model, and all these predictions flow from the fact that there is imperfect
competition. Imperfect competition is needed to ensure that different qualities co-exist, that prices are a
non-constant markup over marginal cost, that prices are correlated with quality, and that export shares are
correlated with income in ways that reflect quality . In short, our output-quality relationship is just one
of several predictions. The output prediction in isolation can be modelled more simply; however, we are
interested in a bundle of predictions that require us to append an imperfectly competitive market structure
onto a trade model. Thus, a cones-of-diversification Heckscher-Ohlin model delivers at best only a small part
of what is needed and a more natural trade model in our setting, one that emphasizes the role of technological
capability for delivering quality, is the Ricardian model.




                                                                              18
3.1. Diffuseness

We can now re-consider the product-mix diagram (figure 1) in the light of the addition
of this new country. Consider the critical value of vk at which the new country ceases to
produce good k − 1 (the boundary between phases I and II). Its product basket will now
coincide with that of type k countries, so that its product basket index, or implied wage,
equals wk , but its actual wage w(vk ) will lie strictly below wk . This is illustrated as point A
in figure 3. The country’s actual wage will advance to wk only when v reaches the standard
quality level u (point B in figure 3.) This provides an explanation for the diffuseness
feature of empirical product-mix diagrams: a horizontal movement across the diagram
corresponds to an advance in quality (and/or productivity) in the country’s existing basket
of goods. In our empirical work we will show this process in the time-series data.


3.2. The Flatness Property

We return to the perfect sorting benchmark of figure 1, in which the product-mix diagram
was a 45◦ line, and ask: what would happen to this plot if industries were aggregated in
a way that lumped low-index industries and high-index industries in the same composite
(aggregate) industry? (See the LCD industry example described in footnote 3 of the Intro-
duction). With this in mind, recall that we have m products (or industries) in each product
group k = 1, . . . , T. We construct a ‘data set’ in which a single product drawn from each of
the T product groups is placed in a single newly defined industry. In other words, this new
industry comprises goods from both low-end product groups (k close to 1) and high-end
product groups (k close to T).
  Note that the mean wage rate of countries producing the ‘product’ of this new industry
is simply the global average wage, which we denote as w. Now we re-compute the wage
implied by a country’s product basket. The only difference introduced into the calculation
is that the wage assigned to the group-k good which has been placed in our new composite
industry is no longer the wage wk associated with k-type countries, but rather the global
average wage w. The result is that the 45◦ line of figure 1 swivels towards the horizontal.


                                               19
See the dashed line in figure 1. To the left lie low-wage countries who produce low-end
products within the composite good, yet are ‘credited’ with the average wage w. They
thus receive too much ‘credit’ and lie above the 45◦ line. In contrast, to the right lie high-
wage countries who produce high-end products within the composite good. They thus
receive too little ‘credit’ and lie below the 45◦ line. This provides an interpretation of the
empirically observed ‘flatness’ property found in product-mix diagrams.
  We now turn to a comprehensive examination of the predictions of the model.



                                          4. Data

Trade data are from COMTRADE for the years 1980 and 2005. It will be important to
find a balance between a long time series, a detailed commodity breakdown, and wide
country coverage. We thus use the 4-digit SITC Revision 2 classification (henceforth SITC4),
which allows us to go back to 1980 for a large number of countries. To verify that all of
our cross-sectional results hold for more detailed commodity breakdowns we also use the
2005 COMTRADE data at the 6-digit HS level (1996 revision, henceforth HS6) and 2005
U.S. import data at the 10-digit HS level (henceforth HS10). We exclude countries whose
population was less than two million in 2005 and/or whose territorial integrity changed
substantially between 1980 and 2005 e.g. the USSR. The exception is Germany (we use
West Germany in 1980 and unified Germany in 2005). This leaves us with the 94 countries
listed in Appendix B. GDP per capita and population data are from the United Nations.
We do not use a PPP adjustment because we are interested in nominal price competition in
world product markets.
  A missing link between our theory and empirics is that the theory deals with production
while the data deal with exports. Given our assumptions of homothetic demand and
internationally identical prices, consumption patterns are the same in all countries (up to a
scale). Hence production and export predictions are qualitatively identical. Specifically, the
production predictions in the bottom two panels in figure 2 also hold for exports. We will
need notation for exports. In the theory xk denoted production; in the empirical sections


                                             20
xkg will denote exports of good g by country k. We also note that the theory deals with
quantities while the export data deal with values. However, it is easy to show that the
quantity predictions in the bottom two panels of figure 2 continue to hold with quantities
replaced by values.12



                                         5. Product-Mix Diagram

The conventional way of representing the relation between a country’s product mix and its
GDP per capita is in terms of a product-mix diagram which shows actual GDP per capita
on the horizontal axis and the level of GDP per capita implied by its export basket on the
vertical axis. The latter is constructed in two stages. First, a product score is calculated based
on the weighted average GDP per capita of countries that export the product. Following
Hausmann et al. (2007) we use weights that depend on the relative importance of the good
in each country’s export basket. Specifically, let xk ≡ Σ g x gk be country k’s total exports so
that x gk /xk is the share of good g in country k’s export basket. Let yk be the GDP per capita
of country k. The score of good g is defined as
                                                               x gk
                                                          Σk   xk     ln yk
                                                  σg ≡                x gk    .                                       (11)
                                                               Σk     xk

Next, an index of a country’s implied GDP per capita is constructed from these scores:

                                                                x gk
                                                    Ik ≡ Σ g         σg .                                             (12)
                                                                xk

   Figure 4 plots Ik against ln yk for 2005. Each of the 94 points is a country. The figure
shows the twin features of ‘flatness’ and ‘diffuseness’ noted in sections 3.1 and 3.2. As we
showed in our perfect sorting benchmark equilibrium, (a) if goods can be grouped based on
the scarcity of the required quality capabilities, (b) if countries can be grouped into types
with identical quality capabilities, and (c) if each country is fully specialized in a single
product group, then the product-mix diagram takes the form of a 45◦ line. See figure 1.

12. The proof of this can be had directly from figure 2. In phases I and II, w(vk ), pk (vk )/w(vk ) and hence
pk (vk ) are all rising. Since xk is rising, pk (vk ) xk must be rising. In phase III, vk is fixed at u and xk is falling so
that pk (u) xk must be falling. Thus, quantities and values behave in the same way.


                                                            21
                                                                                      Figure 4: Product-Mix Diagram

                                                 11.5



                                                 10.5
                          plied by Export Baskets, Ik




                                                                                                                                                                      IRL
                                                        9.5
                                                                                                                                                                  SWECHE
                                                                                                                                                                 FIN
                                                                                                                                                                JPN
                                                                                                                                                               DEU
                                                                                                                                           HUN                 FRA USA
                                                                                                                                                                 AUT
                                                                                                                                                                 GBR
                                                                                                                                                          ESP
                                                                                                                                                           SGP
                                                                                                                                                             ITA     DNK
                                                                                                                                     POL
                                                                                                                                    MEX                    NZL NLD
                                                                                                                                                   PRT          CAN
                                                                                                              CHN    THA      MYS
                                                        8.5                                             PHL                   URY
                                                                                                                            BRA
                                                                                                                             CRI                                AUS
                                                                                                                              TUR
                                                                                                                        BGR ROU
                                                                                                                                                    ISR   GRC
                                                                                                         IDN                 ARG
                                                                                                IND                 COL         LBN
         GDP per Capita Implied




                                                                                                                      DOM                                                   NOR
                                                                                                           EGY                  VEN CHL      SAU
                                                                                                                     TUN
                                                                                                                      DZA  CUB
                                                                                            TCD   NGA IRQ      AGO  ECU
                                                                                                                     PER
                                                                                                                 JORALB
                                                                                               SDN       PRY MAR
                                                                                                                   SLV
                                                        7.5                     SLE                  PNG
                                                                                                   PAKBOL                JAM
                                                                                NPL
                                                                                AFG           ZMB    CMRHND
                                                                                                         LKA    GTM
                                                                                                 SENNIC
                                                                                   GIN HTI KEN
                                                                                       BGD
                                                                                        KHM
                                                                           ZWE MMR
                                                                                 MDGTGO
                                                                                   MOZ GHA
                                                                                 SOM
                                                                                          BEN
                                                        6.5                           BFA
                                                                                         MLI
                                                                              RWA
                                                                               NER UGA
                                                                          MWI
                                                                    BDI


                                                        5.5



                                                        4.5
                                                              4.5            5.5            6.5            7.5             8.5             9.5             10.5               11.5
                                                                                             Log GDP per Capita in 2005, ln(yk)


Notes: The horizontal axis is log GDP per capita. The vertical axis is Ik of equation (12) i.e. log GDP per capita
implied by a country’s export basket. Data are for 2005 at the SITC4 level of aggregation.




                                                                                                              22
We also showed that if industries are classified in such a way as to aggregate goods from
different quality capability groups, then ‘flatness’ results. See section 3.2. Consistent with
this, poor countries lie well above the 45◦ line and rich countries lie well below the 45◦
line.13 Figure 4 is based on SITC4 data (746 products). The corresponding figure using
HS6 data (4,932 products) looks virtually identical. See on-line appendix figure A11.
   Finally, we showed that ‘diffuseness’ would result if firms from different countries op-
erating within each industry have different quality levels (section 3.1). This diffuseness is
a major feature of figure 4: countries with very different GDP per capita have very similar
Ik . For example, the export baskets of the Philippines and Greece imply similar GDP per
capita despite the fact that Greece is 20 times richer than the Philippines.14               15 16


   The strong correlation in figure 4 (ρ = 0.89) has been used to support the view that effect-
ive development policy focuses primarily on the mix of goods that is produced and only
secondarily on the quality of the goods produced. Our theory section provided conditions
under which figure 4 can be used in this way; however, for the remainder of this paper
we show that those conditions are not likely satisfied in the data. In product-mix diagrams
each industry is given a score based on the ‘average’ GDP per capita of exporting countries.
Our main point of departure from product-mix diagrams lies in focussing instead on the
range of GDP per capita levels of countries exporting the product.

13. Another way of making this point is to consider an OLS regression of Ik on ln yk — with the major caveat
that the OLS estimator looses all of its nice properties because Ik and ln yk are jointly determined endogenous
variables. Using the data in figure 4, the OLS slope estimate is 0.43 with a tight standard error of 0.023. That
is, the OLS slope estimate is much less than unity.
14. In this section we used weights x gk / ∑ g x gk i.e. shares in country k’s exports. Michaely (1984) and Lall
et al. (2006) use weights x gk / ∑k x gk i.e. shares in world exports of good g. Flatness and diffuseness are
even more prominent using such world export weights. See on-line appendix figure A11. However, in our
theoretical setting, what matters is the impact of exporting on the derived demand for labour and so on the
equilibrium wage rate. As such, the Hausmann et al. export-basket shares (which are typically large when
employment shares are large) provide the appropriate weights for us.
15. The main conclusions of this section hold when we replace GDP per capita with manufacturing value
added per worker (a much noisier data series). This brings resource-rich countries such as Norway and
Saudi Arabia closer to the 45◦ line, but otherwise does not alter our conclusions.
16. We also calculated product scores σg separately for each country which excluded the country’s trade, and
used these to calculate the country index Ik . This had no effect on figure 4 because no country carries a large
enough weight in the calculation of the product scores.




                                                      23
                                            6. Product Ranges

A key prediction of our theory is that in general equilibrium countries with different quality
capabilities may nevertheless export the same good. While we do not observe quality, an
observable implication is that at least some goods will be produced both by rich and poor
countries. To investigate, for each product g we identify the poorest and richest exporters
of the product. Denote these by ymin,g and ymax,g , respectively. To avoid ‘noise’ associated
with small reported export values, a problem to which trade data are notoriously prone, for
each good we look only at the set of countries for whom the good is a ‘significant’ export,
in the sense that the value of its exports in that good constitute at least 1% of the value
of exports of the country’s principal export good.17 An important theoretical reason for
using this 1% cut-off is that it ensures that the good is sufficiently important to the exporter
to generate the general equilibrium wage impacts upon which our theory rests.
   Product ranges are displayed in figure 5. Each point corresponds to a unique SITC4
good (g) and the figure plots (ymin,g ,ymax,g ). A point therefore shows the range of income
levels of countries for which g is a significant export. All the points necessarily lie above
the 45◦ line. For reference, along the axes we show the log GDP per capita of Nepal, China,
Poland and the United States.
   The truly remarkable feature of figure 5 is the preponderance of points in the top left
corner, i.e. the preponderance of products for which the income range is very wide. To
get a clearer sense of magnitudes, consider the points lying in the top left corner where
ln ymin,g < 8.25 and ln ymax,g > 10. If a product is in this region then its richest significant
exporter is at least 5.8 times richer then its poorest significant exporter (e10−8.25 = 5.8). For
the median product in the region the corresponding difference is 79-fold (e4.4 = 79). These
are huge differences. And there are a lot of goods in this region: the region contains 81% of
all products displayed in the figure and accounts for 70% of world trade.

17. More formally, for each g, let K ( g) be the set of countries for which x gk /xk ≥ 0.01 maxg0 x g0 k /xk . g is a
significant export of country k iff k ∈ K ( g), thus we only use ( g,k) pairs for which k ∈ K ( g). Further, let k( g)
be the poorest and k( g) the richest countries in K ( g). Then ymin,g = yk( g) and ymax,g = yk( g) .



                                                         24
                                                                               Figure 5: Product Ranges

                                                          12




                                                               USA
Richest (GDP per Capita) Producer of Good g: ln(ymax,g)




                                                          10



                                                               POL



                                                          8

                                                               CHN




                                                          6
                                                               NPL




                                                                     NPL                 CHN             POL              USA
                                                          4
                                                               4           6                   8                    10          12
                                                                     Poorest (GDP per Capita) Producer of Good g: ln(ymin,g)


Notes: Each point represents an SITC4 product. The horizontal axis is ln ymin,g , the poorest
country for which the product is a significant export. The vertical axis is ln ymax,g , the richest
country for which the product is a significant export.




                                                                                          25
  We will shortly show the reader that this observation about wide product ranges is
robust, and holds even in the most detailed trade data (HS10). However, we first draw
three economic insights from the wideness of product ranges. The first deals with the
Hausmann et al. (2007) product-mix exercise of figure 4. Their exercise uses all goods in a
country’s export basket even though products with wide ranges are ‘uninformative’ about
a country’s income in the sense that knowing that a wide-range product is a significant
contributor to a country’s export basket tells us little about the country’s income. Figure 5
shows that such ‘uninformativeness’ is the norm rather than the exception.
  Second, our theory emphasizes that for each product, multiple quality levels can coexist
in equilibrium. One can therefore interpret the wide ranges as support for the theory
provided that one is willing to accept that product ranges are the result of quality differences.
As is well known, quality is difficult to identify without detailed data about product
characteristics. Since we do not have this information we refer to the ranges as product
ranges rather than as quality ranges and take the weaker position that wide product ranges
are implied by the theory but do not imply the theory.
  Third, there are two distinct groups of points that lie far from the top-left corner in figure
5. These are ‘informative’ products. The first group lies to the bottom left (ln ymax,g < 10)
and consists of those goods exported only by relatively low- and middle-income countries
(the ‘L group’). The second group lies to the top right (ln ymin,g > 8.25) and consists of
those goods exported only by relatively high-income countries (the ‘H group’). On our
present interpretation, L-group goods are not produced by high-income countries because
these countries’ wage costs are too high, whereas H-group goods are not produced by
low-income countries because their quality capabilities are too low.
  The reader will and should be skeptical about the wide product ranges in figure 5. For
the remainder of this section we anticipate five possible objections to the figure.
  1. It is all aggregation bias: One would expect that the large product ranges displayed in
figure 5 would become much narrower with finer product-level data. This is not the case.
In figure 6 we repeat the exercise using HS6 data (world trade data from COMTRADE)



                                               26
                      Figure 6: Product Ranges: Insensitivity to Aggregation




Notes: Each panel in this figure is constructed in the same way as figure 5, but with different data. Figure 5
used the SITC4 classification and COMTRADE (world) data. The left-hand panel of the current figure uses
the HS6 classification and COMTRADE data. The right-hand panel uses the HS10 classification and U.S.
import data.




and using HS10 data (U.S. import data). The distribution of product ranges in figures 5
and 6 are very similar. In particular, product ranges remain large and in both panels just
over 70% of total exports are accounted for by the uninformative products in the top left
(ln ymin,g < 8.25 and ln ymax,g > 10).18
   2. Finer disaggregation is always better: The fact that nothing changes when moving to
finer levels of product disaggregation may seem puzzling, since if the move to a finer
level of aggregation involved the breaking up of technologically disparate sub-industries
into individual industries, we might expect the range to narrow as we move to this new
level of aggregation. An examination of the way in which industries are broken up in the
HS6 and HS10 data throws light on why disaggregation beyond SITC4 does not alter the

18. In figure 6 there are thousands of points, many of which lie on top of each other. To make the figure
clearer, instead of plotting ln ymax,g on the vertical axis we have plotted ln ymax,g + e where e is a uniformly
distributed random variable on (−0.05,0.05). This adds a tiny random vertical shift to the data, which helps
the reader see where the bulk of points are located. Likewise, we have added a tiny random horizontal shift
to ln ymin,g .


                                                      27
distribution of ranges. In some cases the SITC4 industry is as disaggregated as the HS6
and even the HS10 industries e.g. ‘New tires for motor cars’ is a single category in both
SITC4 and HS6. In other cases, the disaggregation is based only on size or value, without
any reference to capabilities e.g. ‘New tires for motor cars’ feeds into seven HS10 codes
that distinguish between technology-irrelevant differences in the diameter of the tire. In
yet other cases the SITC4 code is disaggregated only by introducing a capability-irrelevant
‘parts of’ HS6 or HS10 code. This is pervasive e.g. SITC4 7817 ‘Nuclear reactors.’ Finally, in
those cases where a technology-based disaggregation of products is introduced it is often
unclear whether this disaggregation conveys any information about differences in required
capabilities: for example, SITC4 7252 ‘Machinery for making paper pulp, paper, paper-
board; Cutting machines’ is disaggregated in HS10 into a number of industries, including
‘Machines for making paper bags etc.’ and ‘Machines for making paper cartons etc.’ Thus,
finer disaggregation is typically not more informative about quality capabilities. Were an
ideal disaggregation of industries to be constructed on the basis of the quality capabilities
required, this would doubtless lead to some narrowing in the relevant ranges. However,
the limitations of the published data are quite serious even at the most disaggregated
level.19
   3. Estimation error: Another possible objection to our wide product ranges is that we have
                                        sig
not reported standard errors. Let Ng be the number of countries for which g is a significant
                                                                                            sig
export.20 It is possible that products with wide ranges are products for which Ng is small
i.e. for which there are very few observations and hence large standard errors. This is not
                                                                           sig
the case; indeed, the opposite is true. The correlation between Ng and the product range
                                                                                 sig
ln ymax,g − ln ymin,g is positive (0.57) and, for example, products with Ng ≥ 20 (one quarter
of all products) all have large product ranges. However, to deal with this objection in the
simplest way possible, in figures 5–6 we have only displayed those products for which

19. For what we are doing, the relevant market is never equatable with an item in a government commodity
classification, be it SITC4, HS6 or HS10. Sometimes the relevant market is more detailed than HS10 (as in
many electronic parts) and sometimes the relevant market is less detailed than SITC4 (as in many apparel
products). Thus, all of our conclusions must be thought of relative to a definition of the market that is
determined by the commodity classification, not the actual product producers.
       sig
20. Ng is the dimension of K ( g) in footnote 17.


                                                   28
                                                             sig
there are at least three significant exporters (Ng                 ≥ 3). That is, we displayed only 547
of the possible 746 SITC4 goods. These 547 products account for 98.3% of world trade so
that we are only excluding very minor products. We conclude from this that wide product
ranges are not an artifact of statistical uncertainty. To be safe though, we will continue
                                                                                           sig
throughout this paper to restrict attention only to products for which Ng ≥ 3.
   4. Wide product ranges are an artifact of using a 1% cut-off for ‘significant exporters’: Again,
this is not the case. On-line appendix figure A12 shows that the inference we have drawn
from figures 5–6 is not sensitive to the choice of cut-offs. It repeats figure 5 for a low
percentage cut-off (0.1%), a high percentage cut-off (10%), and cut-offs based on mixtures
of percentages and dollar values (x gk > $5 million and x gk > $50 million). In every single
case the pattern displayed in figures 5–6 is repeated.21
   5. Wide product ranges are driven by China: Omitting China does not alter the impression
that product ranges are wide. Indeed, the reader can omit China from these figures simply
by deleting all points for which either ln ymin,g = 7.5 or ln ymax,g = 7.5. (China’s log GDP
per capita is 7.5.)
   Having established the robustness of figure 5, we can now restate our conclusion. Our
theory implies that there will be product ranges: the empirical surprise is that product
ranges are often so large.



                                             7. Price Ranges

The theory predicts that, for a single good, all producers of the good will share the same
price-quality ratio. Since richer countries have higher quality, they should have higher
prices. That is, prices should be increasing in the income of the exporter. Since price data
are not available, we follow Schott (2004) in proxying for prices using HS10 unit values

21. There is a minor technical point about figure 6 that should be reviewed. Since the United States is far
from most countries and since trade costs increase in distance we expect that countries’ exports to the United
States will be more concentrated on a few goods than their exports to the world. This is indeed the case.
Therefore, for the HS10 panel of figure 6, which is based on U.S. data, we use a 0.1% cut-off instead of a 1%
cut-off. This results in far more points in the figure, but does not alter the distribution of points in the figure.
See on-line appendix figure A12 for the HS10 figure using a 1% cut-off.



                                                        29
from the 2005 U.S. import file. We emphasize that unit values are extremely noisy so that
caution must be exercised in interpreting them as prices. See Appendix B for a discussion
of the data.
  Let p gk be the unit value of good g exported by country k to the United States. We are
interested in how the p gk vary as we move through product ranges. The most familiar way
of doing this is Schott’s (2004, table V) famous regression ln p gk = α g + β ln yk where α g is an
HS10 product fixed effect. Re-estimating Schott’s regression using 2005 U.S. imports from
our 94 exporters (187,363 observations), the OLS estimate of β is 0.29 (clustered t = 8.05) so
that, as in Schott, there is indeed a statistically significant positive correlation between unit
values and exporter incomes.
  A sharper prediction of our theory is as follows. Consider a single HS10 good g. Recall
that in the HS10 panel of figure 6 we plotted the income of the poorest and richest countries
that had significant exports of g i.e. we plotted (ln ymin,g , ln ymax,g ). Since for each g we
know the identity of the poorest and richest countries, we know these countries’ unit
values. We denote them in obvious fashion by pmin,g and pmax,g . We expect that

                                ∆ g ≡ ln pmax ,g − ln pmin ,g > 0.

This inequality is sharp in that it is directly related to our product ranges, that is, to the
poorest (min) and richest (max) exporters that define the boundaries of our product ranges.
It is also an inequality that is unlikely to hold because we are examining two specific unit
values (pmax ,g and pmin ,g ) even though we know that such unit values are extremely noisy.
  ∆ g > 0 defines one inequality for each product range in the HS10 panel of figure 6.
A nonparametric test of ∆ g > 0 is the sign test, which easily rejects the null hypothesis
that the signs of the ∆ g are random (p-value of less than 0.0001). The mean value of ∆ g is
0.63 (t = 27.23) and, more robustly with noisy data, the median value of ∆ g is 0.45. Since
e0.45 − 1 = 0.57, this implies that the richest significant exporter of the median product has
a unit value that is 57% higher than the corresponding unit value of the poorest significant
exporter. Cautiously interpreting unit values as prices, this means that prices are increasing
as one moves through a product range in figure 6.

                                                30
   It is tempting to examine an even stronger prediction, namely, that unit-value ranges ∆ g
are large when product ranges ln ymax ,g − ln ymin ,g are large. While this is not a prediction
of the model, it can be generated by adding more restrictions on how scarcity varies across
countries and products. To examine this prediction we estimate the following regression:

    (ln pmax ,g − ln pmin ,g ) = 0.15 + 0.18(ln ymax ,g − ln ymin ,g )              (clustered t = 11.23).

Thus, large product ranges in figure 6 are associated with large unit-value ranges.



    8. Development Ladders in the Cross-Section: The Role of Product

                                                      Ranges

The Hausmann et al. (2007) product-mix diagrams only use information about the mean
characteristic of each good (σg of equation 11). Wide product ranges and their correla-
tion with unit values suggest that a country’s wealth depends not just on what goods it
produces, but also on the quality of the goods produced. To investigate further, return to
figure 5 and, as before, divide goods into three groups: (i) the L group to the lower left
(ln ymax,g < 10); (ii) the H group to the upper right (ln ymin,g > 8.25); and, (iii) the ‘unin-
formative’ group, comprising the remaining goods. In what follows we confine attention
to the L and H goods because these are the only ones that are informative.22
   We show in figure 7 the relationship of a country’s GDP per capita with (a) the share of L
goods in its export basket (left panel) and (b) the share of H goods in its export basket (right
panel). We see a clear fall in the share of L goods and a rise in the share of H goods as GDP
per capita increases. But an important feature of figure 7 lies in the fact that the relation
between the product mix and income is not bi-directional: while significant exporters of H
goods are necessarily rich, it is not the case that rich countries are necessarily significant
exporters of H goods. A very low contribution of H goods is consistent with a relatively
high level of GDP per capita. (See Malaysia in the right-hand panel). Similarly, while a
22. The conclusions of this section are in no way sensitive to the choice of 8.25 and 10 as cut-offs: we have
chosen these because they represent break points in figure 5. Also, in figure 5 there is one good that is in both
the L and H groups. This is cameras (SITC4 8732). It lies at the point (ln ymin,g , ln ymax,g ) = (8.9,9.8). We place
this in the H group, though where it goes makes no difference because it is only one of hundreds of goods.


                                                         31
                                                            Figure 7: The Share of L and H Goods in Each Country’s Export Basket

                                                 0.60                    Low (L) Group                                                                               0.12           High (H) Group


                                                 0.50                                                                                                                0.10
 Share of L Goods in a Country's Export Basket




                                                                                                                     Share of H Goods in a Country's Export Basket
                                                 0.40                                                                                                                0.08


                                                 0.30                                                                                                                0.06


                                                 0.20                                                                                                                0.04


                                                 0.10                                                                                                                0.02


                                                        ZWE    BGD                                                                                                                                      MYS
                                                 0.00                                                                                                                0.00
                                                        4            6               8                10   12                                                               4   6               8                10   12
                                                                         log GDP per Capita, ln(yk)                                                                                 log GDP per Capita, ln(yk)



Notes: Each point represents a country (there are 94 points in each panel). The horizontal axis is log GDP per
capita in 2005. The vertical axis is a country’s exports of L goods (right panel) or H goods (left panel) as a
share of the country’s total exports. Using the product ranges in figure 5, a good is an L good if ln ymax,g < 10
and an H good if ln ymin,g > 8.25.




high share of L goods necessarily implies that a country is poor, many poor countries have
a low share of L goods. (See Zimbabwe or Bangladesh in the left-hand panel.)
                                            We can restate this in a way that makes one of the key points of our thesis crystal clear. A
poor country can advance out of L goods and still remain poor: this happens when the country enters
as a low-quality producer into uninformative goods i.e. goods with wide quality ranges. Since most
goods are uninformative, we might expect this type of no-growth shift in product mix to be
common. By the same token, a country may move from being poor to being rich without changing
its product mix: this happens when it improves the quality of the uninformative, wide-quality-range
goods that it already exports.




                                                                                                                32
                                  9. Market Share Predictions

The two bottom panels of figure 2 presented our predictions about each country’s share
of world exports. Underlying that figure is a comparative static in which a country that
previously specialized in producing good k − 1 first sees its quality in good k rise up from
a very low level to that of the world standard and then sees its quality in good k + 1 rise up
from a very low level to that of the world standard. This comparative static highlighted two
mechanisms affecting world export shares. First, as capabilities rise in good k, the country
produces more of k and grabs an increasing share of world exports. This is the ‘quality
effect’. Second, as quality rises for good k + 1 wages are pushed up, which erodes the coun-
try’s competitiveness in good k. This is the general equilibrium ‘wage effect’. These two
mechanisms lead to the world export share predictions in figure 2. For middle-capability
goods (k), world export shares display an inverted-U shaped relationship with income as
first the quality effect and then the wage effect come into play. For low-capability goods
(k − 1), only the wage effect is relevant and world export shares decline in income. For
high-capability goods (k + 1) only the quality effect is relevant and world export shares are
increasing in income. See the bottom two panels of figure 2.
   We operationalize these distinct export-share predictions of goods k − 1, k, and k + 1
as follows. We associate good k + 1 with H goods (goods for which ln ymin,g > 8.25) and
goods k − 1 and k with L goods (goods for which ln ymax,g < 10). To distinguish between
k − 1 and k goods, we split the L group in half: k − 1 is associated with L goods that are
exported by very poor countries (ln ymin,g < 6); k is associated with the remaining L goods
(ln ymin,g > 6). This gives us three groups: the ‘High’ group (k + 1), the ‘Middle’ group (k),
and the ‘Low’ group (k − 1).23
   Since we must pool across exporters and products, we will need to consider nor-
malizations of export shares that are designed to control for country and product size.

23. If this is not clear, the reader is encouraged to draw the boundaries of the three groups on figure 5.
Also, there is potential for notational confusion: g indexes goods and k indexes countries, yet we have been
referring to k as a good. As in the theory sections, references to good k are an abbreviation for ‘a good that is
produced by a type-k country’.




                                                       33
Consider country k’s share of world exports of good g. We normalize the income level
of k by reference to the income levels y and y g of the poorest and richest exporters,
                                                  g
respectively, of g; we represent the position of log GDP per capita within this range as
(ln yk − ln y g )/(ln y g − ln y g ).24
   We also need to adopt some normalization for the level of exports. This will be affected,
as the theory indicates, by product-market size and country size. The global market size
for product g is given by Sg (or equivalently δg ) in the theory. To control for Sg , we scale
x gk by world exports of g, x g ≡ Σk x gk . Country size also figures into the theory. Recall
that each product group k consists of m products and that our small developing country
only produces one of these m products. More generally, larger countries will produce
a larger subset of these m products. To control for this we scale x gk /x g by its average
Σ g ( x gk /x g )/Nk where Nk is the number of goods exported by country k i.e. the number of
goods for which x gk > 0. Summarizing, we plot

                                                                    ln yk − ln y
                                                                                    g
                          (Normalized GDP per Capita) gk ≡                                              (13)
                                                                    ln y g − ln y
                                                                                    g

against
                                                                         ( x gk /x g )
                       (Normalized World Export Share) gk ≡           1
                                                                                                        (14)
                                                                      Nk Σ g ( x gk /x g )

where the numerator is country k’s share of world exports of g and the denominator is
country k’s average share of world exports.
   Figure 8 plots normalized world export shares against normalized GDP per capita for
our three groups of goods. The first thing to note about the plots is the preponderance
of points on or very near the horizontal axis. This reflects the fact that poorer countries
have zero exports of many goods. This fact is built into the model – our small country
produced only one of m possible products in group k. It is also a feature of the Eaton and
Kortum (2002) model. There, a country can potentially produce all goods but draws high

24. Note that y differs from ymin,g . The former is the minimum across all countries that export any positive
                g
amount of good g while the latter is the minimum across any country for which g is a significant export.
Likewise for the difference between y g and ymax,g .



                                                      34
                         Figure 8: Normalized World Market Shares




Notes: Each point in the plot corresponds to a product-country ( g,k) pair. The vertical axis is country
k’s share of world exports of good g, normalized as in equation (14). The horizontal axis is country k’s
income, normalized as in equation (13). The curves are the 90th quantile regressions.




                                                  35
productivity for only a subset of goods. Hence in interpreting these scatters, our focus of
interest lies not on means — which tend to be dominated by the many ( g,k ) pairs with
near-zero exports — but on the upper bound of the scatter. With this in mind, we estimate
a quantile regression (the 90th quantile). This appears as the curve shown in each of the
panels of figure 8.25
   The upper, middle, and lower panels correspond to Low-group goods (k − 1), Middle-
group goods (k), and High-group goods (k + 1), respectively. The panels bear out the
world-export-share predictions of the model. World export shares are decreasing in income
for the Low group, increasing in income for the High group, and display an inverted-U
relationship for the Middle group. This is exactly as predicted in the two bottom panels of
figure 2.
   We round out this section with a discussion of specification issues. In constructing figure
8 we made five choices. First, we defined the low, middle and high groups by reference
to the cut-offs ln ymin,g = 6, ln ymin,g = 8.25 and ln ymax,g = 10. The choice of cut-offs
does not matter. Figure 8 is not substantially altered by lowering the ln ymin,g = 6 cut-off
to 5.25 or raising it to 6.75; by lowering the ln ymin,g = 8.25 cut-off to 7.25 or raising it
to 9.25; or by lowering the ln ymax,g = 10 cut-off to 9. See on-line appendix figure A13.
Changing the cut-offs beyond these ranges results in groups that either (1) contain too few
observations or (2) include too many wide product-range, uninformative goods.26 Second,
we chose the normalization (ln yk − ln y )/(ln y g − ln y ). This choice of normalization
                                                 g                  g
plays almost no role empirically because y g − y does not vary much across goods i.e.
                                                           g
it is not much different than normalizing by a constant. Specifically, across all goods its
maximum is 6.4, its median is 6.0 and its 5th percentile is 5.2. Third, in equation (14) we
normalized world export shares x gk /x g by average world export shares Nk−1 Σ g ( x gk /x g ).
We have experimented extensively with alternative normalizations of ( x gk /x g ), including
the 50th, 75th, 90th, and 99th percentiles of each country’s world export shares.27 All of

25. We use the SAS QUANTREG procedure with a 6th order polynomial.
26. When ln ymin,g = 6 is raised to 6.75, the Low group contains so many Middle group goods that it has an
interior peak, but this peak is far to the left, at 0.2.
27. For each country k these are percentiles of the vector ( x1k /x1 , . . . , x gk /x g , . . . , xGk /xG ).


                                                     36
these normalizations produce curves with the same shapes as those in figure 8. Fourth, we
reported quantile regressions based on the 90th quantile. The curves do not change when
using the 85th, 95th, or 99th quantiles. Fifth, we used SITC4 data. The figures look virtually
identical using HS6 data. See on-line appendix figure A14.28



10. The Dynamics of Development Ladders: The Role of Product Ranges

The preceding investigations of the range of exporter incomes associated with each in-
dustry raise certain questions as to what we can infer from a country’s product mix. The
basic point is that advances in income are in general associated both with changes in the
product mix and with the advance of quality (or productivity) within a given set of indus-
tries. Now one point already noted is that we cannot fully separate these two contributions
by reference to available data across the general run of industries; we acknowledge that
some movements, especially in the wide product-range or ‘uninformative’ goods may
involve either a quality improvement, or a shift from one set of products to another more
demanding set of products within the industry. With that caveat in mind, we return to the
conventional product-mix diagram of figure 4, and we now examine how countries have
moved on this diagram over the 25-year period 1980 to 2005.29
   Figure 9 overlays two product-mix diagrams, one for each year. Each country is rep-
resented by an arrow. At the tail of the arrow is the point (ln yk,1980 , Ik,1980 ) and at the
head is the point (ln yk,2005 , Ik,2005 ). The striking feature of this figure is best seen by

28. There are a few extreme ‘vertical’ outliers that would ‘squash’ figure 8 down to the horizontal axis if
displayed. Rather than leave them off the figure entirely, we shrink them towards the horizontal axis as
follows. In the top panel, if a vertical point y exceeds 9, then it is replaced by 9 + f (∆) where ∆ = y − 9 and
f (∆) = ln(1 + ∆)/5 so that f (0) = 0 and f 0 > 0. Likewise for the middle and bottom panels, but with 4
instead of 9. This has no effect on the position of the quantile regressions.
29. Introducing time subscripts t, we are interested in how the figure 4 points (ln ykt ,Ikt ) have moved over
time. (Ikt was defined in equation 12.) Ik,2005 − Ik,1980 can be decomposed into within and between changes
i.e. into a change due to changing product scores and a change due to changing export weights. Since we are
only interested in the latter, we compute Ikt (t = 1980, 2005) using 1980 scores (σg,1980 ) and period-t exports.
                                             x gkt
That is, in equation (12) we use Ikt ≡ Σ g   xkt σg,1980 ,   t = 1980, 2005. The results are almost identical using 2005
scores.




                                                               37
                                                                             Figure 9: Dynamic Arrow Diagram

                                                           9.0

                                                                                                                                                   SOM

                                                                                                                                                   KHM

                                                                                                                                                   NPL

                                                                                                                                                   MMR

                                                                                                                                                   BFA

                                                                                                                                                   MWI
                                                           8.5                                                                                     TCD

                                                                                                                                                   UGA

                                                                                                                                                   BGD

                                                                                                                                                   BDI

                                                                                                                                                   MLI

                                                                                                                                                   HTI

                                                                                                                                                   AFG

                                                                                                                                                   RWA
                                                           8.0                                                                                     IND

                                                                                                                                                   GHA

                                                                                                                                                   LKA

                                                                                                                                                   GIN

                                                                                                                                                   CHN

                                                                                                                                                   MDG

                                                                                                                                                   SLE
 GDP per Capita Implied by Export Baskets, 1980 and 2005




                                                                                                                                                   MOZ
                                                           7.5                                                                                     BEN

                                                                                                                                                   TGO

                                                                                                                                                   PAK

                                                                                                                                                   NER

                                                                                                                                                   SDN

                                                                                                                                                   BOL

                                                                                                                                                   IDN

                                                                                                                                                   SEN

                                                           7.0                                                                                     EGY

                                                                                                                                                   KEN

                                                                                                                                                   ZMB

                                                                                                                                                   PHL

                                                                                                                                                   AGO

                                                                                                                                                   THA

                                                                                                                                                   HND

                                                                                                                                                   NIC

                                                           6.5                                                                                     ZWE

                                                                                                                                                   SLV

                                                                                                                                                   ALB

                                                                                                                                                   IRQ

                                                                                                                                                   PNG

                                                                                                                                                   PER

                                                                                                                                                   GTM

                                                                                                                                                   CMR

                                                           6.0                                                                                     MAR

                                                                                                                                                   DOM

                                                                                                                                                   JAM

                                                                                                                                                   PRY

                                                                                                                                                   TUN

                                                                                                                                                   COL

                                                                                                                                                   LBN

                                                                                                                                                   TUR

                                                                                                                                                   ECU
                                                           5.5
                                                                 4.5   5.5    6.5            7.5                 8.5           9.5   10.5   11.5
                                                                                    log GDP per Capita (lnyk), 1980 and 2005



Notes: The arrows in this diagram link the point corresponding to actual and implied GDP per capita in
1980 to the corresponding point in 2005. That is, each arrow connects the point (ln yk,1980 ,Ik,1980 ) to the point
(ln yk,2005 ,Ik,2005 ). 1980 is the tail of each arrow and 2005 is the head. The three different types of arrows
correspond to low-, middle- and high-income country groups.




                                                                                                 38
splitting countries into low-, middle- and high-income groups.30 It is clear a priori that
for high-income countries, an initial concentration on high-end products limits the extent
to which the product mix, and hence the implied GDP per capita, can rise further; so here
the arrows are necessarily flat.
   The point of interest in figure 9 relates to the difference in experience between the low-
and middle-income groups: the arrows are flatter for middle-income countries than for
low-income countries. Figure 3 provided a partial explanation of this. Steep arrows occur
when GDP per capita rises without a commensurate increase in Ik . This can happen for two
reasons. First, as in figure 3, a country may advance into a new product but only produce it
with atypical, below-average quality; in which case there is limited world demand for the
product and only slight upward pressure on wages. Second, as in figure 1, the SITC4 good
may be an aggregate of low- and high-capability goods and the country may advance into
the lower-capability sub-aggregates of the SITC good; in which case exports are limited
by competition from other low-capability countries and thus there is very little upward
pressure on wages. In short, low-income countries exhibit a very steep slope because they
typically moved into the bottom end of ‘wider range’ industries, which can be interpreted
either as becoming low-quality producers, or as producing low-end products within these
industries. In contrast, middle-income countries have flatter slopes because they advanced
through the figure 9 cloud by becoming typical or average producers within the new
industries they entered, whether in terms of product quality or in terms of the products
they offer within their industries.
   This difference in average slopes between the low- and middle-income groups can be
confirmed more formally as follows. Since Ik,2005 − Ik,1980 > 0 for almost every country, we
work with
                                               ln yk,2005 − ln yk,1980
                                  slopek−1 =                                                       (15)
                                                  Ik,2005 − Ik,1980

30. The cut-off between low- and middle-income countries is 1980 log GDP per capita of 6.7. This corres-
ponds to a break-point in the GDP per capita series. There are 39 low-income countries below this and 34
middle-income countries above this. The high-income group consists of countries with a 1980 log GDP per
capita in excess of 8.5. These are primarily OECD countries, with Spain being the poorest country in the
group.



                                                  39
                                                     Figure 10: Cumulative Distributions of Slopek−1

                                       1 00
                                       1.00
   Cumulativee Frequency off Slope‐1



                                                                                     Low Income
                                       0.75




                                       0.50
                                                                                                              Middle Income


                                       0.25




                                       0.00
  Percentile 0.0                               0.1      0.2        0.3        0.4         0.5         0.6         0.7       0.8   0.9    1.0
  Slope–1 ‐80.8                               ‐1.1     ‐0.1        0.4        0.8         1.1         1.3         1.6       3.0   5.7   75.9

                                                          Inverse of Slope: (ln yk,2005 ‐ ln yk,1980)/(Ik,2005 ‐ Ik,1980)


Notes: This figure plots the cumulative distribution of slopek−1 (equation 15) for the low- and middle-income
countries that appear in figure 9. The horizontal axis reports both the value of slopek−1 and the percentile of
its rank. The ‘Low Income’ curve reports the proportion of low-income countries for which slopek−1 is less
than or equal to the number on the horizontal axis. Likewise for the middle-income curve. In essence, the
figure shows that low-income countries have steeper figure 9 arrows than do middle-income countries.




and ask whether poor countries have had small gains in GDP per capita relative to their
gains in Ikt .
     Figure 10 reports the cumulative distribution of slopek−1 for our low- and middle-income
groups of countries. The distribution cumulates faster for the low-income group, which
means that low-income countries as a group have smaller values of slopek−1 .
     Figure 10 establishes that for comparable changes in Ik , a low-income country experi-
ences a smaller increase in GDP per capita than does a middle-income country. We can
interpret this in a purely arithmetic sense as follows: if a low-wage country that hitherto
produced L goods enters new markets where it produces goods for which the product



                                                                                    40
range is very wide, so that the product score is close to world average income, the country’s
implied income Ik rises. In economic terms, we interpret this by saying that the developing
country enters at the ‘low-quality’ end of the product range, and so achieves only a small
increase in GDP per capita.
  While it would be dangerous to draw strong inferences here, this does emphasize our
basic point that advances in GDP per capita involve both changes in product mix and
improvements in quality and productivity; and the trajectory followed by this group of
countries suggests that the key challenges to development may be on improving quality
and productivity within existing activities.



                                    11. Conclusions

The aim of this paper has been to explore the way in which advances in wealth are associ-
ated both with changes in the product mix and with changes in quality (and productivity)
within a given set of industries. The central point relates to the fact that the range of
wealth levels of significant exporters of most products is very wide. This is true for
products defined at the conventional SITC4, HS6 and HS10 levels, and moving to more
disaggregated data does not change this. At a theoretical level, one reason for the wide
product ranges lies in aggregation of disparate sub-industries; another reason lies in the
fact that within any industry, there will, in a general equilibrium multi-country setting, be
a viable range of producer wealth levels. In this viable range, poor low-quality exporters
compete with rich high-quality exporters.
  The central property of this producer-wealth range is that, in a multi-market general
equilibrium setting, the relation between quality and price on the one hand, and output
and global market share on the other, is non-monotonic. There is at equilibrium a range
of producer qualities (and so wealth levels) that are viable in a given industry. As quality
rises, the country moves into the production of higher-ranked goods, and its equilibrium
wage (or GDP per capita) rises. But this means that its output and global market share all
exhibit an inverted-U relationship with quality, and so with GDP per capita. As quality


                                               41
rises, market share rises, and wages rise also. As the country advances into the production
of higher-ranked products, the rise in wage causes its effective cost level to rise, and its
global market share in this industry to fall. It is this inverted-U relation that is the basis of
the selection effect that links a country’s wealth to its product-mix.




                                               42
                                       References
Amiti, Mary and Amit K. Khandelwal, “Import Competition and Quality Upgrading,”
 Working Paper No. 15503, National Bureau of Economic Research, November 2009.

Baldwin, Richard and James Harrigan, “Zeros, Quality, and Space: Trade Theory and
  Trade Evidence,” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, forthcoming.

Bastos, Paulo and Joana Silva, “The Quality of a Firm’s Exports: Where you Export to
  Matters,” Journal of International Economics, November 2010, 82 (2), 99–111.

Bernard, Andrew B., Jonathan Eaton, Bradford Jensen, and Samuel Kortum, “Plants and
  Productivity in International Trade,” American Economic Review, September 2003, 93 (4),
  1268–1290.

Chenery, Hollis B., “Patterns of Industrial Growth,” American Economic Review, 1960, 50
 (4), 624–654.

Choi, Yo Chul, David Hummels, and Chong Xiang, “Explaining Import Quality: The Role
 of Income Distribution,” Journal of International Trade, April 2009, 77 (2), 265–275.

Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum, “Technology, Geography, and Trade,” Econometrica,
  September 2002, 75 (5), 1741–1779.

Feenstra, Robert C., “Voluntary Export Restraint in U.S. Autos, 1980-81: Quality, Em-
  ployment, and Welfare Effects,” in Robert E. Baldwin and Anne O. Krueger, eds., The
  Structure and Evolution of Recent U.S. Trade Policy, Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
  1984, pp. 35–66.

Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and Chad Syverson, “Reallocation, Firm Turnover, and
  Efficiency: Selection on Productivity or Profitability?,” American Economic Review, March
  2008, 98 (1), 394–425.

Goldberg, Pinelopi Koujianou and Nina Pavcnik, “Distributional Effects of Globalization
 in Developing Countries,” Journal of Economic Literature, March 2007, 45 (1), 39–82.

Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman, Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy,
 Cambridge, Mass. and London: MIT Press, 1991.

Hall, Robert E. and Chad Jones, “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output
 per Worker than Others?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 1999, 114 (1), 83–116.

Hallak, Juan Carlos, “Product Quality and the Direction of Trade,” Journal of International
 Economics, January 2006, 68 (1), 238–65.

  and Jagadeesh Sivadasan, “Firms’ Exporting Behavior under Quality Constraints,”
  Working Paper No. 14928, National Bureau of Economic Research, April 2009.

  and Peter Schott, “Estimating Cross-Country Differences in Product Quality,” Working
  Paper No. 13807, National Bureau of Economic Research, February 2008.



                                            43
Hausmann, Ricardo, Jason Hwang, and Dani Rodrik, “What You Export Matters,” Journal
 of Economic Growth, March 2007, 12 (1), 1–25.
Helpman, Elhanan, The Mystery of Economic Growth, Cambridge, MA: Harvard, 2004.
Hummels, David and Alexander Skiba, “Shipping the Good Apples Out: An Empirical
 Confirmation of the Alchian-Allen Conjecture,” Journal of Political Economy, December
 2004, 112 (6), 1384–1402.
  and Peter Klenow, “The Variety and Quality of a Nation’s Exports,” American Economic
  Review, June 2005, 95 (3), 704–23.
Johnson, Robert C., “Trade and Prices with Heterogeneous Firms,” 2009. Mimeo, Dart-
  mouth College.
Khandelwal, Amit, “The Long and Short (of) Quality Ladders,” Review of Economic Studies,
 October 2010, 77 (4), 1450–1476.
Kugler, Maurice and Eric Verhoogen, “The Quality-Complementarity Hypothesis: Theory
 and Evidence from Colombia,” Working Paper No. 14418, National Bureau of Economic
 Research, October 2008.
Lall, Sanjaya, John Weiss, and Jinkang Zhang, “The “Sophistication” of Exports: A New
  Trade Measure,” World Development, February 2006, 34 (2), 222–37.
Leamer, Edward E., Sources of International Comparative Advantage: Theory and Evidence,
  Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1984.
Melitz, Marc J., “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
 Industry Productivity,” Econometrica, November 2003, 71 (6), 1695–1725.
Michaely, Michael, Trade, Income Levels, and Dependence, Amsterdam, North-Holland and
 New York: Elsevier Science Pub. Co, 1984.
Schott, Peter, “One Size Fits All? Heckscher-Ohlin Specialization in Global Production,”
  American Economic Review, June 2003, 93 (2), 686–708.
  , “Across-Product versus Within-Product Specialization in International Trade,”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2004, 119 (2), 647–678.
  , “The Relative Sophistication of Chinese Exports,” Economic Policy, 2008, 53, 5–49.
Sutton, John, Sunk Costs and Market Structure, Cambridge: MIT Press, 1991.
  , Technology and Market Structure, Cambridge: MIT Press, 1998.
  , “Market Structure: Theory and Evidence,” in Mark Armstrong and Robert Porter,
  eds., Handbook of Industrial Organization, Volume III, Amsterdam: North-Holland, 2007,
  pp. 2301–2368.
  , “Quality, Trade and the Moving Window: The Globalisation Process,” Economic Journal,
  November 2007, 117 (524), F469–F498.
Verhoogen, Eric, “Trade, Quality Upgrading and Wage Inequality in the Mexican Manu-
  facturing Sector,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2008, 123 (2), 489–530.

                                            44
                           Appendix A. Proof of Lemma 1
                                                      wj cj                          w ci /ui
Proof of Part 1. Using equation (3), note that
                                                       uj∑  is increasing in wi , and i w j cj
                                                                                               is
                                                    j                                 ∑ uj
increasing in wi , whence the r.h.s. of the equation rises.
Proof of Part 2. From equation (3) it follows on re-arranging that
                                                    (                   )
                          S              wi ci /ui           wi ci /ui
                    xi =        ( Ng − 1) w c 1 − ( Ng − 1) w c           .
                         wi c i                 j j                 j j
                                         ∑ uj                ∑ uj
                                          j                   j

We aim to examine how xi varies with ui , holding wi , ci and the w j , c j and u j constant, over
the relevant domain (where inequality (4) is satisfied, to be defined precisely below).
  With this in mind, define the function

                                         wi ci /ui            1
                            z ( ui ) =       wj cj =     ui          wj cj
                                         ∑ uj        1+       (∑
                                                        wi c i j 6 =i u j
                                                                           )
                                          j

and note that z(ui ) is strictly decreasing. Note that

                                     S
                             xi =          ( Ng − 1) × z[1 − ( Ng − 1)z]
                                    wi c i

  The relevant domain can be written in terms of z as

                                          1        1
                                             <z≤
                                          Ng     Ng − 1

where the right hand inequality corresponds to the threshold at which ui reaches the level
at which firm i’s effective cost level wi ci /ui makes the firm just viable, while the left hand
inequality corresponds to the point at which firm i’s effective cost level wi ci /ui becomes
equal to that of its Ng − 1 identical rivals, so that z(ui ) = 1/[1 + ( Ng − 1)] = 1/Ng .
  To establish that xi is increasing in ui on the relevant domain, we note that the function
z[1 − ( Ng − 1)z] is strictly decreasing on the domain

                                     1 1            1
                                              <z≤        .
                                     2 Ng − 1     Ng − 1

  Recall that Ng ≥ 2, whence this domain includes the relevant domain

                                          1        1
                                             <z≤        .
                                          Ng     Ng − 1

                                                    45
   It follows that ∂xi /∂ui > 0 on the relevant domain.
Proof of Part 3. Consider equation (3). Since ui /wi and hence wi ci /ui are constant, the r.h.s.
of equation (3) is constant. Hence so is xi ui . Since ui is rising, it must be that xi is falling.



                                   Appendix B. Trade Data

COMTRADE reports each bilateral transaction twice, once by the importer and once by the
exporter. We always use the importer’s data as this is known to be more reliable for most
countries.
   The countries in our sample are (using ISO codes for brevity31 ): AFG, AGO, ALB, ARG,
AUS, AUT, BDI, BEN, BFA, BGD, BGR, BOL, BRA, CAN, CHE, CHL, CHN, CMR, COL,
CRI, CUB, DEU, DNK, DOM, DZA, ECU, EGY, ESP, FIN, FRA, GBR, GHA, GIN, GRC,
GTM, HND, HTI, HUN, IDN, IND, IRL, IRQ, ISR, ITA, JAM, JOR, JPN, KEN, KHM, LBN,
LKA, MAR, MDG, MEX, MLI, MMR, MOZ, MWI, MYS, NER, NGA, NIC, NLD, NOR, NPL,
NZL, PAK, PER, PHL, PNG, POL, PRT, PRY, ROU, RWA, SAU, SDN, SEN, SGP, SLE, SLV,
SOM, SWE, TCD, TGO, THA, TUN, TUR, UGA, URY, USA, VEN, ZMB, and ZWE. The only
major countries not included in our list are Taiwan and Honk Kong. Taiwan is excluded
because there are no 1980 data. Hong Kong is excluded because, for our purposes, it should
be merged with China in 2005 and be by itself in 1980. None of our 2005 cross-section
results are affected by the inclusion of Taiwan and Hong Kong (the latter either by itself or
merged with China).
   We exclude live animals, meat, fish and dairy. These goods account for only 2.1% of
trade and including them does not affect our results at all; however, it is hard to relate
trade in these goods to the issues raised in this paper.
   Price data p gk are from the U.S. historical imports CD, 2001–2005. This CD only reports
what is called the ‘first quantity’ and ‘first value’ so that all observations within an HS10
product have the same quantity units. We sum U.S. imports and quantities by HS10
product and trading partner (exporter to the United States). We calculate unit values with

31. See on-line appendix table A1 for a full list of country names and GDPs per capita.


                                                     46
the summed data. In addition, we winsorize the unit values below the 10th within-HS10
percentile and above the 90th within-HS10 percentile. Winsorizing makes virtually no
difference to our results.




                                         47
                     On-Line Appendix – Not for Publication




        Online Appendix to


“Deductions from the Export Basket:
  Capabilities, Wealth and Trade”

                by

  John Sutton and Daniel Trefler
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                On-Line Appendix – Not for Publication




                                                                   Figure A11: Product-Mix Diagrams: HS6 and World Weights

                                                            11.5                                                                                                                                                                             11.5
                                                                                                                HS6                                                                                                                                                       SITC4, World Weights

                                                            10.5                                                                                                                                                                             10.5
             GDP per Capita Implied by Export Baskets, Ik




                                                                                                                                                                                              GDP per Capita Implied by Export Baskets, Ik
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NER                                                                        IRL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      DEU   CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         USA
                                                                                                                                                                          IRL                                                                                                                                                     NZL CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ESP  GBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       JPN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        FIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CUB      POL             ITA NLDDNK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              URY MEX HUN     ISR SGP AUS
                                                             9.5                                                                                                       FIN
                                                                                                                                                                       SWE                                                                    9.5                 AFG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MOZ  BEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BOL                      ARG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            BRA LBN         PRT  GRC
                                                                                                                                                                      JPN CHE
                                                                                                                                                                     DEU                                                                                         MMR BFAMLI    SEN      PRY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    THA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    COL BGR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         JAMROU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              TUR CHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NOR
                                                                                                                                                                      AUT
                                                                                                                                                                     FRA
                                                                                                                                                 HUN
                                                                                                                                                                        USA
                                                                                                                                                                   ITAGBR
                                                                                                                                                                 ESP
                                                                                                                                                                 NZL
                                                                                                                                                                           DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ZWE   SOM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SLEGIN      IND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ZMB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PHLEGY        PER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      DZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CRI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              MYS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                VEN     SAU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TCD          IDN CHN
                                                                                                                                                                     CAN
                                                                                                                                                                       NLD                                                                                               KEN SDNNGAPNG IRQ     AGO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 JOR DOM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              MAR TUN
                                                                                                                                           POL                   SGP                                                                                              NPL                               ALB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ECU
                                                                                                                                          MEX            PRT                                                                                                        UGA            CMR
                                                                                                                                                           ISR                                                                                                                                  GTMSLV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RWA TGO
                                                             8.5                                                  CHN    THA      MYS
                                                                                                                                  URY                        GRC AUS                                                                          8.5          MWI                    NIC
                                                                                                          PHL                  BRA
                                                                                                                                  TUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     BDI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  MDG HTI        PAK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LKA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       HND
                                                                                                                            BGR ROU
                                                                                                                                 CRI
                                                                                                                                 ARG
                                                                                                                                   LBN CHL
                                                                                                    IND                                                                          NOR                                                                                      KHM
                                                                                                             IDN         COL                                                                                                                                             BGD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           GHA
                                                                                                               EGY         DOM      VEN            SAU
                                                                                                 TCD NGA IRQ                DZA CUB
                                                                                                                           PER
                                                                                                                          TUN
                                                                                                    SDN            MAR
                                                                                                                    AGO  ECU JAM
                                                                                                                      JORALB
                                                                                                             PRY
                                                                                                                        SLV
                                                             7.5                                         PNG
                                                                                                          BOL                                                                                                                                 7.5
                                                                                                             LKA
                                                                                                         CMRHND      GTM
                                                                                                       PAK
                                                                                                  ZMB   NIC
                                                                                                     SEN
                                                                                             HTIKEN
                                                                                            BGD
                                                                                            KHM
                                                                              MMR
                                                                                SLE
                                                                                NPL
                                                                               MDG TGO GHA
                                                                                   GIN
                                                                          ZWE NER
                                                                               AFGMOZ
                                                                                          BEN
                                                             6.5                SOM      MLI                                                                                                                                                  6.5
                                                                                      BFA
                                                                                      UGA
                                                                    BDI   MWI
                                                                                RWA

                                                             5.5                                                                                                                                                                              5.5

                                                                                                                                                                        R² = 0.85                                                                                                                                                         R² = 0.48
                                                                                                                                                                      slope = 0.50                                                                                                                                                      slope = 0.18
                                                             4.5                                                                                                                                                                              4.5
                                                                   4.5          5.5               6.5             7.5            8.5               9.5              10.5               11.5                                                         4.5          5.5             6.5         7.5           8.5           9.5          10.5            11.5
                                                                                                 Log of GDPper capita in 2005, ln(yk)                                                                                                                                            Log of GDPper capita in 2005, ln(yk)




Notes: This figure displays two variants of the figure 4 product-mix diagram. The left-hand panel uses HS6
data for 2005. The right-hand panel uses SITC4 data for 2005, but constructs predicted GDP per capita using
world weights as in Michaely (1984). That is, the weights x gk / ∑ g x gk in equation (11) are replaced by world
weights x gk / ∑k x gk . See section 5 for details.




                                                               On-Line Appendix A. Robustness of Product-Mix Diagrams

Figure A11 displays two product-mix diagrams: (1) using HS6 data (left panel) and (2)
using Michaely (1984) and Lall et al. (2006) world export shares rather than own export
shares (right panel). Both panels display ‘flatness’ and ‘diffuseness’.

                                                             On-Line Appendix B. Robustness of Product Range Diagrams

There were several choices made in constructing the product ranges of figures 5–6. When
defining the product ranges we only looked at country-product pairs for which the product
accounted for a significant share of the country’s exports. As in the main text, let x gk /xk
be the share of country k’s exports accounted for by product g. We considered country-
product pairs with x gk /xk ≥ α maxg0 x g0 k /xk where α = 0.01. In the top left and bottom left
panels of figure A12 we choose α = 0.001 and α = 0.10, respectively. As is apparent, the
impression of the pervasiveness of wide product ranges does not change.
   An alternative to choosing cut-offs based on x gk /xk ≥ α maxg0 x g0 k /xk is to use a dollar
value cut-off: x gk > $5,000,000 or x gk > $50,000,000. This has the advantage that it keeps
more of the trade of rich countries, and the disadvantage that it eliminates more of the
trade of poor countries. We therefore combine this dollar criterion with our previous α (or
percentage) criterion. That is, an observation ( g,k) is included if it meets either of the two
criteria. The results appear in the right-hand panels of figure A12. The top and bottom
panels use $5,000,000 and $50,000,000, respectively.
                                                                                                                                                              On-Line Appendix – Not for Publication




                                                           Figure A12: Product Ranges: Sensitivity to Cut-offs

                                12
                                                                                                                      12
                                11                                                                                    11
Richest GDP per Capita (ymax)




                                                                                      Richest GDP per Capita (ymax)




                                10                                                                                    10

                                 9                                                                                     9

                                 8                                                                                     8

                                 7                                                                                     7

                                 6                                                                                     6

                                 5                                                                                     5
                                                   SITC4, 0.1% Cut‐Off                                                         SITC4, 1% Cut‐Off or $5M in Exports
                                 4                                                                                     4
                                     4   5   6      7      8      9     10     11    12                                    4   5     6       7     8      9     10    11       12
                                12               Poorest GDP per Capita (ymin)
                                                                                                                      12                                                                                     12
                                11                                                                                    11                                                                                     11
Richest GDP per Capita (ymax)




                                                                                    Richest GDP per Capita (yymax)




                                                                                                                                                                            Richest GDP per Capita (yymax)




                                10                                                                                    10                                                                                     10
                                 9                                                                                    9                                                                                      9
                                 8                                                                                    8                                                                                      8
                                 7                                                                                    7                                                                                      7

                                 6                                                                                    6                                                                                      6

                                 5                                                                                    5                                                                                      5
                                                  SITC4, 10% Cut‐Off                                                           SITC4, 1% Cut‐Off or $50M in Exports                                                         HS10, 1% Cut‐Off
                                 4                                                                                    4                                                                                      4
                                     4   5   6       7     8      9     10    11     12                                    4   5    6       7      8     9     10      11        12                               4   5    6    7     8     9    10       11   12
                                             Poorest GDP per Capita (ymin)                                                               Poorest GDP per Capita (ymin)                                                    Poorest GDP per Capita (ymin)
                                                                On-Line Appendix – Not for Publication




                On-Line Appendix C. Robustness of Market-Share Diagrams

In section 9 we claimed that the figure 8 market-share diagram was not very sensitive to
the choice of cut-offs ln ymin,g = 6, ln ymin,g = 8.25 and ln ymax,g = 10. Figure A13 shows
the basis for this claim. In the top pair of panels, ln ymin,g = 6 is lowered to 5.25. In the
second pair of panels, ln ymin,g = 6 is raised to 6.75. Here the monotonicity of the Low
group is lost, but only because the Low group now absorbs so many Middle-group goods.
It remains true that the Low-group peak is far to the left of the Middle-group peak. In
the third pair of panels, ln ymin,g = 8.25 is lowered to 7.25. Monotonicity is lost for the
High group, but only because it now includes so many Middle-group goods. (Also, the
downturn at the far right of the High panel is entirely associated with Norway.) In the
fourth pair of panels, ln ymin,g = 8.25 is raised up to 9.25. In the bottom pair of panels,
ln ymax,g = 10 is lowered to 9. From figure A13 it is clear that the market-share predictions
of figure 8 are not sensitive to the choice of cut-offs, or where they are, this ‘sensitivity’ is
entirely explainable.
   The market-share diagram (figure 8) was drawn using SITC4 data. In figure A14 the
figure is redrawn using HS6 data. Because there is much more data, we report the 95th
quantile rather than the 90th quantile that was used for the SITC4 data. As is apparent,
figures 8 and A14 are almost identical. The only difference lies in the Low group where
the peak of the quantile is no longer at the far left; however, its peak remains close to the
extreme left and certainly much further left than for the middle group.32

32. On a minor technical note, at the HS6 level there are a few goods that meet the criteria for being in both
the Medium and High groups. Where this is the case the goods are put in the High group; however, since
there are so few of these goods it makes no difference where they are put.
                                                                     On-Line Appendix – Not for Publication



         Figure A13: Normalized World Market Shares, Sensitivity to Cut-Offs

                                        er ln(ymin,g) = 6 to ln(ym
                                     Lowe                        min,g) = 5.25

                               Low                                           Middle




                                      Raise ln(ymin,g) = 6 to ln(yymin,g) = 6.75

                               Low                                           Middle




                                 Lower ln
                                        n(ymin,g) = 8.25 to ln(yymin,g) = 7.25

                             Middle                                            High




                                      Raise ln(ymin,g) = 8.25 to ln
                                                                  n(ymax,g) = 9.25

                             Middle                                            High




                                  Lower ln(ymax,g) = 10 to ln(yymax,g) = 9

                               Low                                           Middle




Notes: This figure reports the sensitivity of figure 8 to the choice of cut-offs defining the Low, Middle
and High groups of goods. SITC4 data are used.
                                                                       On-Line Appendix – Not for Publication



                Figure A14: Normalized World Market Shares, HS6 Data

                                                       k ‐ 1 or Low
                                                                  w‐Group Goods




                      Normalized World Export Shares




                                                       k or Mediu
                                                                um‐Group Goods
                    Normalized World Export Shares




                                                       k + 1 or High
                                                                   h‐Group Goods
                    Normalized World Export Shares




                                                       Normalized G
                                                                  GDP per Capita


Notes: This figure repeats figure 8, but using HS6 COMTRADE data and the 95 quantile (since the HS6
data are much finer than the SITC4 data).
                                                                            On-Line Appendix – Not for Publication



                                            Table A1: List of Countries


                                          GDP per Capita (2005)                           GDP per Capita (2005)
                 Code Country               $US         ln y k    Code   Country            $US         ln y k
                 BDI   Burundi                101         4.62    ALB    Albania           2,691          7.90
                 MWI   Malawi                 157         5.06    COL    Colombia          2,739          7.92
                 ZWE   Zimbabwe               170         5.13    ECU    Ecuador           2,794          7.94
                 RWA   Rwanda                 226         5.42    THA    Thailand          2,797          7.94
                 NER   Niger                  245         5.50    TUN    Tunisia           2,846          7.95
                 MMR   Myanmar                248         5.51    PER    Peru              2,911          7.98
                 SLE   Sierra Leone           273         5.61    DOM    Dominican Rep.    3,073          8.03
                 AFG   Afghanistan            273         5.61    DZA    Algeria           3,115          8.04
                 NPL   Nepal                  276         5.62    BGR    Bulgaria          3,441          8.14
                 SOM   Somalia                283         5.64    JAM    Jamaica           3,622          8.19
                 MDG   Madagascar             283         5.65    CUB    Cuba              4,093          8.32
                 UGA   Uganda                 317         5.76    BRA    Brazil            4,260          8.36
                 MOZ   Mozambique             323         5.78    ROU    Romania           4,557          8.42
                 GIN   Guinea                 325         5.78    CRI    Costa Rica        4,616          8.44
                 TGO   Togo                   337         5.82    ARG    Argentina         4,728          8.46
                 BFA   Burkina Faso           387         5.96    TUR    Turkey            4,969          8.51
                 BGD   Bangladesh             422         6.05    URY    Uruguay           4,996          8.52
                 HTI   Haiti                  429         6.06    MYS    Malaysia          5,098          8.54
                 KHM   Cambodia               444         6.10    VEN    Venezuela         5,374          8.59
                 MLI   Mali                   473         6.16    LBN    Lebanon           5,436          8.60
                 GHA   Ghana                  475         6.16    CHL    Chile             7,297          8.90
                 BEN   Benin                  513         6.24    MEX    Mexico            7,365          8.90
                 KEN   Kenya                  526         6.27    POL    Poland            7,923          8.98
                 TCD   Chad                   580         6.36    HUN    Hungary          10,942          9.30
                 ZMB   Zambia                 637         6.46    SAU    Saudi Arabia     13,119          9.48
                 SDN   Sudan                  675         6.52    PRT    Portugal         17,457          9.77
                 IND   India                  713         6.57    ISR    Israel           19,389          9.87
                 SEN   Senegal                730         6.59    GRC    Greece           25,562        10.15
                 NGA   Nigeria                803         6.69    ESP    Spain            25,947        10.16
                 PAK   Pakistan               820         6.71    NZL    New Zealand      26,789        10.20
                 NIC   Nicaragua              899         6.80    SGP    Singapore        26,968        10.20
                 PNG   Papua New Guinea       928         6.83    ITA    Italy            30,053        10.31
                 CMR   Cameroon               955         6.86    DEU    Germany          33,718        10.43
                 BOL   Bolivia              1,028         6.94    FRA    France           33,862        10.43
                 PHL   Philippines          1,163         7.06    CAN    Canada           35,071        10.47
                 IRQ   Iraq                 1,213         7.10    JPN    Japan            35,646        10.48
                 HND   Honduras             1,225         7.11    AUS    Australia        36,321        10.50
                 IDN   Indonesia            1,244         7.13    AUT    Austria          36,760        10.51
                 LKA   Sri Lanka            1,253         7.13    GBR    United Kingdom   36,954        10.52
                 PRY   Papua New Guin.      1,266         7.14    FIN    Finland          37,307        10.53
                 EGY   Egypt                1,392         7.24    NLD    Netherlands      38,512        10.56
                 CHN   China                1,766         7.48    SWE    Sweden           39,539        10.59
                 MAR   Morocco              1,906         7.55    USA    USA              41,348        10.63
                 AGO   Angola               2,039         7.62    DNK    Denmark          47,839        10.78
                 GTM   Guatemala            2,147         7.67    IRL    Ireland          48,373        10.79
                 JOR   Jordan               2,293         7.74    CHE    Switzerland      49,282        10.81
                 SLV   El Salvador          2,545         7.84    NOR    Norway           63,704        11.06




            On-Line Appendix D. Full Country Names and GDP per Capita

Table A1 provide full country names for the ISO codes listed in appendix Appendix B.

       On-Line Appendix E. Additional Justification of Our Modelling Approach

E.1. Alternative Models Used in the International Trade Literature
   There are a number of models of international trade that could have been used to deliver
our results e.g. Eaton and Kortum (2002), Bernard, Eaton, Jensen and Kortum (2003) and
Melitz (2003). Why have we not used these? The core of our model has two components.
First, we assumed that quality capabilities are scarce and asymmetrically distributed across
countries. Second, in equilibrium wages adjust to changes in quality capabilities so that rich
                                                       On-Line Appendix – Not for Publication


countries are priced out of low-k goods. One could obtain our main results in these other
models, but it would be less straightforward.
   For one, in these other models, scarcity is described by the distribution of productivities
(G ( a) in Melitz, 2003; the Type II extreme value distribution in Eaton and Kortum, 2002
and Bernard et al., 2003). To use these other models one would have to provide a detailed
specification of how these distributions vary across both countries and industries. This can
be done, but it would require so much asymmetry that the elegance of these models would
be lost. Re-stated, these other models are designed to handle within-industry heterogen-
eity and are less concerned with standard between-industry comparative advantage. In
contrast, we have made the extreme assumption that there is at most one firm per country
and focussed instead on the cross-country, cross-industry distribution of capabilities that
are central to our Ricardian logic.
   For another, in these other models wage adjustment plays a role in determining entry
thresholds. Beyond this, there is little discussion of the comparative advantage implica-
tions of wages or of why some countries are rich and others poor. It is these latter issues
that are our main concern.
   In short, we have chosen the simplest model possible that focuses on (1) Ricardian asym-
metries in the distribution of quality capabilities and (2) the role of wages as an adjustment
mechanism in a multi-industry world populated by rich and poor countries.
E.2. The Endogeneity of Quality Capabilities
   The driving assumptions on this paper are that (a) some capabilities are relatively scarce,
and (b) the relatively scarce capabilities are distributed asymmetrically across countries.
(We have chosen to take (a) and (b) as given, and explore their consequences.) It might
seem natural to endogenize the entry process, and so derive (a) and (b) from more primitive
assumptions. We have chosen not to do this for the following reasons. Endogenizing (a)
is straightforward, and has been done elsewhere (Sutton, 1991, 1998, 2007b). To model (b),
however, requires that some assumption be made regarding asymmetries between coun-
tries. This could be done by assuming that the (unobservable) relationship between the
fixed and sunk costs of product development, and product quality, differ across countries;
but to do this would simply beg the question, why? This leads, then, into the broad
economic history of industrial development, and so to the issues that lie far beyond our
present scope; no single way of modelling the origin of these cross-country differences
could hope to command general acceptance. And so we have chosen to present the theory
in its simplest form, staying close to the empirical observables, by taking (a) and (b) as our
primitives.
