NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TRENDS IN THE TRANSITORY VARIANCE OF MALE EARNINGS IN THE U.S.,
1970-2004
Robert A. Moffitt
Peter Gottschalk
Working Paper 16833
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16833

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2011

The authors would like to thank the participants at many seminars and conferences for comments,
Joe Tracy and John Abowd for discussant comments, and Tom DeLeire and Gary Solon for helpful
conversations. Outstanding research assistance was provided by Yonatan Ben-Shalom, Kai Liu, Shannon
Phillips, and Sisi Zhang. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Robert A. Moffitt and Peter Gottschalk. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Trends in the Transitory Variance of Male Earnings in the U.S., 1970-2004
Robert A. Moffitt and Peter Gottschalk
NBER Working Paper No. 16833
February 2011
JEL No. J31
ABSTRACT
We estimate the trend in the transitory variance of male earnings in the U.S. using the Michigan Panel
Study of Income Dynamics from 1970 to 2004. Using both an error components model as well as simpler
but only approximate methods, we find that the transitory variance started to increase in the early 1970s,
continued to increase through the mid-1980s, and then remained at this new higher level through the
1990s and beyond. Thus the increase mostly occurred about thirty years ago. Its increase accounts
for between 31 and 49 percent of the total rise in cross-sectional variance, depending on the time period.

Robert A. Moffitt
Department of Economics
Johns Hopkins University
3400 North Charles Street
Baltimore, MD 21218
and NBER
moffitt@jhu.edu
Peter Gottschalk
Department of Economics
Boston College
140 Commonwealth Avenue
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467-3806
peter.gottschalk@bc.edu

A substantial literature has accumulated on trends in various measures of instability in
individual earnings and family income in the US over the last thirty or so years, with many
studies finding increases in instability (Gottschalk and Moffitt, 1994; Moffitt and Gottschalk,
1995; Dynarski and Gruber, 1997; Cameron and Tracy, 1998; Haider, 2001; Hyslop, 2001;
Stevens, 2001; Moffitt and Gottschalk, 2002; Dynan et al., 2008; Keys, 2008; Jensen and Shore,
2010; Shin and Solon, 2010). Increases have also been found in Canada (Baker and Solon, 2003;
Beach et al., 2003, 2010; Ostrovsky, 2010) and the UK (Dickens, 2000). Interest in trends in
instability, particularly instability that comes from an increase in the transitory variance of
earnings, has arisen for many reasons. One reason is that Friedman (1957) argued in his classic
treatise that transitory fluctuations should have little or no impact on consumption. A massive
literature over the subsequent five decades has followed, showing that consumption and saving
respond differently to permanent and transitory changes in income (Attanasio and Weber, 2010).
A recent contribution by Blundell et al. (2008), for example, argues that considerable
consumption smoothing takes place in response to transitory shocks but much less for permanent
shocks. A second, more normative reason for interest in transitory variance is that shocks which
cannot be smoothed generally impose welfare losses and, given the evidence that transitory
fluctuations are more easily smoothed than permanent shocks, welfare losses are presumably
smaller, the greater relative importance of transitory shocks compared to permanent ones. Third,
and relatedly, many students of inequality have long noted that transitory shocks have little
impact on the inequality of lifetime incomes, whereas permanent shocks do. This has normative
implications for inequality (Atkinson and Bourguignon, 1982; Cowell, 2000; Gottschalk and

1

Spolare, 2002; Sen, 2000) Fourth, a literature which assumes that social welfare depends on
whether it is possible for individuals to change their rank in the income distribution over their
lifetimes argues that increases in the variance of permanent shocks, which move individuals
farther apart in the distribution and hence makes changes in rank less likely are social-welfaredetracting. In contrast, transitory changes in income, which mix up the distribution and result in
more changes in rank are social-welfare-improving (Shorrocks, 1978; Gottschalk and Spolare,
2002).
A purely labor economics motivation for an interest in distinguishing permanent from
transitory shocks relates to the well-known increase in cross-sectional inequality (Katz and
Autor, 1999). By definition, an increase in cross-sectional inequality has to arise from an
increase in permanent shocks, transitory shocks, or both. The literature has put forth explanations
for this trend in inequality (e.g., skill-biased technical change) which all assume that permanent
shocks have generated the cross-sectional increase, yet, statistically, a rising cross-sectional
variance could also result from an increase in the transitory variance. Explanations for rising
transitory variance are likely to be quite different,. For example, the increase in the transitory
variance could have been caused by an increase in product or labor market competitiveness, a
decline in regulation and administered prices, a decline in union strength, increases in temporary
work or contracting-out or self-employment, and similar factors. In addition, insofar as transitory
fluctuations are more easily insured against than permanent fluctuations, as just noted, the
welfare losses from increases in cross-sectional inequality might be smaller than would
otherwise be supposed if transitory fluctuations have been an important source of the increase in
cross-sectional inequality.
This paper reports new estimates of the trend in the transitory variance of male earnings

2

in the US over the period 1970-2004. We use several methods to estimate trends in transitory
variances. The first is a formal error components model that is an extension of the model
originally developed by Moffitt and Gottschalk (1995), but here adding several features that have
since gained prominence in the literature. This is our preferred method since findings from this
explicit statistical model map directly into well-defined statistical concepts of permanent and
transitory variation. But we also use two simpler methods, one an extension of the method
originally suggested by Gottschalk and Moffitt (1994) and the other a new nonparametric
method that provides consistent estimates of the transitory variance while making weak
assumptions about the structure of the earnings process. These two methods relax some of the
strong parametric assumptions made in the error components model but at the cost of providing
only approximate estimates. All three methods show rising transitory variances from the 1970s to
the 1980s and a leveling off in the 1990s. Some ambiguity attaches to the precise dates at which
the variance rises, and at which it levels off, as a result of cyclical events—which have a
significant impact on transitory variances—that occur around the major turning points.
The first section briefly gives the intuition for how trends in transitory variances are
identified with a panel data set. The next section describes the data set we construct and the third
section lays out our methods and results. We then provide a section that compares our results to
others in the literature and provides potential explanations for differences in findings. A brief
summary concludes.

I. Identification of Trends in Transitory Variances
The intuition for identification of trends in a transitory variance can be seen from the
canonical error components model with permanent and transitory components:

3

yit  i   it

(1)

where yit is log earnings or residual log earnings for individual i at age t,  i is a time-invariant,
permanent individual component and it is a transitory component. The typical assumptions are
that E(i )  E(it )  E(i it )  0, Var(i )  2 and Var(it )  2 . Identification and estimation of
this basic random effects model has been known since the 1960s. However, typically these
models assume E( it  i )  0 for t   but this has been shown not to hold in most earnings
applications. When it does not hold, identification is less obvious. Carroll (1992) was, to our
knowledge, the first to point out explicitly that identification in this case can be obtained from
“long” autocovariances. The covariance of yit between periods  apart is

Cov(yit , yi,t  )  2  Cov(it , i,t  )

(2)

and hence 2 is identified from Cov(yit , yi,t  ) , which is observed in the data, provided that

Cov(it , i,t  )  0 .1 But Cov(it , i,t  )  0 is essentially the definition of a transitory component
in the first place, because this covariance represents the persistence of such a component--that is,
whether a transitory shock at time t-  is still present, even in reduced magnitude, by time t. If the
definition of a transitory component is something that eventually goes away, the permanent
variance must be identified at sufficiently high values of  (more on this below).

1

The textbook random-effects ANOVA expression for the permanent variance, which
involves the variance of the mean of y for each individual over time periods, should, under the
assumptions of the model, equal this long autocovariance if that mean is taken over periods far
apart.
4

Once the permanent variance is identified, the transitory variance is identified as the
residual:

2  Var(yit )  2

(3)

because Var(yit ) is observed in the data. This exercise can be conducted in different calendar
periods, thereby revealing whether transitory variances are changing.
This method of identification of permanent and transitory variances from the long
autocovariances of yit is employed in the richer error components model as well as the
nonparametric method described below. The data requirements are therefore for a sufficiently
long panel which allows not only calculation of variances but also long autocovariances, and for
different periods of calendar time.

II. Data
The Michigan Panel Study on Income Dynamics (PSID) satisfies these requirements, for
it covers a long calendar time period (1968-2005 at the time this analysis was conducted) and,
because it is a panel, we can compute autocovariances of earnings between periods quite far
apart. We use the data from interview year 1971 through interview year 2005.2 Earnings are
collected for the previous year, so our data cover the calendar years 1970 to 2004. The PSID
skipped interviews every other year starting in interview year 1998, so our last five observations
are for earnings years 1996, 1998, 2000, 2002, and 2004. The sample is restricted to male heads
of households. Females are excluded in order to reduce the selection effects of the increasing
2

We do not use earnings reported in 1969 or 1970 since wage and salary earnings, which
is what we used, are reported only in bracketed form in those years.
5

number of females participating in the labor market. Only heads are included since the PSID
earnings questions we use are only asked of heads of household. We take any year in which these
male heads were between the ages of 30 and 59, not a student, and had positive annual wage and
salary income and positive annual weeks of work. We include men in every year in which they
appear in the data and satisfy these requirements. We therefore work with an unbalanced sample
because of aging into and out of the sample in different years, attrition, and movements in and
out of employment. Fitzgerald et al. (1998) have found that attrition in the PSID has had little
effect on its cross-sectional representativeness, although less is known about the effect of
attrition on autocovariances. Measurement error in earnings reports is another potential problem
when using survey data to estimate covariance matrices. However, Pischke (1995) has shown
that measurement error in the PSID has little effect on earnings covariances and Gottschalk and
Huynh (2010) show that this is a result of the non-classical structure of measurement error in
earnings found in many surveys.3 We exclude men in all PSID oversamples (SEO, Latino). All
earnings are put into 1996 CPI-U-RS dollars. The resulting data set has 2,883 men and 31,054
person-year observations, for an average of 10.8 year-observations per person. Means of the key
variables are shown in Appendix Table A-1.
Rather than form a variance-autocovariance matrix directly from these earnings
observations, we work with residuals from regressions of log earnings on education, race, a
polynomial in age, and interactions among these variables, all estimated separately by calendar
3

In fact, Gottschalk and Huynh find that the cross-sectional variance of true earnings is
greater, rather than smaller, than that variance in survey data, contrary to expectations (this is
because measurement error is negatively correlated with true earnings). Nevertheless, we do
expect some measurement error in the PSID data and expect this to affect our estimates.
However, since our focus is on how the various variance estimates have changed over time, this
should be a problem for our work only if PSID measurement error has changed. Aside from one
possible instance of such a change, which we discuss below, we have no evidence of such
changes.
6

year. Our analysis, therefore, estimates the transitory component of the within group variance of
log earnings. We use these residuals to form a variance-autocovariance matrix indexed by year,
age, and lag length. Thus, a typical element consists of the covariance between residual log
earnings of men at ages a and a’ between years t and t’. Because of sample size limitations,
however, we cannot construct such covariances by single years of age. Instead, we group the
observations into three age groups--30-39, 40-49, and 50-59--and then construct the variances for
each age group in each year, as well as the autocovariances for each group at all possible lags
back to 1970 or age 20, whichever comes first. We then compute the covariance between the
residual log earnings of the group in the given year and each lagged year, using the individuals
who are in common in the two years (when constructing these covariances, we trim the top and
bottom one percent of the residuals within age-education-year cells to eliminate outliers and topcoded observations4). The resulting autocovariance matrix represents every individual variance
and covariance between every pair of years only once, and stratifies by age so that life cycle
changes in the variances of permanent and transitory earnings can be estimated (the human
capital literature has shown that there are life cycle patterns in earnings variances). The
covariance matrix has 1,197 elements over all years, ages, and lag lengths. A few specimen
elements are illustrated in Appendix Table A-2.
After presenting our main results, we will report the results of sensitivity tests to a
number of the more important of these data construction decisions.

4

If top-coding were the only motivation for trimming, a preferable procedure would be to
top-trim the earnings variable directly rather than the residuals. However, our motivation is
more general, to avoid distortion of log variances from outliers. The section below on sensitivity
tests discusses trimming in more detail. In any case, in prior work (Moffitt and Gottschalk,
2002), we tested trimming on the residuals versus trimming on earnings itself, and found no
qualitative difference in the results.
7

III. Models and Results
We present results on trends in transitory variances from three models: a parametric error
components model; an approximate nonparametric implementation of that model; and an even
simpler method used originally by Gottschalk and Moffitt (1994) which also only approximates
the variances of interest.
Error Components Model. We first formulate an error components (EC) model of life
cycle earnings dynamics process in the absence of calendar time shifts. There is a large literature
on the formulation of such models (Hause, 1977, 1980; Lillard and Willis, 1978; Lillard and
Weiss, 1979; MaCurdy, 1982; Abowd and Card, 1989; Baker, 1997; Geweke and Keane, 2000;
Meghir and Pistaferri, 2004; Guvenen, 2009; see MaCurdy, 2007, for a review). These models
have suggested that the permanent component is not fixed over the life cycle but evolves,
typically with variances and covariances rising with age. This pattern can be captured by a
random walk or random growth process in the permanent effect. The literature has also shown
that the transitory error is serially correlated, usually by a low-order ARMA process. Our model
contains all these features:

yia  ia   ia

(4)

ia  i,a 1  i  ia

(5)

ia  i,a 1  ia  i,a 1

(6)

with E(ia )  E(i )  E(ia )  E(ia )  0 , orthogonality between all four of these errors, and
initial conditions i0  0, i0  0 (the life cycle begins at a=1). Eqn(4) again posits a permanenttransitory model but with an age-varying permanent effect ( ia ). The latter evolves over the life
8

cycle from a random growth factor ( i ) which allows each individual to have a permanently
higher or lower growth rate than that of other individuals, and from a random walk factor ( ia )
that arrives randomly but is a permanent shock in the sense that it does not fade out over time as
the individual ages. The transitory error evolves according to a ARMA(1,1) process typically
found in the literature, with the underlying transitory shock ( ia ) fading out at rate  but deviating
from that smooth fade-out rate by  in the next period (the MA(1) parameter  improves the fit of
the lag process significantly). Our tests also show, consistent with other findings in the literature,
that higher order ARMA parameters are not statistically significant. We assume all forcing errors
to be i.i.d. except ia , whose variance we assume to vary with age because transitory shocks are
likely to be greater at younger ages. We allow i0 and i to be correlated in light of the Mincerian
theory that they should be negatively related (those who have higher initial investments in human
capital will start off low but rise at a faster rate). Hence
E(i2 )  2 , E(ia2 )  2 , E(ia2 )  0 +1a a, E(i02 )  2 0 and E(i0 i )   .

An important point to note is that, in this more realistic model, compared to the simple canonical
model outlined previously, transitory shocks never completely fade out because of the AR(1)
process, which implies that they fade out only asymptotically. Consequently, the variance of the
permanent effect can never be exactly identified by the long autocovariances, as we argued it
should be, above. The permanent variance (and hence the transitory variance as well) is therefore
identified by extrapolation of the AR(1) curve to infinity. However, provided that  is not too
high, the covariance will fall to a low value over the 34 years of our data, reducing the
extrapolation problem to some degree.5
5

In an AR(1) model, another way to state the identification condition for the permanent
variance is that we require <1. If =1, transitory shocks are equivalent to permanent shocks and
9

With this identification condition satisfied, the parameters of the model can be identified
for a single cohort. Determining whether there are calendar time shifts can therefore be identified
from changes in parameters across multiple cohorts, for that allows a comparison of variances
and covariances at the same point in the life cycle but at different calendar time periods.
Although all the parameters of the model could potentially shift with calendar time, for reasons
of convenience and on the basis of past work testing for calendar-time shifts in the other
parameters (Moffitt and Gottschalk, 1995), we allow calendar time shifts in only two places in
the model, in the permanent component and the forcing transitory component:

yiat   t  ia   iat

(7)

ia  i,a 1  i  ia

(8)

 iat   i,a 1,t 1   t ia  ( t 1i,a 1 )

(9)

where t is calendar time. The parameter  t alters the variance of the permanent effect, which is
now  2t Var( ia ) . This formulation coincides with an interpretation of ia as a flow of human

capital services and  t as its time-varying price, consistent with the literature on changes in the
returns to skill. We force it to be the same for all ages although this could be relaxed. The
parameter  t likewise allows calendar time shifts in the variance of the transitory component,
which is now  2t Var(ia ).
The introduction of time-varying parameters introduces a problem of left-censoring
because those parameters cannot be identified prior to 1970 yet their evolution prior to that year

hence the two cannot be separately identified. In practice, we have found this sometimes to be
an important issue because estimates of  can be close to 1.
10

affects variances and covariances after 1970. To address this issue, we introduce an additional
parameter  which allows the transitory variances in 1970 to deviate from what they would be if
t  1 for t<1970, with   0 implying no deviation. The details are given in Appendix B.

For any set of values of the parameters, the model in (7)-(9) generates a set of predicted
variances and covariances in each year and for each age and lag length, and therefore a predicted
value for each of the 1,197 elements of our data covariance matrix. We estimate the parameters
by minimizing the sum of squared deviations between the observed elements and elements
predicted by the model, using an identity weighting matrix and computing robust standard errors.
The formal statement of the model and estimating procedure appears in Appendix B.6
The estimates of the model parameters are given in Appendix Table A-3. The transitory
component is significantly serially correlated both through the AR(1) and MA(1) component,
implying, as discussed before, that long autocovariances are needed to identify the model, and
the variances of the random walk and random growth errors in the permanent component are
both statistically significant; and the initial permanent and transitory components are indeed
negatively correlated. However, our main interest is in the estimates of  t and  t , which are
shown graphically in Figures 1 and 2 along with smoothed trend lines (both are normalized to 1
in 1970).7 Figure 1 shows that the permanent variance rose starting in the early 1970s, continued

We estimate the model in levels rather than differences. The individual effect i0 does
not cancel out in differences in our model because of the  t . In addition, the covariance matrix
of the differences of yiat is a function of the same covariance matrix we are fitting with our levels
model. Fitting in levels is more convenient for our purposes because we wish to decompose the
trend in the cross-sectional variance of yiat into permanent and transitory variances.
7
To avoid clutter in the figures, we do not show confidence interval bands. The point
estimates in both figures have standard errors that range from one-twentieth to one-tenth of those
estimates (see Table A-3), which means that the patterns of rising, falling, and stable variances
we find are all significant.
6

11

to rise through to the mid-1980s, leveled off or declined slightly from then through the mid1990s, and then started rising again in the mid-1990s. This pattern in within group permanent
variance is roughly consistent with rises in the return to education and other indicators of skill
differentials shown in the cross-sectional literature on inequality trends. This pattern reflects, as
has already been emphasized and as will be shown explicitly below, trends in the long
autocovariances in the data.8
Of more direct interest to our focus on the transitory variance of earnings is Figure 2,
which shows the estimated values of  t along with a trend line. The transitory variance rose
sharply starting in the early 1970s, and then continued to rise, albeit at a slower rate, until the
mid-1980s, after which time it has remained flat, although with major fluctuations (that is, it
remained flat on average, as shown by the smoothed line). As we will show momentarily,
recessions in the early 1980s, early 1990s, and early 2000s caused jumps in the transitory
variance which prevent us from being precise about the exact dates at which some of the trends
stopped rising or leveled off. Nevertheless, our general answer to the question we posed in the
introduction is: the transitory variance of male earnings started to increase in the early 1970s,
continued to rise through the mid-1980s, and then stabilized at a new higher level.
The evolution over time in the variance of the transitory component, whose formula is
shown in eqn(9), is not quite the same as that of  t since the latter feeds into the transitory
variance in future periods, and similarly for the permanent variance. Drawing the implications of
our estimated parameters for the variances of  t ia and iat requires applying the formulas in
Appendix B. Figure 3 shows the resulting pattern in permanent and transitory variances for those
8

We do not attempt to interpret the large increase in the permanent variance at the end of
the period, which is mostly a result of one observation, that in 2004 (the 2003 point is
interpolated). Given the volatility of this series, the estimate could easily drop in the next year.
We will examine this further as further waves of the PSID are released.
12

age 30-39 (the variances differ by age, but a similar time pattern obtains for other ages; plots for
the other ages are available upon request). Both the permanent and transitory variances follow
roughly the same pattern as  t and  t , as should be expected since these are the only calendartime varying parameters in their formulas. From 1970 to 1984, the rise in the transitory variance
accounted for 49 percent of the total rise in the cross-sectional variance, consistent with prior
work on the 1980s by Gottschalk and Moffitt (1994) and Moffitt and Gottschalk (1995).
However, from 1970 to 2004, it has accounted for only 31 percent of the total rise because of the
increase in the permanent variance that started in the mid-1990s. In fact, all of the rise in the total
variance over the last decade reflects an increase in the permanent variance. This points to a
resumption in the rise in prices skill that started in the late 1970s and continued through the mid1980s. This was followed by nearly a decade of little or no growth in the permanent variance.
However, as Figure 3 shows, the permanent variance resumed its upward trend in the mid-1990s
and continued through 2004.
Much of the fluctuation in the transitory variance is business-cycle related. Figure 4
shows the same transitory variance but plotted along with the national unemployment rate for
men 20 and over. The variance is clearly positively correlated with the unemployment rate, albeit
with something of a lag in the first half of the period. The recession of the early 1980s appears to
have been responsible for some of the transitory variance increase in the early 1980s, but the
variance never returned to its pre-1980s levels in the late 1980s, when the unemployment had
fallen. The transitory variance increase in the early 1990s appears to also have been partly
business-cycle related, its decrease from the early 1990s to 1997 appears to be related to the
decline in the unemployment rate (although, once again, it did not return to its former level), and
the increase in the variance in the early 2000s corresponds to the recession in that period. Thus

13

the fluctuations after approximately 1990 appear to be cyclically induced. However, the average
level of the transitory variance during the decade of the 1990s was above its average level in
the1980s, even the late 1980s. Thus our evidence also suggests, albeit with considerable
uncertainty as to the exact timing, that the transitory variance in the 1990s may have been
slightly higher than in the 1980s. Nevertheless, even if true, the size of the increase was much
less than the size of the increase from the 1970s to the 1980s.
An important question for the credibility of these results is whether they can be
demonstrated with simpler econometric methods which employ more flexible specifications of
the permanent and transitory components than assumed in our parametric model. We consider
two simpler methods to address this question.
Approximate Nonparametric Method. One approach is to follow the simple model
described in Section I by using the long autocovariances to estimate the variance of the
permanent effect and by then subtracting that value from the total variance to obtain an estimate
of the transitory variance. Figure 5 shows the variance of log annual earnings residuals in each
year for those 30-39, for illustration, along with the autocovariances between those residuals in
each year and those in years 6 and 10 years previous, which might be considered to be
sufficiently long that the transitory shocks are no longer correlated. The figure shows this not to
be the case for the lag-6 autocovariance, which is above that at lag 10, indicating that the
autocovariance is still falling between 6 and 10 years previous (the lag-10 autocovariance may,
of course, not be long enough either). Taking the difference between the upper line for the
variance and the line for the lag-10 autocovariance results in an estimate of the transitory
variance which is plotted in Figure 6 (it necessarily starts in 1980, since a 10-year lag is needed
to compute it). These estimates show an increase in the transitory variance in the early 1980s

14

followed by a reversal, and fluctuations but no clear trend over the entire period. This is quite
different than the pattern shown in the EC model.
However, this method has two flaws which imply that it should not be used, although we
will modify it to correct these flaws. The first is that the more realistic model of the ageevolution of the permanent effect shown in Eqn(4)-(6) with its random walk and random growth
specifications implies that the relevant long autocovariance is no longer equal to the variance of
the permanent component, as it was in the simple canonical model.9 The second is that the
method does not work well when  t is evolving over the period covered by the long
autocovariance, for in that case the autocovariance of yiat is

Cov(yiat , yi,a ,t  )   t  t Cov(ia , i,a  )

(10)

and therefore the long autocovariance will not equal  2t Cov(ia , i,a  ) because  t is changing
over time. For example, Cov(yiat , yi,a ,t  ) will rise at a faster rate than  t is rising if recent lagged
 t have also been rising. Specifically, the rise in  t in the 1970s and early 1980s shown in

Figure 1 will cause later Cov(yiat , yi,a ,t  ) to rise “too much,” leading to an excess decline in the
transitory variance because it is obtained as the residual from subtracting Cov(yiat , yi,a ,t  ) from
the total variance.10

9

See Appendix Eqns (B15) and (B16): the autocovariance in (B16) equals the permanent
variance in (B15) only if the random walk and random growth terms do not appear.
10
This problem was noted initially by Gottschalk and Moffitt (2006) and noted as well
by Shin and Solon (2010) and in a prior 2008 version of their paper. Shin and Solon criticize us
in their 2010 paper for using this method despite the fact that we have not used it since we
uncovered the problem in 2006.
15

Nevertheless, Eqn(10) forms a basis for a better method of applying the idea of using the
long autocovariances to obtain an estimate of the permanent variance, which we term the
approximate nonparametric (NP) method. Taking the logs of Eqn(10), we have

log[Cov(yiat , yi,a ,t  )]  log  t  log  t   log[Cov(iat , i,a  )]
log  t  log  t   f (a, )
an equation which should hold, again, if the lag order τ is high enough that the transitory errors
are no longer correlated. Eqn(11) can be estimated by OLS using year dummies to capture the
log  t and log  t  and if (say) a polynomial approximation in a and  is used to approximate
log[Cov(iat , i,a  )] nonparametrically. We denote that approximation as f(a, ). The variance of
the permanent component is then estimated by using the fitted equation (11), evaluated at  = 0.11
The influence of the lagged log  t  on the autocovariance is captured by the lagged year
dummies. This method is nonparametric because it imposes no parametric model on the
evolution of the permanent effect--random walk, random growth, or something else--with that
evolution approximated by an arbitrary function of age and lag length; and because it imposes no
parametric model on the evolution of the transitory component, except to assume that that
component is not correlated after a sufficient length of time. But it is only approximate because
the effects of past transitory shocks are never exactly zero because of the presence of the AR(1)
process.
Figure 7 shows the estimates of the transitory variance obtained in this way using a
second-order polynomial for a and  for the function f(a, ) and using all lags of order 10 and
11

The permanent variance in Appendix equation (B15) equals the autocovariance in
equation (B16) when at  =0.

16

(11)

over in the regression Eqn (11) (the predicted permanent variance from the fitted equation is then
subtracted from the total variance). The pattern in the Figure is much closer to that obtained from
the EC model, differing only in the period of the 1990s and after, when the variance indicated by
the smoothed line gradually falls instead of flattening out, as the smoothed line in Figure 2 does.
This latter difference is a result of the failure of the key assumption of negligible transitory
autocovariance. At lag 10, that autocovariance is small but it is still trending upward (see Figure
5). The transitory autocovariance is trending upward because the transitory variances themselves
are; and, because the transitory components are serially correlated, an increase in the variance of
the underlying transitory shock necessarily increases all transitory autocovariances as well (see
eqn (B19)). This spuriously pulls up the permanent variance when Eqn(11) is estimated, pushing
the transitory variance down. Nevertheless, this simple nonparametric method provides some
support for the error components model by showing that approximately the same results are
obtained without so much structure imposed on the autocovariance process.
Window Averaging Method. An even simpler method introduced by Gottschalk and
Moffitt (1994) and applied in some subsequent studies is to estimate the permanent and
transitory variances with standard random-effects formulas within moving calendar time
windows of fixed length, which we denote the window averaging (WA) method.12 To estimate
the transitory variance in year t, the 2w+1 residuals in the calendar time window [t-w, t+w] are
averaged for each individual i to obtain an estimate of the individual’s permanent component.
The difference between the residual for each individual in each year and the individual’s average
residual constitutes an estimate of the transitory component. Then the textbook formulas for the

12

In a prior version of this paper, and in some other work, this method has been referred
to as the “BPEA” method.
17

random effects model are used to compute the variances of the two components.13 Repeating
this process for each successive year t in the data—with a shift in the window each time--a trend
in the estimated transitory variance is generated.
If the window is limited to two periods, the variance of transitory earnings computed in
this way is closely related to the variance of the change in earnings ( yiat  yi,a 1,t 1 ) between the
periods. This can be seen by recognizing that when the window is limited to two periods, a
transitory component calculated as the deviation of earnings in period t from the average
earnings over periods t and t-1 is equal to one-half times the change in earnings between the
periods. In this case the variance of transitory earnings is equal to one-quarter of the variance of
the change in earnings. When the window is longer than two periods, this equivalence no longer
holds.
The WA method produces consistent estimates of the transitory variance under the
canonical model described in Section I because that model corresponds to the textbook random
effects model whose estimator we use. However in more general models the residuals used in the
computation are not quite the right ones if the permanent and transitory components follow the
more complex, serially-correlated process in our EC model. The method is also not well-suited to
detecting exact turning points in trends because it averages over years. Nevertheless, it is an
approximation which has the virtue of simplicity and transparency whose defects may not be
quantitatively important.

13

The exact formulas used for the permanent and transitory variance are given in
Gottschalk and Moffitt (1994). The above description is only approximate because a term
involving the deviations around individual means must be subtracted from the variance of the
means to obtain consistent estimates of the permanent variance. Note that the residuals from a
regression that controls for age are being averaged; if this were not done, normal life cycle
growth would be misinterpreted as negative transitory earnings in the early period of the window
and positive transitory earnings in the later period.
18

Figure 8 shows the WA estimates using a nine-year window. Thus the earliest date is
1974 and the latest is 2000 because of the requirement of four years of data on either side of the
year in question. The results are quite similar to those from the EC model shown in Figure 4 and
the NP model shown in Figure 7, rising from the 1970s to the 1980s and leveling off around
1990, a bit later than in the other methods but not drastically so. The variance turns up at the end,
for the year 2000 window, but Figure 4 and Figure 7 show that this upturn is followed by a
downturn in the years which follow. Because of the averaging that is part of this method, the
series is much smoother than that of the other methods.
Sensitivity Tests. We conduct sensitivity tests to several of the more important data
construction decisions we have made in this study. All sensitivity tests are conducted using the
simplest method, the WA method, and all results are shown graphically in Appendix C. We
examine the effect on the results from (1) using residuals that do not take out age and education
effects, (2) restricting the sample to those who worked 48 or more weeks per year, (3) trimming
the data to lesser or greater degrees than in our base case, and (4) including nonworkers.
The residuals from our first-stage log earnings regression necessarily have a lower
variance than if age and education effects were not taken out, and would probably be expected to
result in lower permanent and transitory variances in terms of levels. However, the difference in
the trend could be either positive or negative, for that depends on trends in the variance of age
and education and trends in the transitory variance of the age and education coefficients, which
fluctuate from year to year. Figure C-1 shows estimates from the WA method of transitory
variances using residuals which only take out year effects (which must be removed to avoid
macro effects generating transitory fluctuations) and not age and education. The pattern is
virtually identical to that shown in Figure 8.

19

It is of interest to know whether the increased transitory variance has been a result of
increased transitory variance of wage rates or labor supply. A full investigation of this issue is
beyond the scope of this paper, but a simple method often used to isolate something close to a
wage rate is to select workers who work full year. Figure C-2 shows the pattern of transitory
variances based on a sample of men who worked at least 48 weeks in the year. The same pattern
of sharply increased variances from the 1970s to the 1980s as in Figure 8 is exhibited, although
the uptick in the late 1990s and early 2000s in that Figure does not appear, suggesting that the
variance of weeks worked may have increased in that period. However, as we noted previously,
our EC and NP methods imply that variances turned down subsequent to 2000, and it could
easily be that the early-2000s recession generated a short-term increase in the variance of weeks
worked. Further investigation of the issue is warranted.
Our main results are based on data in which the top and bottom one percent of earnings
residuals within age-education-year cells are deleted, both to eliminate top-coded observations
and to eliminate earnings observations with low and high values in general, which can have a
disproportionate effect on logarithmic transformations. Figure C-3 (a) shows estimates when no
trimming is done. Variances are much higher in this case (compare its vertical axis with that of
Figure 8) but the same upward trend through the early 1990s is present, though the jump in the
variance in the early 1990s is much larger, which may be a result of changes in PSID procedures
in that period which we discuss further below. The transitory variance does turn down at the end,
but this may also be traceable to the high rates of variances in the early 1990s. Figure C-3(b)
shows trends when 5 percent of each tail is trimmed and shows that the upward trend from the
1970s to 1980s continues to be robust to this additional trimming. However, there is a stronger

20

increase in the late 1990s and early 2000s in this case, which must mean that the 95th to 99th
percentiles or the 1st to 5th percentiles moderated the increase in the variance.
To include nonworkers, we must modify our method because log earnings cannot be
used. We include nonworkers by changing from calculations of variances to calculations of
percentile points, using percentile points of the non-logarithmic earnings distribution. To
accomplish this, we select the log earnings residuals we have used thus far for each individual in
each year and calculate the anti-logarithm of each.14 Following the WA method, we then
compute the average of these transformed residuals for each individual in a 9-year window over
working years only and, finally, we compute, for each year, an individual’s ratio of his
transformed residual in that year to his mean. This ratio signifies the fraction by which (nonlogged) earnings in the year is in excess of, or below, his mean over all years, and thus measures
a relative transitory component. In years in which an individual is a nonworker, this fraction is
zero by definition. We then compute the percentile points of the distribution of these fractions in
each year.
Figure C-4(a) shows percentile point trends excluding nonworkers to determine if this
method yields the same result as our variance calculations above. All four percentile points in the
figure show a marked spreading-out of the distribution from the 1970s to the 1980s. Thus the
increase in variance we have found previously is not a result of a change in only one part of the
distribution, but is rather widely spread across the entire distribution. The percentile points are
stable through the late 1990s but, again consistent with the variance calculations, a slight
spreading out of the distribution occurs at both high and low percentile points starting in the late

14

We also tested using unlogged earnings as the dependent variable in the first-stage
regression, but this provided a very poor fit to the data, as earnings tend to grow in proportionate
terms and to differ across age and education groups proportionately.
21

1990s. Figure C-4(b) shows the trends including nonworkers (between 10 percent and 14 percent
of these prime-age men were nonworkers, depending on the year). The upper three percentile
point patterns are virtually the same as in Figure C-4(a) but the 10th percentile point pattern
shows a sharper rate of increased dispersion from the 1970s to the 1980s but then a narrowing in
the 1990s, ending up in 2000 only slightly below its initial 1974 value. The inclusion of
nonworkers, it should be noted, should increase cross-sectional dispersion but has no necessary
implication for trends in the transitory variance, which will depend on the degree to which
nonworking status has become more persistent rather than more unstable. If the rate of nonwork
increases but becomes more persistent, this will not increase the transitory variance. The pattern
in the figure suggests that nonworking did, in fact, become more persistent in the 1990s for the
lower tail of the distribution, leading to a decline in transitory dispersion in those years.

IV. Differences Across Studies
There have been several other studies in the literature which separate permanent from
transitory components and have estimated whether the male earnings variance of the transitory
component has increased with calendar time in the US (Gottschalk and Moffitt, 1994; Moffitt
and Gottschalk, 1995; Haider, 2001; Stevens, 2001; Hyslop, 2001; Moffitt and Gottschalk, 2002;
Moffitt and Gottschalk, 2006; Keys, 2008; Jensen and Shore, 2010). These studies all find
increases in the transitory variance over time, particularly from the 1970s to mid-1980s. Those
later studies which examined the period after the mid-1980s report different results, some finding
no trend in the 1990s while others finding some decrease and others finding an increase. Moffitt
and Gottschalk (2002), for example, find a decrease from the early 1990s to 1996, but our
current results show that decrease to be temporary and probably a result of cyclical factors. Also,

22

Moffitt and Gottschalk (2006) found a larger increase in the 1990s than we find in this study (as
noted above, we find a small increase in that period), but this is a result of improvements in the
model specification.15 Overall, however, this literature reinforces the view that transitory
variance increases were greater in the 1970s and 1980s than anything in the 1990s.
Another strand in the literature does not attempt to separate permanent from transitory
variances but instead focuses on trends in the variance of one-year or two-year changes in male
annual earnings, often termed ‘volatility’. While most of these studies find, like us for transitory
variances, increases in volatility in the 1970s and early 1980s (Dynarski and Gruber, 2007;
Cameron and Tracy, 1998; Dynan et al., 2008; Shin and Solon, 2010), the two studies which had
data through the late 1990s and early 2000s showed an additional significant increase in that
period (Dynan et al., 2008; Shin and Solon, 2010), which we do not find despite using the same
data; and one study found no increase at all in earlier periods, in contrast to our findings (U.S.
Congressional Budget Office, 2007; Dahl et al., 2010).16 These differences must be traced either
to differences in the measures—transitory variances versus volatility—or to differences in data.
Regarding differences in the measures, the most obvious difference is that the volatility
measure includes changes in the instability of permanent earnings as well as transitory earnings.
The authors of these studies argue that there is considerable interest among policy-makers and
others in volatility per se regardless of the permanent-transitory decomposition of such changes.

15

Specifically, the addition of the random growth term in the permanent variance lowers
the growth rate of the transitory variance in the 1990s. This is because the random growth term
accounts for part of the rise in the long autocovariance, and that is therefore attributed more now
to the permanent variance, leaving less for the transitory variance. We should emphasize,
however, that Moffitt and Gottschalk (2006) still found the increase in the 1970s and 1980s to be
greater.
16
In addition, Shin and Solon (2010) find a slight decline in the 1990s rather than a
flattening out or slight increase, as we find. This is a less important difference, but we remark on
it below.
23

We do not disagree with that view but believe that the classically-defined decomposition into
these two components is of additional interest for the reasons noted in the Introduction. The
inclusion of permanent earnings in the volatility measure explains one of the two differences in
findings we noted above, namely, why Dynan et al. (2008) and Shin and Solon (2010) find
significant increases in volatility in the late 1990s and early 2000s whereas our EC model finds
no increase in the transitory variance in that period (aside from cycle). Since we find that there
was a marked increase in the permanent variance in that period, as shown in Figure 1, a measure
which aggregates increasing permanent variances and stable transitory variances should show an
increase. Our data, indeed, show such an aggregate increase in the variance of two-year changes
in log residual earnings in the last years of the data (see Appendix Figure C-5; this result also
holds for log earnings itself rather than residuals).17
As for differences with these two studies in treatment of the PSID data, while there are
differences in age ranges, variable definitions, and related decisions that we would expect to
have only minor effects, two differences could be important.18 One is that both studies included
nonworkers in some of their volatility measures whereas we exclude nonworkers from our main
transitory variance calculations. However, as we noted above in our discussion of sensitivity
tests, including nonworkers does not change our results (Shin and Solon (2010) also calculated
their estimates with and without nonworkers and found little difference). The other difference is
that, as Dynan et al. (2008) emphasize, the introduction of Computer Assisted Telephone
17

This also explains the difference in trends in the 1990s between our study and that of
Shin and Solon (2010), who find a decline in volatility over that period instead of a flattening
out, for we find that the permanent variance declined in that period (see Figures 1 and 3 above).
18
We have investigated changing our age ranges by up to 10 years at the bottom and top
ends, and find no change in results. We should note that Shin-Solon exclude imputed values,
whereas we do not. While we have not investigated this issue in this paper, an earlier
investigation of ours found no difference in results whether imputations were included or
excluded (Moffitt and Gottschalk, 1995).
24

Interviewing in the PSID in 1992 and a shift to new data processing software in 1993 may also
have led to a spurious one time shift in measures of instability. Dynan et al. (2008) find an
unusually large increase in the number of individuals who change from positive earnings to zero
earnings from 1991 to 1992, even though hours worked were reported in the latter year; they find
that excluding those with zero earnings but positive hours leads to a reduction in estimated
volatility over those years. More generally, they find an increase in the number of low earners in
this period relative to previous years of the PSID. Once again, however, our results do not appear
to be sensitive to this issue as far as we can determine, even though complete certainty about the
effect of this change is not known. For example, we include in our sample only men with both
positive earnings and positive weeks worked in our sample, thereby accomplishing the restriction
imposed by Dynan et al. In addition, as we already noted, the inclusion of nonworkers does not
affect our results when we use percentile point measures of transitory dispersion. Finally, as our
discussion of sensitivity to trimming above indicated, our one-percent trim at both tails does
indeed remove the major jump in transitory variance in the 1991-1993 period, and further
trimming does not have much effect on reducing the size of the modest jump that remains.
As for the difference in findings with the U.S. Congressional Budget Office (2007)
(CBO) and Dahl et al. (2010), who find no upward trend (if not a downward one) in volatility,
we should immediately note that the latter study restricted its analysis to years 1985 and after on
the grounds that the Social Security earnings data prior to those years—which were used in the
earlier CBO report—had been discovered suspect and were no longer sufficiently trustworthy to
use. However, our results and theirs for the years 1985 and after differ very little, for both Dahl

25

et al. (2010) and we find no long-term trend in volatility or transitory variance after that year.
Our results show that the major upward trend was completed by the mid-1980s.19
Of course, there is a major difference in the data used, for these studies use administrative
earnings reports from the Social Security Administration whereas we use household survey data,
which may contain response error. However, the two data sets also differ in their sample
populations—the Social Security data contain non-heads and the PSID data only cover heads,
and neither data set can replicate the other’s sample—and the Social Security data have
somewhat different coverage than the PSID. Further, earnings recorded on Social Security
records have some errors, and there are some items likely to be reported in a survey that are
excluded from the relevant line on W-2 forms (Abowd and Stinson, 2010). Further, the simple
presumption that the Social Security data contain less response error is not consistent with the
finding in several studies that those data show greater cross-sectional dispersion than do survey
data, not less (Abowd and Stinson, 2010; Gottschalk and Huynh, 2010), suggesting that there
may be other differences in either the populations or the earnings measures than simple reporting
error. The reasons for differences in the data sets certainly deserve further investigation.

19

It is also surprising that the CBO report found no increase in the early 1980s despite the
recession in those years, which all the PSID studies show temporarily increased instability. A
possible reason for the lack of an increase in volatility even in that period, if the data are
considered reliable, is that the variance of a change in earnings is not the simple sum of the
variance of permanent and transitory earnings but is, rather, equal to that sum minus the
covariance in earnings between the two periods. However, the two-year covariance trended
upward over the 1970s and early 1980s (a figure showing this is available upon request), thus
pulling down such a volatility measure relative to that for the transitory variance. This could
also explain a decline in volatility but a stable trend in transitory variance (although a declining
permanent variance can also explain that). Our EC model, by subtracting off long-term
covariances instead of short-term ones, avoids this issue. We should also note that the CBO
tested a variant of the WA method in their Appendix, however, and still did not find an increase
in their measure in the early 1980s.
26

V. Summary
We have provided new estimates of the trend in the transitory variance of male earnings
in the U.S. using the Michigan Panel Study of Income Dynamics through 2004. Our study uses
the classical definition of a transitory component that fades out over time and eventually
disappears altogether, as distinct from a permanent component that never goes away. Using both
an explicit error components model as well as two simpler but more approximate methods, we
find that the transitory variance increased substantially in the 1970s and early 1980s and then
remained at this new higher level through 2004. We also find a strong cyclical component to the
transitory variance which induced major jumps in the variance during the recessions of the early
1980s, early 1990s, and early 2000s. Our conclusion that the transitory variance was stable, net
of cycle, after the mid-1980s results from our interpretation that the changes in the transitory
variance were cyclical and that there was no trend after that time, although it is possible that that
transitory variance was slightly higher than it was previously. The trend increase in the transitory
variance accounts for about half of the increase in cross-sectional inequality through the late
1980s but only for about a third through 2004 because the permanent variance has been rising
markedly since the mid-1990s. Since other research has shown that a significant proportion of
transitory shocks can be smoothed, these findings imply that the welfare implications of the rise
in cross-sectional inequality experienced in the U.S. are less serious than they might otherwise
have been thought to be. Put differently, the rise in cross-sectional inequality corresponds to a
smaller increase in lifetime inequality.
These results are robust both to the methodology used and to data construction decisions
related to outliers and trimming, inclusion of non-workers, and related issues. We have also
reconciled our results with most other studies, although there is some uncertainty whether

27

findings from the PSID give the same results as those from administrative data drawn from
Social Security earnings files which deserves further research.
In addition to further research on methods and data, it would be interesting to conduct
more subgroup analysis to determine how these transitory variance trends vary by age,
education, race, and other dimensions. The sample sizes in the PSID limit the amount of
disaggregation that is possible, however, and other data sets might have to be brought to bear to
fully conduct such an investigation.

28

Appendix Table A-1
Descriptive Statistics
Mean

Stnd Dev

Min

Max

$43,514

$26,516

$615

$525,015

Log annual real earnings

10.51

0.617

6.421

13.171

Log annual real earnings residual

0.018a

0.547

-3.85

2.503

Age

42.8

8.4

30

59

Year

1985.7

9.6

1970

2004

Annual real earnings

Notes:
Means taken over all person-year observations (NT=30,424).
Means taken after 1-percent trimming within age-education-year cells for paired observations.
a
Multiplied by 10,000; residual mean is close to zero.

Appendix Table A-2
Specimen Elements of the Covariance Matrix: Year 1974
Year

Age

Lag Year

Lag Age

Covariance

1974

35

1970

31

.0783

1974

35

1971

32

.0941

1974

35

1972

33

.1150

1974

35

1973

34

.1211

1974

35

1974

35

.1861

1974

45

1970

41

.1117

1974

45

1971

42

.1225

1974

45

1972

43

.1283

1974

45

1973

44

.1420

1974

45

1974

45

.1945

1974

55

1970

51

.0993

1974

55

1971

52

.1075

1974

55

1972

53

.1094

1974

55

1973

54

.1196

1974
Notes:

55

1974

55

.1762

Ages in the table denote midpoints of a ten-year group (35=30-39, 34=29-38, etc)
Covariance element values are after 1-percent trimming
A set of covariance elements of this type exist for each year, 1970-2004, for all three age groups
in each, and for lags back to 1970 or age 25 (=20-29), whichever comes first.

Appendix Table A-3
Estimates of the Error Components Model
Estimate

Standard Error

Alpha
1971

0.9320

0.0471

1972

0.9942

0.05158

1973

1.0376

0.0590

1974

1.0182

0.0658

1975

1.0565

0.0748

1976

1.2024

0.0896

1977

1.1055

0.0819

1978

1.0285

0.0752

1979

1.0900

0.0905

1980

1.1055

0.0892

1981

1.1730

0.0928

1982

1.2930

0.1030

1983

1.2764

0.1040

1984

1.2518

0.1006

1985

1.3603

0.1097

1986

1.3314

0.1077

1987

1.2546

0.1024

1988

1.3781

0.1141

1989

1.2614

0.0998

1990

1.2339

0.1010

Table A-3 (continued)
Estimate

Standard Error

1991

1.1910

0.1023

1992

1.1843

0.1019

1993

1.2284

0.1036

1994

1.2594

0.1082

1995

1.3126

0.1127

1996

1.2041

0.1094

1998

1.2750

0.1205

2000

1.3377

0.1327

2002

1.3812

0.1465

2004

1.6133

0.1715

Beta
1971

1.0461

0.1328

1972

0.7143

0.0880

1973

0.6804

0.0974

1974

0.8274

0.1165

1975

0.8659

0.1234

1976

0.9554

0.1424

1977

0.9737

0.1340

1978

1.0116

0.1414

1979

0.9817

0.1394

1980

0.7937

0.1131

1981

1.0708

0.1578

1982

1.1747

0.1709

Table A-3 (continued)
Estimate

Standard Error

1983

1.2086

0.1736

1984

1.1462

0.1594

1985

1.3068

0.1789

1986

1.2053

0.1675

1987

1.0044

0.1370

1988

1.0982

0.1560

1989

1.2699

0.1692

1990

1.0718

0.1439

1991

1.4059

0.1963

1992

1.3934

0.1860

1993

1.2409

0.1676

1994

1.3267

0.1778

1995

1.2486

0.1770

1996

1.1748

0.1592

1998

1.1053

0.1552

2000

1.2802

0.1847

2002

1.3354

0.1942

2004

1.1726

0.1807

2 0

0.0901

0.0186

2 * 100

0.2669

0.1430

2 * 10000

0.3830

0.2663

 * 10000

-1.9033

0.6828

Table A-3 (continued)
Estimate

Standard Error



0.8468

0.0510



-0.5740

0.0495

0

0.0625

0.0216

1 * 100

0.1985

0.0859

-0.0330

0.0348


Notes:
R-squared = .105
Chi-squared = 5.27

Appendix B
Model and Estimating Procedure

The model, restated, is
yiat   t ia   iat

(B1)

ia  i,a 1  i  ia

(B2)

ia  i,a 1,t 1   t ia  (t 1i,a 1 )

(B3)

with the following normalizations, variance assumptions, and initial conditions:
 70  1, 70  1

(B4)

Var(i0 )  2

(B5)

Var(i )  2

(B6)

Var(ia )  2

(B7)

Cov(i0 , i )  

(B8)

Var(ia )  2a  0  1a a

(B9)

and with a=1 defined as age 20. For the left-censored (1970) observations, define a70 as the
individual’s age in 1970. Those with a70>1 are left-censored. We define the variance of the
transitory component in 1970 for these left-censored observations in the following way (the
variance of the permanent component does not require knowledge of  t prior to 1970):
 i,a 70 ,70   i,a 69 ,69   70  i,a 70   69  i,a 69
1
Var(i,a 69 ,69  69i,a 69 )  [1   (a 70  1)]Var(
ia 70 ,70 )  g(a 70 )

1

(B10)
(B11)

Var(

1
ia 70 ,70

)

a 70  2


s0

2s

(  ) 2 Var(i,a 70 s 1 )

(B12)

Eqn(B10) is the ARMA(1,1) expression for the 1970 transitory component. Only the first and
third terms are prior to 1970 and hence only they must be approximated. Eqn(B12) gives the
formula for the variance of the transitory component for someone who is age a70 in 1970 and
whose transitory component has followed its age evolution from age a=1 to that age with βt=1 in
all those years. Eqn(B11) allows that age profile of transitory variances to be modified by the
parameter , and it is assume that the deviation is a function of age--the lower the age, the fewer
years prior to 1970 have occurred, and hence the smaller the expected deviation. We denote the
expression in (B11) as g(a70) for use in the formulas below.
An alternative treatment of the left-censored observations would simply allow the 1970
age-profile of transitory variances to be some unknown function of g(a70) whose parameters
would be estimated. However, this approach would result in a misspecification in the present
case because it would make all succeeding transitory variances a function of calendar time (we
do not demonstrate this for brevity). As a result, even in a model with t=βt=1, the model would
predict calendar time evolution of the variances and covariances. Thus true calendar time shifts
after 1970 would be confounded with distance from the left-censoring point, generating incorrect
estimates of tand βt (see MaCurdy, 2007, pp.4094-4098 for a related discussion).
2
. They
The unknown parameters in the model are  t , t , , , 0 , 1 , , 2 0 , 2 , 2 , and 

generate the following variances and covariances for all years, ages, and lag lengths.

2

Total Variances and Covariances
Var(y iat )   2t Var( ia )  Var( iat )

Cov(y iat , y i,a  ,t   )   t  t  Cov( ia ,  i,a  )  Cov(  iat ,  i,a   ,t  )

(B13)
(B14)

Permanent Variances and Covariances

Var(iat )  2 0  a 2 2  a2  2a
2
Cov(ia , i,a  )  2 0  a(a  )2  (a  )2  [a  (a  )]

(B15)
(B16)

Transitory Variances and Covariances
If a701 (non-left-censored):
a  1: Var(iat )  2t 2

(B17)

a 2

a  2: Var( iat )   2s (  ) 2 2t s 12,a s 1  2t 2a

(B18)

a  2,  1: Cov( iat , i,a ,t  )   Var( i,a ,t  )  12t  2,a 

(B19)

s 0

If a70>1 (left-censored):
2
t  70: Var(ia 70 ,70 )  g(a 70 )  70
2a 70

(B20)

t  71

t  71: Var(iat )  2(t 70) g(a 70 )   2s (  ) 2 2t s 12,a s 1  2t 2a

(B21)

s 0

t  71,  1: Cov(iat ,  i,a ,t  )   Var(i,a ,t  )  12t  2,a 

(B22)

We estimate the model with minimum distance. Let s im  y ij y ik , where yij and yik are the
log earnings residuals for individual i for age-year "locations" j and k, and where m=1,...,M
indexes the moments generated by the product of residuals at all locations j and k. In our case,
M=1,197. Write the model in generalized form as
sim  f (, j, k)  im
3

i  1,..., N, m  1,..., M

(B23)

where  is a Lx1 vector of parameters. Then the set of M equations in (B23) constitutes an SUR
system whose efficient estimation requires an initial consistent estimate of the covariance matrix
of the im. However, following the findings and recommendations of Altonji and Segal (1996) on
bias in estimating covariance structures of this type, we employ the identity matrix for the
estimation. Hence we choose  to minimize the sum of squared residuals:
N

M

min  [sim  f (, j, k)]2


(B24)

i 1 m 1

or, equivalently, since f is not a function of i,
M

min  [sim  f (, j, k)]2


(B25)

m 1

where sim is the mean (over i) of sim (i.e., a covariance).
To obtain standard errors, we apply the extension of Eicker-White methods in the manner
suggested by Chamberlain (1984), using the residuals from (B24), each of which we denote eim.
Let  be the MxM covariance matrix of the eim, each element of which is estimated by:20
ˆ mm ' 

1 N
 eim eim '
N i 1

(B26)

Define  as the NMxNM covariance matrix of individual residuals which is a block diagonal
matrix with the matrix  on the diagonals. Then
Cov(ˆ )  (GG) 1 G '  G(GG) 1

where G is the NMxL matrix of gradients

(B27)

f (, j, k)
.


Each individual in our data set contributes to only a subset of the moments in ; we do
not adjust the notation in (B26) for this.
20

4

References

Abowd, J. and D. Card. 1989. "On the Covariance Structure of Earnings and Hours Changes."
Econometrica 57 (March): 411-445.
Abowd, J. and M. Stinson. 2010. “Estimating Measurement Error in SIPP Annual Job Earnings:
A Comparison of Census Survey and SSA Administrative Data.” Cornell University and U.S.
Census Bureau.
Altonji, J. and L. Segal. 1996. "Small Sample Bias in GMM Estimation of Covariance
Structures.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 14 (July): 353-366.
Atkinson, A. and F. Bourguignon. 1982. “The Comparison of Multidimensional Distributions of
Economic Status.” Review of Economic Studies 49:183-201.
Attanasio, O. and G. Weber. 2010. “Consumption and Saving: Models of Intertemporal
Allocation and Their Implications for Public Policy.” Journal of Economic Literature 48
(September): 693-751.
Baker, M.. 1997. “Growth-Rate Heterogeneity and the Covariance Structure of Life-Cycle
Earnings.” Journal of Labor Economics 15 (April): 338-75.
Baker, M. and G. Solon. 2003. “Earnings Dynamics and Inequality Among Canadian Men,
1967-1992: Evidence from Longitudinal Income Tax Records.” Journal of Labor Economics 21
(April): 289-322.
Beach, C.; R. Finnie; and D. Gray. 2003. “Earnings Variability and Earnings Instability of
Women and Men in Canada: How Do the 1990s Compare to the 1980s?” Canadian Public
Policy 29 Supplement: S41-S63.
Beach, C.; R. Finnie; and D. Gray. 2010. “Long-Run Inequality and Short-Run Instability of
Men’s and Women’s Earnings in Canada.” Review of Income and Wealth 56 (September): 572596.
Blundell, Richard; Luigi Pistaferri; and Ian Preston. 2008. “Consumption Inequality and Partial
Insurance.” American Economic Review 98 (December): 1887-1921.
Cameron, S. and J . Tracy. 1998. “Earnings Variability in the United States: An Examination
Using Matched-CPS Data.” Columbia University and Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Carroll, C. 1992. “The Buffer-Stock Theory of Saving: Some Macroeconomic Evidence.”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2: 61-135.
Chamberlain, G. 1984. "Panel Data." In Handbook of Econometrics, eds. Z. Griliches and M.
Intriligator. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
5

Cowell, F. 2000. “Measurement of Inequality.” In Handbook of Income Distribution, eds. A.
Atkinson and F. Bourguignon. Amsterdam and New York: Elsevier North Holland.
Dahl, M.; T. DeLeire; and J. Schwabish. 2010. “Estimates of Year-to-Year Variability in Worker
Earnings and in Household Incomes from Administrative, Survey, and Matched Data.”
Washington: Congressional Budget Office.
Dickens, R. 2000. “The Evolution of Individual Male Earnings in Great Britain: 1975-95.”
Economic Journal 110 (January): 27-49.
Dynan, K.; D. Elmendorf; and D. Sichel. 2008. “The Evolution of Household Income Volatility.”
Washington: Brookings Institution.
Dynarski, S. and J. Gruber. 1997. “Can Families Smooth Variable Earnings?” Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity 1: 229-303.
Fitzgerald, J.; P. Gottschalk; and R. Moffitt. 1998. “An Analysis of Sample Attrition in Panel
Data: The Michigan Panel Study of Income Dynamics.” Journal of Human Resources 33
(Spring): 251-299.
Friedman, M. 1957. A Theory of the Consumption Function. Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
Geweke, J. and M. Keane. 2000. “An Empirical Analysis of Earnings Dynamics Among Men in
the PSID: 1968-1989.” Journal of Econometrics 96 (June): 293-356.
Gottschalk, P. and M. Huynh. 2010. “Are Earnings Inequality and Mobility Overstated? The
Impact of Non-classical Measurement Error.” Review of Economics and Statistics 92 (May):
302-315.
Gottschalk, P. and R. Moffitt, 1994. “The Growth of Earnings Instability in the U.S. Labor
Market.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2: 217-272.
Gottschalk, P. and R. Moffitt. 2006. “Trends in Earnings Volatility in the US: 1970-2002.”
Paper presented at the Meetings of the American Economic Association, January 2007.
Gottschalk, P. and E. Spolare. 2002. “On the Evaluation of Economic Mobility.” Review of
Economic Studies 69: 191-208.
Guvenen, F. 2009. “An Empirical Investigation of Labor Income Processes.” Review of
Economic Dynamics 12 (January): 58-79.
Haider, S. 2001. “Earnings Instability and Earnings Inequality of Males in the United States,
1967-1991.” Journal of Labor Economics 19 (October): 799-836.

6

Hause, J. 1977. "The Covariance Structure of Earnings and the On-the-Job Training Hypothesis."
Annals of Economic and Social Measurement 6: 335-365.
Hause, J. 1980. "The Fine Structure of Earnings and the On-the-Job Training Hypothesis."
Econometrica 48 (1980): 1013-1029.
Hyslop, D. 2001. “Rising U.S. Earnings Inequality and Family Labor Supply: The Covariance
Structure of Intrafamily Earnings.” American Economic Review 91 (September): 755-777.
Jensen, S. and S. Shore. 2010. “Changes in the Distribution of Income Volatility.” Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University.
Katz, L. and D. Autor. 1999. “Changes in the Wage Structure and Earnings Inequality.” In
Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 3A, eds. O. Ashenfelter and D. Card. Amsterdam and New
York: Elsevier North-Holland.
Keys, B. 2008. “Trends in Income and Consumption Volatility, 1970-2000.” In Income
Volatility and Food Assistance in the United States, eds. D. Jolliffe and J. Ziliak. Kalamazoo,
Michigan: W.E.Upjohn.
Lillard, L. and Y. Weiss. 1979. "Components of Variation in Panel Earnings Data: American
Scientists, 1960-1970." Econometrica 47 (March): 437-454.
Lillard, L. and R. Willis. 1978. "Dynamic Aspects of Earnings Mobility." Econometrica 46
(1978): 985-1012.
MaCurdy, T. 1982. "The Use of Time Series Processes to Model the Error Structure of Earnings
in a Longitudinal Data Analysis." Journal of Econometrics 18 (1982): 83-114.
MaCurdy, T. 2007. “A Practitioner’s Approach to Estimating Intertemporal Relationships Using
Longitudinal Data: Lessons from Applications in Wage Dynamics.” In Handbook of
Econometrics, Vol.6A, eds. J. Heckman and E. Leamer. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Meghir, C. and L. Pistaferri. 2004. “Income Variance Dynamics and Heterogeneity.”
Econometrica 72 (January): 1-32.
Moffitt, R. and P. Gottschalk. 1995. “Trends in the Covariance Structure of Earnings in the U.S.:
1969-1987.” Mimeographed. Available at http://www.econ.jhu.edu/people/moffitt/.
Moffitt, R. and P. Gottschalk. 2002. “Trends in the Transitory Variance of Earnings in the United
States.” Economic Journal 112 (March): C68-C73.
Ostrovsky, Y. 2010. “Long-Run Earnings Inequality and Earnings Instability Among Canadian
Men Revisited, 1985-2005.” The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy 10(1), Article
20: 1-32.

7

Pischke, S. 1995. ”Measurement Error and Earnings Dynamics: Some Evidence from the PSID
Validation Study.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 13(3): 305-14.
Sen, A. 2000. “Social Justice and the Distribution of Income.” In Handbook of Income
Distribution, eds. A. Atkinson and F. Bourguignon. Amsterdam and New York: Elsevier North
Holland.
Shin, D. and G. Solon. 2010. “Trends in Men’s Earnings Volatility: What Does the Panel Study
of Income Dynamics Show?” East Lansing, Michigan: Michigan State University.
Shorrocks, A. 1978. “The Measurement of Mobility.” Econometrica 46:1013-1024.
Stevens, A. 2001. “Changes in Earnings Instability and Job Loss.” Industrial and Labor
Relations Review 55 (October): 60-78.
U.S. Congressional Budget Office. 2007. Trends in Earnings Variability Over the Past 20 Years.
Washington DC: U.S. Congress.

8

Figure 1: Error Components (EC) Model Estimates of Alpha
1.8

1.6

1.4

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

Year
In this and subsequent figures, the four PSID non-interview years are interpolated from the two adjacent points. The trend line is fit from
a fifth-order polynomial.

Figure 2: Error Components (EC) Model Estimates of Beta
1.6

1.4

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

Year

Figure 3: Fitted Permanent, Transitory, and Total Variances of Log Earnings Residuals,
Age 30-39 (EC Model)
0.4

0.35

0.3

0.25

Total

0.2

Transitory

0.15

Permanent
0.1

0.05

0

Year

Figure 4: FittedTransitory Variance of Log Earnings Residuals for Age 30-39
(EC Model) and Unemployment Rate
0.25

0.1
0.09

Unemployment Rate
0.2

0.08
0.07

0.15

0.06
0.05

0.1

0.04

Transitory
Variance

0 03
0.03
0.05

0.02
0.01

0

0

Year

Male Unemployment Rate Age 20 and over

Figure 5: Variances and Autocovariances, Age 30-39
0.45

0.4

0.35

0.3

Variance

0.25

0.2

0 15
0.15

Autocovariance,
Lag 6

0.1

0.05

0

Autocovariance,
Lag 10

Figure 6: Implied Transitory Variance of Log Earnings Residuals Using 10-Lag
Autocovariance, Age 30-39
0.35

0.3

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05
0 05

0

Figure 7: Approximate Nonparametric (NP) Estimate of Transitory Variance of Log Earnings
Residuals
0.3

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0

Averaged over all ages.

Year

Figure 8. Window Averaging (WA) Estimate of Transitory Variance, 9-Year Window
0.14

0.13

0.12

0.11

01
0.1

0.09

0.08

0.07

0.06

0.05

0.04

Year

Figure C-1: Window Averaging (WA) Estimate of Transitory Variance of Log Earnings
Residuals, 9Year Window, Year Residuals Only
0.160

0.140

0.120

0.100

0 080
0.080

0.060

0.040

Figure C-2: Window Averaging (WA) Estimate of Transitory Variance of Log Residual
Earnings, 9-Year Window, 48+ Weeks Worked
0.120

0.110

0.100

0.090
0.080

0.070

0.060

0.050

0.040

0.030
0.020

Figure C-3(a): WA Estimate of Transitory Variance, No Trimming
0.390
0.340
0.290
0.240
0.190
0.140
0.090
0.040
Year

Figure C-3(b): WA Estimate of Transitory Variance, 5% Trimming
0.080
0 070
0.070
0.060
0.050
0.040
0.030
0.020
Year

Figure C‐4(a). Percentile Points of the Relative Transitory Component
Distribution, excluding Nonworkers
1.5

90th Percentile

1.4
1.3

75th Percentile

1.2
1.1

25th Percentile

1
0.9

10th Percentile
0.8
0.7
0.6

Year

Figure C‐4(b). Percentile Points of the Relative Transitory Component
Distribution, including Nonworkers
1.6

90th Percentile
1.4
1.2
1

75th Percentile
25th Percentile

0.8

10th Percentile
0.6
0.4

Year

0.3

Figure C‐5: Variance of Two‐Year Difference in Log Residual Male
Annual Earnings

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0

Year

