                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          SCHOOL INPUTS, HOUSEHOLD SUBSTITUTION, AND TEST SCORES

                                            Jishnu Das
                                          Stefan Dercon
                                        James Habyarimana
                                         Pramila Krishnan
                                       Karthik Muralidharan
                                      Venkatesh Sundararaman

                                        Working Paper 16830
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16830


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2011


We thank Julie Cullen, Gordon Dahl, Roger Gordon, Gordon Hanson, Hanan Jacoby and several seminar
participants for comments. The World Bank and the UK Department for International Development
(DFID) provided financial support for both the Zambia and India components of this paper. The experiment
in India is part of a larger project known as the Andhra Pradesh Randomized Evaluation Study (AP
RESt), which is a partnership between the Government of Andhra Pradesh, the Azim Premji Foundation,
and the World Bank. We thank Dileep Ranjekar, Amit Dar, Samuel C. Carlson, and officials of the
Department of School Education in Andhra Pradesh for their continuous support. We are especially
grateful to DD Karopady, M Srinivasa Rao, and staff of the Azim Premji Foundation for their leadership
in implementing the project in Andhra Pradesh. Vinayak Alladi provided excellent research assistance.
The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do
not necessarily represent the views of the World Bank, its Executive Directors, the governments they
represent, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Jishnu Das, Stefan Dercon, James Habyarimana, Pramila Krishnan, Karthik Muralidharan,
and Venkatesh Sundararaman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
School Inputs, Household Substitution, and Test Scores
Jishnu Das, Stefan Dercon, James Habyarimana, Pramila Krishnan, Karthik Muralidharan,
and Venkatesh Sundararaman
NBER Working Paper No. 16830
February 2011
JEL No. H52,I21,O15

                                              ABSTRACT

Empirical studies of the relationship between school inputs and test scores typically do not account
for the fact that households will respond to changes in school inputs. We present a dynamic household
optimization model relating test scores to school and household inputs, and test its predictions in two
very different low-income country settings – Zambia and India. We measure household spending changes
and student test score gains in response to unanticipated as well as anticipated changes in school funding.
Consistent with the optimization model, we find in both settings that households offset anticipated
grants more than unanticipated grants. We also find that unanticipated school grants lead to significant
improvements in student test scores but anticipated grants have no impact on test scores. Our results
suggest that naïve estimates of public education spending on learning outcomes that do not account
for optimal household responses are likely to be considerably biased if used to estimate parameters
of an education production function.


Jishnu Das                                           Pramila Krishnan
The World Bank                                       University of Cambridge
jdas1@worldbank.org                                  UK
                                                     pk237@cam.ac.uk
Stefan Dercon
Oxford University                                    Karthik Muralidharan
stefan.dercon@economics.ox.ac.uk                     Department of Economics, 0508
                                                     University of California, San Diego
James Habyarimana                                    9500 Gilman Drive
Georgetown University                                La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
jph35@georgetown.edu                                 and NBER
                                                     kamurali@ucsd.edu

                                                     Venkatesh Sundararaman
                                                     South Asia Human Development Unit
                                                     The World Bank
                                                     vsundararaman@worldbank.org
1. Introduction
    The relationship between school inputs and education outcomes is of fundamental
importance for education policy and has been the subject of hundreds of empirical studies around
the world (see Hanushek 2002, and Hanushek and Luque 2003 for reviews of US and
international evidence respectively). However, while the empirical public finance literature has
traditionally paid careful attention to the behavioral responses of agents to public programs 1, the
empirical literature estimating education production functions has rarely accounted for household
re-optimization in response to public spending. This is a critical gap because (a) household
responses to education policies will mediate the extent to which different types of education
spending translate into learning outcomes, and (b) parameters of education production functions
are typically not identified if household inputs respond to changes in school-level inputs (see
Urquiola and Verhoogen 2009 for one such example in the context of class-size).
    We develop a dynamic model of household optimization that clarifies how increases in
school-provided inputs translate into learning outcomes. We then test the main predictions of the
model in two very different countries – Zambia and India – using unique matched data sets of
school and household spending, and panel data on student achievement. A key contribution of
this paper is our ability to measure household spending changes and student test-score gains in
response to both unanticipated as well as anticipated changes in school funding. The former
measures the production function effect of increased school funding (a partial derivative holding
other inputs constant), while the latter measures the policy effect (a total derivative that accounts
for re-optimization by agents).
    The theoretical framework of a dynamic forward-looking model provides a useful guide to
the key issues. In this framework, households' optimal spending decisions will take into account
all information available at the time of decision making. The impact of school inputs on test
scores depends then on (a) whether such inputs are anticipated or not and (b) the extent of
substitutability between household and school inputs in the education production function. The
model predicts that if household and school inputs are technical substitutes, an anticipated
increase in school inputs in the next period will decrease household contributions that period.
Unanticipated increases in school inputs limit the scope for household responses, leaving

1
 Illustrative examples include Meyer (1990) on unemployment insurance, Cutler and Gruber (1996) on health
insurance, Eissa and Leibman (1996) on the EITC, Autor and Duggan (2003) on disability insurance. See Moffitt
(2002) for an overview on labor supply responses to welfare programs.

                                                       1
household contributions unchanged in the short run. These differences lead to a testable
prediction: If household and school inputs are (technical) substitutes, unanticipated inputs will
have a larger impact on test scores than anticipated inputs. We test this using data on educational
spending for largely substitutable school inputs, such as books and writing materials in both
Zambia and India.
   Our data from Zambia allow us to distinguish between two different types of school
spending: a predictable and fixed rule-based school block grant and an unpredictable district-
level source of funds that varied widely across schools. The cross-sectional variation in the per-
student rule-based grant comes from variation in school enrollment, which is instrumented for
with the size of the catchment area (Case and Deaton 1999, and Urquiola 2006 use a similar
instrumental variable strategy). We find that household spending substantially offsets variations
in predicted per-student school grants. Evaluated at the mean, for each dollar spent on schools
via the predictable grants, household spending on education reduces by a similar amount. In
contrast, unpredictable grants have no impact on household spending. We also find that student
test scores respond positively to the unanticipated sources of funds (test scores in schools
receiving these funds are 0.10 standard deviations (SD) higher for both the English and
mathematics tests for a mean transfer of just under $3 per pupil), but that they do not vary with
variations in anticipated funds. This evidence is strongly suggestive that the two main
predictions of the model are correct and is robust to several checks. However, we cannot fully
rule out all identification concerns, and therefore test the model again using experimental
variation induced by a randomly-assigned school grant program in the Indian state of Andhra
Pradesh.
   The Andhra Pradesh (AP) school block grant experiment was conducted across a
representative sample of 200 government-run schools in rural AP with 100 schools selected by
lottery to receive a school grant (also around $3 per pupil) over and above their regular allocation
of teacher and non-teacher inputs. The conditions of the grant specified that the funds were to be
spent on inputs used directly by students and not on any infrastructure or construction projects.
The program was implemented for two years. In the first year, the grant was exogenously
assigned and a surprise for recipient schools, while in the second year, the grant continued to be
exogenous (relative to the comparison schools), but was now anticipated by the parents and
teachers of program schools.

                                                 2
    We find that household education spending in program schools is significantly lower in the
second year than in the first year of the program suggesting that households offset the anticipated
grant significantly more than they offset the unanticipated grant (just like in Zambia). Evaluated
at the mean, the point estimates suggest that for each dollar spent in the form of the anticipated
grant in the treatment group, household spending declines by 0.85 dollars (and we cannot reject
that the grant is completely offset by the household). Further, students in program schools
perform significantly better than those in comparison schools at the end of the first year of the
(unanticipated) school grant program, scoring 0.08 and 0.09 SD more in language and
mathematics tests respectively for a transfer of about $3 per pupil. In the second year of the
program, there is no significant effect of the (anticipated) school grant on test scores. These
findings are again consistent with the two main predictions of the model and are virtually
identical to those from Zambia. The two sets of results complement each other and provide
greater external validity to our findings. The Zambia case offers an analysis of two sources of
funding (rule-based and discretionary), but relies on cross-sectional data and instrument quality.
The AP case offers experimental variation in one source of funding, which changes from
unanticipated to anticipated over time.
    There are important policy implications of our results. The impact of anticipated school
grants in both settings is low or zero, not because the money did not reach the schools (it did) or
because it was not spent well (there is no evidence to support this), but because households
realigned their own spending patterns optimally. The replication of the findings in two very
different settings 2, with two different implementing agencies (the government in Zambia and a
leading non-profit organization in AP), and in representative population-based samples suggests
that the impact of school grant programs is likely to be highly attenuated by household
responses. Further, we find no heterogeneity in household responses across asset-poor and asset-
rich households suggesting that school grants for learning materials may largely be viewed as
pure income transfers to households, and that their long-term impact on learning is unlikely to be

2
  The two settings are similar in some ways including having high primary school enrollment but low student test
scores and having limited funding for recurrent non-salary expenditures (Pratham 2010, Kanyika et al. 2005).
However, at the time of the study, Zambia experienced severe declines in per-capita government education
expenditure and a stagnant labor market, while Andhra Pradesh has been one of the fastest growing states in India
with large increases in government spending in education over the last decade. Our finding very similar results in a
dynamic, growing economy and in another that was, at best, stagnant at the time of our study suggests that the
results generalize across very different labor market conditions and the priority given to education in the
government's budgetary framework.

                                                         3
higher than the income elasticity of test scores. This has direct implications for thinking about
the effectiveness of many such programs across several developing countries. 3
    The distinction between anticipated and unanticipated inputs and the differential ability of
households to substitute across various inputs could account for the wide variation in estimated
coefficients of school inputs on test scores (Glewwe 2002, Hanushek 2003, or Kreuger 2003),
and our results highlight the empirical importance of distinguishing between policy effects and
production function parameters (Todd and Wolpin 2003, and Glewwe and Kremer 2005 make
this point theoretically). A failure to reject the null hypothesis in studies that use the production
function approach could arise either because the effect of school inputs on test scores through the
production function is zero or because households (or teachers or schools) substitute their own
resources for such inputs. While in our case the substitution takes the form of textbooks or
writing materials, in a more general setting it may include parental time 4, private tuition and
other inputs. 5 Our results show that the policy effect of school inputs is different from the
production function parameters with consequences both for estimation techniques and for policy.
    The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the theoretical
framework and develops the dynamic model which motivates our estimating equations. Section 3
presents results from Zambia using cross-sectional variation in anticipated and unanticipated
school funding, while section 4 presents results from the school grant experiment in India.
Section 5 discusses robustness to alternative interpretations and section 6 concludes.


2. Model
    The aim of this section is to offer an analytical framework to organize the empirical
investigation and to understand the results. Becker and Tomes (1976) provide a classic model of
the role of parents in spending on educational inputs, but do not model the interaction of school
and household inputs. Todd and Wolpin (2003) allow for the possible substitutability of
household and school inputs, but do not offer an explicit optimization model to derive empirical
predictions. The contribution of our model is to specify the household's dynamic optimization
3
  Examples include school grants under the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) program in India, the Bantuan Operasional
Sekolah (BOS) grants in Indonesia, and several similar school grant programs in African countries (see Reinikka
and Svensson 2004 for descriptions of school grant programs in Uganda, Tanzania, and Ghana).
4
  Houtenville and Conway (2008) estimate an achievement production function that includes measures of parental
effort and find that parental effort is negatively correlated with school resources.
5
  Of course, not all school inputs are substitutes. As we show in Section 2, these predictions do not hold for school
inputs that are complementary to household inputs.

                                                         4
problem, solve it subject to both budget and production function constraints, and to derive the
Euler equation that shows the optimal growth path of test scores (based on an appropriate
shadow price of the cost of investing in educational inputs in each period). 6 We use this solution
to discuss the differential impact of anticipated and unanticipated school inputs on test-score
improvements and show how this varies based on whether school and household spending are
substitutes or complements.
    A household derives (instantaneous) utility from the test scores of a child, TS, and the
consumption of other goods, X. The household maximizes an inter-temporal utility function U(.),
additive over time and states of the world with discount rate β(<1), subject to an inter-temporal
budget constraint. Finally, test scores are determined by a production function relating current
achievement TSt to past achievement TSt-1, household educational inputs zt, school inputs wt , non
time-varying child characteristics µ and non time-varying school characteristics η. We assume
that household utility is additively separable, increasing and concave in test scores and other
goods [A1]; and that the production function for test scores is given by
TSt = F ( TSt −1 , wt , zt , µ ,η ) where F (.) is concave in its arguments [A2].
    Under [A1] and [A2] the household problem is
                                                               T
                                    Max( X t , zt ) U τ = Eτ   ∑τ β
                                                               t=
                                                                      t −τ
                                                                             [u (TS t ) + v( X t )]   (1)
                                                                                                      (2)
                                            s.t. At +1 = (1 + r ).( At + yt − Pt X t − zt )
                                                TS t = F (TS t −1 , wt , zt , µ ,η )                  (3)
                                               AT +1 = 0                                              (4)

Here u and v are concave in each of their arguments. The inter-temporal budget constraint,
Equation (2), links asset levels At +1 with initial assets At, private spending on educational inputs
zt, income yt and the consumption of other goods, Xt. The price of educational inputs is the
numéraire, the price of other consumption goods is Pt and r is the interest rate. The production
function constraint, Equation (3) dictates how inputs are converted to educational outcomes, and
the boundary condition, Equation (4) requires that at t=T, the household disposes of all
remaining assets so that all loans are paid back and there is no bequest motive.
      We treat test scores as the observable measure of human capital. The latter is what parents

6
This relates closely to the discussion on durable goods and inter-temporal household optimization; see Deaton and
Muellbauer (1980), Jacoby and Skoufias (1997), Foster (1995) and Dercon and Krishnan (2000).

                                                           5
care about, while the former is what they observe and optimize with respect to. The formulation
can be seen as a short-cut for an alternative set up in which parents derive future utility from the
flow of returns to the child’s stock of human capital, as in a more standard human capital
investment model. As we are mainly interested in deriving the optimal dynamic path for reaching
the desired stock of human capital considering the costs and benefits of boosting test scores in
current and future periods, the insights gained from using a human capital investment model are
going to be similar, given the other assumptions made, especially the concavity of the period-by-
period production function. 7
    In this formulation, credit markets are perfect so that there are no bounds on At +1 apart from

Equation (4). 8 Moreover, households choose only the levels of Xt and zt so that school inputs, wt
are beyond its control. In the contexts studied here, this is a reasonable assumption since school
resources are allocated at state or federal levels and are not tied to a local property tax that
residents may choose (unlike in the US). At the time the household makes its decision, it knows
the underlying stochastic process governing wt but not the actual level; we assume that school
inputs are a source of uncertainty in the model—for simplicity, the only source.
     Maximization of Equation (1) subject to Equations (2) and (3) provides a decision rule
related to TS t , characterizing the demand for test scores. Since test scores are a stock, we define
a per-period price for test scores as the user-cost of increasing the stock in one period by one
unit, i.e., the relevant (shadow) price in each period for the household. As in the durable goods
literature (Deaton and Muellbauer 1980), the user cost, evaluated at period t is (see Das et al.
(2004) for its derivation):
                                               1          FTSt (.)
                                      πt =          −                                               (5)
                                             Fzt (.) ( 1 + r )Fzt +1 (.)

Here, the first term measures the cost of taking resources at t and transforming them into one
extra unit of test scores. When implemented through a production function, the cost of buying an
extra unit is the inverse of the marginal product of spending, Fzt (.) . However, since TS is

durable, increasing TS in period t, reduces the cost of acquiring TS in period t+1 proportional to

7
   Further, we assume that households care about the level of educational achievement, a stock. Results are
unaffected if households care about the (instantaneous) flow from educational outcomes, provided that the flow is
linear in the stock.
8
  It is straightforward to incorporate imperfect credit markets in this framework (see Das et al. 2004).

                                                         6
FTSt (.) and the second term thus measures the present value of this reduction in cost in the next

period, expressed in monetary terms. 9 Given the user cost, the first-order Euler condition
determines the optimal path of educational outcomes between period t-1 and t as:

                                                     π              ∂U       
                                            Et − 1  β t − 1
                                                                    ∂TS t     =1                  (6)
                                                       πt           ∂U       
                                                                  ∂TS t −1    
    This is a standard Euler equation stating that along the optimal path, test scores will be
smooth, so that the marginal utilities of educational outcomes will be equal in expectations,
appropriately discounted and priced. Finally, the concavity of the production function in each
time period will limit the willingness of households to boost education fast since the cost is
increasing in household inputs. 10 Starting from low levels in childhood, the optimal path will be
characterized by a gradual increase in educational achievement over time.
    Under the further assumptions that household utility is additively separable and of the CRRA
form, and that marginal utility is defined as TS t− ρ , (ρ the coefficient of relative risk aversion),
Equation (6) can be rewritten as:
                                                          −ρ                                     (7)
                                           TS t              βπ t − 1
                                          
                                           TS        
                                                                       = 1 + et
                                              t −1            πt
Where et is an expectation error, uncorrelated with information at t-1. Taking logs and expressed
for child i, we obtain the optimal growth path:
                                TSit  1           1    π      1                                 (8)
                            ln          = ln β − ln( it ) + ln( 1 + eit )
                                TSit −1  ρ        ρ   π it −1 ρ
which is determined by the path of user-costs, and a term capturing surprises.
    In this paper, we do not aim to use the structural dynamic model to estimate an impulse-
response function over time to an unexpected change in inputs (the data requirements for that

9
  In the durable goods literature, the user cost per period is derived by assuming that the good is sold in the second
period. Though there is no “second hand market” for test scores, the shadow price for consuming a unit of test
scores derived above is similar to those derived in the durable goods literature (see Foster 1995 for a similar
derivation of the rental-equivalent price of boosting nutritional status in one period).
10
   The "per-period" concavity of the education production function can be motivated in several ways, the most
intuitive of which is the existence of limits to how much a student can learn in a given period of time. While the
unit of time is not specified in the model (as in the consumption smoothing literature in general), it is natural to
consider the unit to be one year in the context of education, since decisions regarding education are typically made
prior to the start of the school year. If an additional school grant arrives after this initial spending and is spent on
learning materials, households are unlikely to be able to sell materials already purchased and we assume that they
will only re-optimize at the start of the next school year.

                                                               7
exercise are beyond any education data set we know of). However, we can use this theoretical
model to derive an empirical model that nests some key predictions on how anticipated and
unanticipated inputs affect the path of test scores. To derive these, assume that school resources
are not known with certainty until households make decisions regarding their own inputs. Let
wta ( wtu ) be inputs at time t that were anticipated (unanticipated) at t-1. For unanticipated
increases in school inputs, households are unable to respond till the next time period and are
therefore pushed off the optimal path (see footnote 10). The increase in educational achievement

in period t is given by Fwt dwtu , and the change in the growth path is given by ln( TS t + wtu Fw )

which is strictly positive.
       In the case of anticipated increases, the effect on the path of outcomes will depend on the
impact on the user-cost of educational achievement at t, since there is no direct impact on the
budget constraint at t (all information related to the anticipated inputs, including the budget
constraint, will have been incorporated into the programming problem at t-1). Using the implicit
function theorem with Equation (5) and assuming TS t = (1 − δ )TS t −1 + F ( wt , z t , µ ,η ) where the

Hessian of F (.) is negative semi-definite,

                                            dπ t            Fz t wt      >                  <
                                                      =−                 <
                                                                             0 if Fz t wt   >
                                                                                                0
                                            dwta
                                                                 2
                                                             Fz t                                     (9)
The change in the optimal growth path is given by
                                        ∂( ∆tt −1 ln TS )            1 ∂ ln π t
                                                            =−        (         )
                                              ∂wta                   ρ ∂wt                            (10)
                                                                1 1 Fzw         > 0 if
                                                            =                   <
                                                                                         Fzw <> 0
                                                                ρ π t Fz2

       If household and school inputs are technical substitutes so that Fzt wt < 0 , anticipated

increases in school inputs at t increase the relative user-cost of boosting TS at t, resulting in lower
growth of test scores, ceteris paribus, between t and t-1. 11 Households have (price) incentives to


11
     In other words, if   Fzt wt < 0 , an increase in wt will decrease the marginal product of zt (and therefore increase
the price of boosting TS by increasing       zt ).   We do not model the schools' choice of inputs to spend on, but if their
objective function is to maximize TS, they should optimally allocate cash grants across different inputs and therefore
account for the degree of substitution with households. One way to interpret these results is that schools are
constrained in what they can do and are hence unable to spend this funding on inputs that could not be easily
substituted for by parental resources. These constraints could arise either due to thin markets, explicit restrictions on

                                                                     8
shift resources for educational spending to t-1, boosting educational achievement at t-1 in
anticipation of the higher resources at t, and also to take advantage of the higher overall
resources for educational inputs that allow them to spend relatively less on educational inputs
compared to other commodities. Thus, the effect of an unanticipated change is higher than that of
an anticipated change: household spending on educational inputs at t is unchanged, as
households cannot move some of their spending to t-1, or to other commodities, as they could
with anticipated increases of government spending. 12,13
    Assuming identical risk preferences, an empirical specification consistent with (8) is:

                              TSit 
                          ln        = α o + α 1 ln wita + α 2 ln witu + α 3 ∆X t + ε it               (11)
                              it −1 
                               TS

Here, wita and witu are anticipated and unanticipated changes in school inputs, measured in this

paper by the flows of funds, while ∆X t reflects all other sources of changes in the user cost
between t and t-1. The core prediction is that the marginal effect of anticipated funds is lower
than that of unanticipated funds when household and school inputs are substitutes. Finally, it is
easy to see that if a portion of what the econometrician regards as unanticipated was anticipated
by the household (or was substitutable even after the 'surprise' arrival of the school grant), then
the estimate of α2 will be a lower bound of the true production function effect (see section 5.4).




the use of the grants (to hire teachers for instance), an inability to exploit scale economies (for instance, to improve
infrastructure), or parental preferences expressed through school committees to spend on substitutable items).
12
   If school and households inputs are technical complements, increasing school inputs at t will increase the
marginal productivity of household inputs at t, and through the decline in user-costs lead to higher growth in test
scores along the optimal path between t and t-1. Anticipated lower user costs for educational inputs at t relative to t-1
create incentives to shift resources from t-1 to t, leading to a higher growth of test scores between t and t-1. Whether
this reduces spending and therefore test scores at t-1 depends on preferences, as households have incentives to keep
the optimal path of test scores smooth, while taking advantage of the additional government spending at t to spend
more on other commodities.
13
   The model above is written as if there is only one type of school and household inputs. It is straightforward to
allow for multiple inputs, taking w and z as vectors of educational inputs in the model. Different inputs could have
different cross-derivatives, implying different degrees of technical substitutability, so that the extent to which the
household may substitute for school spending on particular inputs may differ. We return to this issue in section 5.


                                                           9
3. Zambia
3.1     Background and Context
      The educational system in Zambia is based on public schools (less than 2 percent of all
schools are privately run) and the country has a history of high primary enrollment rates. Teacher
salaries are paid directly by the central government, and account for the majority of spending on
school-level resources; schools receive few other resources from government. Districts receive
some discretionary funding for non-salary purposes from the central government and aid
programs. However, since the 1990s, these sources were highly unreliable and unpredictable,
partly due to the operation of a "cash budget" in view of the poor macroeconomic situation, and
partly due to the irregularity of much of the aid flows to the education sector (Dinh, et al. 2002).
In 2002, the year of our survey, less than 24 percent of all schools received such discretionary
grants and conditional on receipt, there was considerable variation with some schools receiving
30 times as much as others. Few resources were distributed in kind to schools during the year of
the survey (see Das et. al 2003). Overall, the share of discretionary resources was only about a
tenth of the share of the teacher salary bill.
      Parental involvement in schools is high with parents traditionally expected to contribute
considerably to the finances of the school via fees paid through the Parent Teacher Association
(PTA). Limited direct government funding for non-salary purposes during economic decline put
pressure on parents to provide for inputs more usually provided by government expenditure. This
customary arrangement regarding PTA fees changed in 2001; following an agenda of free
education, all institutionalized parental contributions to schools, including formal PTA fees were
banned in April 2001. At the same time, this put further pressure to complement school finances
by further direct private parental spending on education.
      In 2001 the year preceding our survey, a rule-based cash grant through the government's
Basic Education Sub-Sector Investment Program (BESSIP) was provided to every school to
reverse some of the pressure on school finances arising from a persistent economic decline.
These grants were fixed at $600 per school ($650 in the case of schools with Grades 8 and 9)
irrespective of school enrollment to exclude any discretion by the administration. The grant was
managed via a separate funding stream from any other financial flows, and directly delivered to
the school, via the headmaster. Spending decisions were made at the Annual General Meeting,
before the start of the school year. The share of this funding in overall school funding was

                                                  10
considerable: for 76% of schools it was the only public funding for non-salary inputs, while its
average share in total school resources was 86%. The scheme also attracted much publicity,
increasing its transparency; combined with the simplicity of the allocation rule, this ensured that
the grants reached their intended recipients. Disbursement was fast and reliable and 95 percent of
all schools had received the stipulated amounts by the time of the survey and the remainder
within 1 month of survey completion (Das et al. 2003). 14
      Therefore, we expect that in the year of the survey the fixed cash grants would be anticipated
by households making their educational investment decisions for the year, contrary to
discretionary sources, which had become highly unpredictable and therefore unanticipated.
Furthermore, because the grants were fixed in size, there was considerable variation across
schools in per-student terms due to underlying differences in enrollment. We use the variation in
per-student amounts to examine the crowding-out of household expenditures, a strategy
discussed further below.
3.2     Sampling and Data
      We collected data in 2002 from 172 15 schools in 4 provinces of Zambia (covering 58 percent
of the population), where the schools were sampled to ensure that every enrolled child had an
equal probability of inclusion. The results are therefore externally valid within the 4 provinces of
the study. The school surveys provide basic information on school materials and funding as well
as test scores for mathematics and English for a sample of 20 students in grade 5 in every school,
who were tested in 2001 as part of an independent study and were then retested in 2002 to form a
panel.
      To supplement these data, we also collected information for 540 households matched to a
sub-sample of 34 schools identified as "remote" using GIS mapping tools (defined as schools
where the closest neighboring school was at least 5 kilometers away). From these schools, the
closest village was chosen and 15 households were randomly chosen from households with at
least one child of school-going age. The restriction of the household survey sample to 34 remote
schools allows us to match household and school inputs in an environment where complications
arising from school choice are eliminated. We use the entire sample of 172 schools to estimate

14
  This contrasts with the early experience in Uganda (Reinnika and Svensson 2004).
15
  The initial sample contained 182 schools, although 2 yielded only incomplete information, 5 were private schools
not covered in this paper and 3 could not be matched to the test scores data from the Examination Council of
Zambia.

                                                        11
the relationship between test scores and cash grants to schools (rule-based and discretionary). We
use the sub-sample of 34 schools matched to 540 households to estimate the relationship between
rule-based cash grants to schools and household expenditures on education.
      Table 1 presents summary statistics separately for rural and urban schools, as well as for
schools that are in our "remote" sample and matched to households. As might be expected, there
are significant differences between rural and urban areas, with the latter having a better-off
student body, but not necessarily better school supplies per student. Our sample of "remote"
schools is not significantly different from rural schools on most measures, but they attract poorer
students than the other rural schools, and have relatively more books and desks per student
(though each desk or textbook is still shared by two students). Per student funding from the
predictable rule-based grant increases as we go from urban to rural to remote schools, which is
consistent with a fixed rule-based grant being distributed among fewer students in rural and
remote areas.
      Substantial parts of school spending are suitable for substitution by parents. On average 54%
is spent on books, chalk (for slates), stationary and other school materials by the school while
23% is spent on sports materials and equipment. About 19% is spent on utilities, maintenance
and infrastructure, and only 3% is spent on allowances and other costs linked to teachers. 16
3.3    Empirical Methodology
      We first test whether there is crowding out of household educational spending in response to
anticipated grants. We estimate a cross-section demand model for the 1195 children (from 540
households) matched to 34 schools in which household spending on school-related inputs is
regressed on anticipated and unanticipated grants with and without a set of controls for child,
household and school-level variables:

                  ln zij = α + β 1 Ai + β 2 ln w aj + β 3 ln wuj + β 4 X i + ε i + ε j     (12)

where z ij is the spending by the household on child i enrolled in school j, w aj and wuj are

respectively anticipated (rule-based) and unanticipated (discretionary) grants per student in
school j that matches to child i, and X i are other characteristics of child i including assets owned


16
  Looking at average spending shares by households, 27% is on books and stationary, and other materials for school
while 19% is spent on cash contributions of various forms (although PTA fees were formally abolished) and other
direct cash payments to the school. The remainder, 54% of household expenditure, is on school and sport uniforms
and shoes, and for sports activities at school.

                                                         12
by the household. We test β 2 < β 3 = 0 , i.e., households respond negatively to the pre-
announced, anticipated rule-based grants at the school level by cutting back their own funding,
but are unable to respond to cash grants that are unanticipated.
     To address the concern that w aj captures unobserved components of household demand

operating through an enrollment channel, we use the size of the eligible cohort in the catchment
area as an instrument for school enrollment and therefore the level of per-student cash grants.
This instrumentation strategy is similar to Case and Deaton (1999), Urquiola (2006) in the case
of class-size and more recently by Boonperm et al. (2009) and Kaboski and Townsend (2008) in
the context of large fixed grants to villages in Thailand. Using the size of the eligible cohort as
an instrument for enrollment is especially credible in this context since we use only a sample of
remote schools and can abstract away from issues of school choice. We also confirm that there is
no correlation between the instrument and X i .
     We explore the impact of different spending types using Equation (13), based on (11),
modeling changes in standardized test-scores TS between t and t-1 regressed on anticipated and
unanticipated spending, and a set of controls at t-1 capturing sources of heterogeneity and
differences in user costs.

     ∆TS it = α o + α 1 ln wita + α 2 ln witu + α 3 X t −1 + ε it                                 (13)
The prediction is that α1 < α2: unanticipated spending will have a larger effect on test scores than
anticipated spending. 17

3.4 Results
3.4.1    Household Spending
     The results of estimating (12) are presented in Table 2, showing results without and with
controls, and using the size of the eligible cohort in the catchment area as an instrument. 18 The
results are consistent with the predictions from our model: across all specifications, the estimated
elasticity of substitution for anticipated grants (𝛽̂2) is always negative and significant and ranges



17
   In one specification shown, Xt-1 will include the lagged dependent variable TSit-1 as a further control for
heterogeneity in the path of test-scores over time.
18
   We can reject the hypothesis that the instrument is weak: the F-statistic of the first stage regression is above 10.
The impact of an extra child in the catchment area on enrollment is 0.68 – which is close to the actual enrollment of
about 80% in the sample.

                                                          13
from -0.72 to -1.12 while the coefficient of unanticipated grants (𝛽̂3) is small and insignificant. 19
Evaluated at the mean we cannot reject the hypothesis that for each dollar spent on the rule-based
grant per student, households reduce school expenditure by one dollar, while there is no
substitution of discretionary, unanticipated spending.
     One concern may be that households in larger villages (which have smaller per capita
anticipated funding) have a different overall demand for education. We address this concern by
comparing household expenditure across schools with different levels of rule-based grants. We
divide schools into two categories - those receiving less than the median per-child rule-based
grant ("low rule-based grant schools) and those receiving more than the median ("high rule-based
grant schools) - and Table 3 shows school and household expenditure for these two types of
schools. As expected, we find that the per-student grant is significantly lower in the "low rule-
based grant" schools. However, household spending on education is significantly higher in these
schools. Most importantly, there is no significant difference in total expenditure per child across
these two school types. This suggests that overall demand for education is similar across the
households in the sample, and that they compensate/offset for lower/higher spending at the
school level. 20
3.4.2    Test Scores
     Tables 4A and 4B show the results for English and Mathematics for different specifications
where all estimations are at the school level, based on equation (13). The high variability in
discretionary funding, with less than a quarter of the school sample receiving any fund, and other
schools receiving very high levels, encourages us to explore two specifications for discretionary
funding. Table 4A shows the results, expressing discretionary funding as dummy variable, while
in Table 4B, we introduce both the level and the square of discretionary funding. In each table,
we show two specifications for test-score results for English and for Mathematics. In a first
specification, we only include some geographical characteristics (rural/urban and province
dummies). The second is our key result, and includes also changes in other school level
characteristics that change over time in the data (changes in head teacher, changes in chair of the




19
   Only 4 schools (or 12%, with about 150 students in total) in this sample received discretionary funding, possibly
weakening this test.
20
   In a parent’s succinct summary: "The school had no textbooks this year, so we had to buy our own".

                                                         14
Parent-Teaching Association, and changes in fees for this association). 21 Other school-level
controls did not affect the results.
     For all specifications, the coefficient on anticipated grants is small and insignificant: there is
no improvement in test-scores from these rule-based grants. Adding higher order terms for
anticipated grants does not make any difference. For English, there consistently is an impact
from discretionary funds received by the school. When expressed in levels and squares (in table
4B), the overall effect is significant at 10% (in column 2). 22 When added as a dummy in table
4A, the effect is significant at 5% (in column 2). For Mathematics, the effect of discretionary
funds is only significant when added as a dummy (at 10%, see column 3 in table 4A).
Nonparametric investigation of the relationship between levels of discretionary funds and test
score gains suggested a highly non-linear relationship for both English and Mathematics (not
shown). Consistent with table 4A, a positive relationship with discretionary funds exists for both
subjects, but table 4B suggests that a simple (quadratic) parametric formulation is only sufficient
to capture this relationship for English. Focusing on the results in table 4A (columns 2 and 4), we
find that on average, receiving discretionary funds adds 0.10 of a SD of test-scores, in both
English and Mathematics; in contrast, and consistent with the predictions of the model, there is
no impact from rule-based, anticipated school grants.
     One key threat to identification in the results above is the possibility that the
discretionary/unanticipated grants may have been targeted to areas with the most potential
improvement in test scores. Alternatively, parents and communities that care enough to obtain
these funds for their schools may also be motivated to increase test scores in other ways. We
address this concern by comparing the characteristics of schools that do and do not receive these
discretionary funds and find that there is no significant difference between these types of schools
(Table 5). In this table, as column [3] shows, we find no difference in initial levels of test scores,
other school performance indicators, location or wealth characteristics between these two types
of schools. Column [4] shows OLS results when using these characteristics to try to explain
whether discretionary funding was received, and we reject the joint significance of these
characteristics. At least on the basis of observables, there is no evidence of differences between
these two types of schools that are correlated with the trajectory of test score of gains.

21
   These controls could be thought of as potentially changing the benefits of spending on schooling by parents (i.e.
the user costs).
22
   Although the squared term is negative, for all observed values in the sample, the overall effect is still positive.

                                                          15
3.4.3   Limitations
   These results are strongly suggestive of the processes outlined in the theory: household and
school-level funds are technical substitutes in the production function of test scores and when
school-level funding increases, it crowds out private spending within the household.
Consequently, such grants have little (if any) impact on the path of test-scores. We are also able
to show that the lack of a relationship between test-scores and school-level funding is not
because such funds have no effect through the production function—when households are
“surprised” and cannot adjust their own expenditures, test-scores increase with school funding.
   However, there are a few caveats to the estimates presented from Zambia. First, our
household substitution results are only valid for the “remote” rural sample and while we can
show that household spending offsets variation in anticipated funding, our test of the hypothesis
that it does not respond to unanticipated funding is based on a small sample (only 4 of the 34
linked schools in the remote sample reported any unanticipated funding at all). Second, while
standard in the literature, we cannot rule out that the size of the catchment area (used as an
instrument for school-level enrollment) could be correlated to returns in the labor market or
historical levels of education in the population. These in turn may be directly correlated to
educational investments thus biasing downwards our estimates of crowding-out. Third,
unanticipated funds could have been targeted in unobservable ways to schools where parental
substitution would be less and where test-scores were more likely to increase even in the absence
of funding.
   While the patterns of observed characteristics and the stability of the results to the use of
credible instrumental variables suggest that these are not serious concerns, we cannot fully rule-
out these alternate explanations. We therefore present results from a field experiment in the
Indian state of Andhra Pradesh designed to specifically determine the pattern of crowd-out and
we show that the results obtained are virtually identical across these different contexts. The
randomized school grants address the second and third caveats above, while the first limitation is
addressed by collecting spending data from a large sample of households at multiple points in
time (both when the grants were a surprise, and later when they were expected), which allows us
to test differential household responses to anticipated and unanticipated funds across a large
representative sample of schools.



                                                 16
4     Andhra Pradesh, India
4.1      Background and Context
      Andhra Pradesh (AP) is the 5th largest state in India, with a population of over 80 million,
73% of whom live in rural areas. AP is close to the all-India average on various measures of
human development such as gross enrollment in primary school, literacy, and infant mortality, as
well as on measures of service delivery such as teacher absence. There are a total of over 60,000
government primary schools in AP and over 70% of children in rural AP attend government-run
schools (Pratham 2010).
      The average rural primary school is quite small, with total enrollment of around 80 to 100
students and an average of 3 teachers across grades one through five. 23 Teachers are well paid,
with the average salary of regular civil-service teachers being over Rs. 8,000/month and total
compensation including benefits being over Rs. 10,000/month (per capita income in AP is
around Rs. 2,000/month). Regular teachers' salaries and benefits comprise over 90% of non-
capital expenditure on primary education in AP, leaving relatively little funds for recurring non-
teacher expenses. 24
      Some of these funds are used to provide schools with an annual grant of Rs. 2,000 for
discretionary expenditures on school improvement and to provide each teacher with an annual
grant of Rs. 500 for the purchase of classroom materials of the teachers’ choice. The
government also provides children with free text books through the school. However, compared
to the annual spending on teacher salaries of over Rs. 300,000 per primary school (three teachers
per school on average) the amount spent on learning materials is very small. It has been
suggested therefore that the marginal returns to spending on learning materials used directly by
children may be higher than more spending on teachers (Pritchett and Filmer 1999). The AP
School Block Grant experiment was designed to evaluate the impact of providing schools with
grants for learning materials, and the continuation of the experiment over two years (with the
provision of a grant each year) allows us to test the differences between unanticipated and
anticipated sources of school funds.



23
   This is a consequence of the priority placed on providing all children with access to a primary school within a
distance of 1 kilometer from their homes.
24
   Funds for capital expenditure (school construction and maintenance) come from a different part of the budget.
Note that all figures correspond to the years 2005 - 07, which is the time of the study, unless stated otherwise.

                                                         17
4.2 Sampling, Randomization, and Program Description
     The school block grant (BG) program was evaluated as part of a larger education research
initiative (across 500 schools) known as the Andhra Pradesh Randomized Evaluation Studies
(AP RESt), with 100 schools being randomly assigned to each of four treatment and one control
groups. 25 We sampled 5 districts across each of the 3 socio-cultural regions of AP in proportion
to population. In each of the 5 districts, we randomly selected one administrative division and
then randomly sampled 10 mandals (the lowest administrative tier) in the selected division. In
each of the 50 mandals, we randomly sampled 10 schools using probability proportional to
enrollment. Thus, the universe of 500 schools in the study was representative of the schooling
conditions of the typical child attending a government-run primary school in rural AP.
Experimental results in this sample can therefore be credibly extrapolated to the full state of
Andhra Pradesh.
      The school year in AP starts in mid June, and baseline tests were conducted in the 500
sampled schools during late June and early July, 2005. 26 After the baseline tests were evaluated,
2 out of the 10 project schools in each mandal were randomly allocated to one of 5 cells (four
treatments and one control). Since 50 mandals were chosen across 5 districts, there were a total
of 100 schools (spread out across the state) in each cell. The geographic stratification allows us
to estimate the treatment impact with mandal-level fixed effects and thereby net out any common
factors at the lowest administrative level of government, and also improve the efficiency of the
estimates of program impact.
     Since no school received more than one treatment, we can analyze the impact of each
program independently with respect to the control schools without worrying about any
confounding interactions. The analysis in this paper is based on the 200 schools that comprise
the 100 schools randomly chosen for the school block grant program and the 100 that were
randomly assigned to the comparison group. Table 6 shows summary statistics of baseline




25
   The AP RESt is a partnership between the government of AP, the Azim Premji Foundation (a leading non-profit
organization working to improve primary education in India), and the World Bank. The Azim Premji Foundation
(APF) was the main implementing agency for the study. The details of the other interventions are provided in
Muralidharan and Sundararaman (2010, 2011).
26
   The selected schools were informed by the government that an external assessment of learning would take place
in this period, but there was no communication to any school about any of the treatments at this time.

                                                       18
school and student characteristics for both treatment and comparison schools and the null of
equality across treatment groups cannot be rejected for any of the variables. 27
     As mentioned earlier, the block grant intervention targeted non-teacher and non-
infrastructure inputs directly used by students. The block grant amount was set at Rs. 125 per
student per year (around $3) so that the average additional spending per school was the same
across all four programs evaluated under the AP RESt.28 After the randomization was
conducted, project staff from the Azim Premji Foundation (APF) personally went to selected
schools to communicate the details of the school block grant program (in August 2005). The
schools had the freedom to decide how to spend the block grant, subject to guidelines that
required the money to be spent on inputs directly used by children. Schools receiving the block
grant were given a few weeks to make a list of items they would like to procure. The list was
approved by the project manager from APF, and the materials were jointly procured by the
teachers and the APF field coordinators and provided to the schools by September, 2005. This
method of grant disbursal ensured that corruption was limited and that the materials reached the
schools and children.
     APF field coordinators also informed the schools that the program was likely to continue for
a second year subject to government approval. Thus, while program continuation was not
guaranteed, the expectation was that it was likely to continue for a second year. Schools were
told early in the second year (June 2006) that they would continue being eligible for the school
grant program and the same procedure was followed for disbursal of materials (no money was
handed over to schools or teachers, and procurement was conducted jointly).
     Table 7 shows that the majority of the grant money was spent on student stationary such as
notebooks, and writing materials (over 40%), classroom materials such as charts (around 25%),
and practice materials such as workbooks and exercise books (around 20%). A small amount
(under 10%) of the grant was spent in the first year on student durable items like school bags,
and plates/cups/spoons for the school mid-day meal program. This amount seems to have been
transferred to stationary and writing materials in the second year. We also see that the overall

27
   Table 6 shows sample balance between the comparison schools and those that received the block grant, which is
the focus of the analysis in this paper. The randomization was done jointly across all treatments and the sample was
also balanced on observables across the other treatments.
28
   The block grant was set on the basis of the number of students who took the baseline tests as opposed to the
number of students enrolled (except for the first grade where there was no baseline test). This ensured that schools
that inflated enrollment (which is not uncommon in India) were not rewarded with a larger grant.

                                                        19
spending pattern at the school level is quite stable across the first and second year of the grant.
Many of these items could be provided directly by parents for their children, suggesting a high
potential for substitution.
4.3     Data
      Data on household expenditure on education was collected from a household survey that
attempted to cover every household with a child in a treatment or comparison school and
administer a short questionnaire on education expenditures on the concerned child during the
previous school year. 29 Data on household spending was collected at three points in time –
alongside the baseline tests for spending incurred in the pre-baseline year (Y0), during the
second year of the program about spending during the first year (Y1), and after two full years of
the program about spending during the second year (Y2). Data on household education spending
was collected retrospectively to ensure that this reflected all spending during the school year. 30
      The outcome data used in this paper comprise of independent learning assessments in math
and language (Telugu) conducted at the beginning of the study, and at the end of each of the two
years of the experiment. The baseline test (June-July, 2005) covered competencies up to that of
the previous school year. At the end of the school year (March-April, 2006), schools had two
rounds of tests with a gap of two weeks between them. The first test covered competencies up to
that of the previous school year, while the second test covered materials from the current school
year's syllabus. The same procedure was repeated at the end of the second year, with two rounds
of testing. Doing two rounds of testing at the end of each year allows for the inclusion of more
overlapping materials across years of testing, reduces the impact of measurement errors specific
to the day of testing by having multiple tests around two weeks apart, and also reduces sample
attrition due to student absence on the day of the test.
      For the rest of this paper, Year 0 (Y0) refers to the baseline tests in June-July 2005; Year 1
(Y1) refers to the mean score across both rounds of tests conducted at the end of the first year of
the program in March-April, 2006; and Year 2 (Y2) refers to the mean score across both rounds
of tests conducted at the end of the second year of the program in March-April, 2007. All
analysis is carried out with normalized test scores, where individual test scores are converted to

29
   The data was collected from a short survey that was only based on the “main” child who was being covered in the
school assessments and not for other siblings or other components of household spending.
30
   We obtained spending data from a total of 8,612 households for Y0 (no data was collected for retrospective
spending on children in grade 1, because it was their first year in school), 13,572 households for Y1, and 10,189
households for Y2.

                                                       20
z-scores by normalizing them with respect to the distribution of scores in the control schools on
the same test. 31
4.4 Results
4.4.1    Household Spending
     We estimate:
          ln zijkt = β 0 ⋅ Y0 + β1 ⋅ Y1 + β 2 ⋅ Y2 + β 3 ⋅ BG ⋅ Y0 + β 4 ⋅ BG ⋅ Y1 + β 5 ⋅ BG ⋅ Y2 + β ⋅ Z m + ε ijk   (14)
where ln z ijkt is the expenditure incurred by the household on education of child i, at time t (j, k,

denote the grade, and school), Yn is the project year, BG is an indicator for whether or not the
child was in a “block grant” school, and standard errors are clustered at the school level. The
parameters of interest are β 3 , which should equal zero if the randomization was valid (no

differential spending by program households in the year prior to the intervention); β 4 , which
measures the extent to which household spending adjusted to an unanticipated increase in school
resources (since the block grant program was a surprise in the first year of the project), and β 5 ,
which measures the response of household spending to an anticipated increase in school
resources (since the grant was mostly anticipated in the second year). 32 All regressions include a
set of mandal-level dummies (Zm) to account for stratification and to increase efficiency.
     Table 8 confirms that that β 3 and β 4 are not significantly different from zero while β 5 is
significantly negative. We report the results both with and without a full set of household
controls, and the results are unchanged. The findings are fully consistent with the predictions of
the model: in Y1, households did not adjust to the unexpected grant, while in Y2, household
spending was adjusted in anticipation of provision of materials by the school (using the grant). 33
The estimated elasticity of -0.25 to -0.27 suggests that at the mean household expenditure for the




31
   Since all analysis is done with normalized test scores (relative to the control school distribution), a student can be
absent on one testing day and still be included in the analysis without bias because the included score is normalized
relative to the control school distribution for the same test that the student took.
32
   We say “mostly anticipated” because it was not guaranteed that the program would be continued to the second
year, but field reports suggest that the perception of the likelihood of continuation was high enough that households
waited to see the materials provided by the schools before doing their own spending.
33
   This was further corroborated by field reports after the program was withdrawn, which suggest that most parents
did not buy the materials that they thought would be provided by the school.

                                                             21
comparison group (Rs 411 in Y2), the per-child grant of Rs. 125 would be almost entirely offset,
and we cannot reject that the substitution is 100% (the estimated offset is around 85%). 34
4.4.2    Student Test Scores
    Our default specification for studying the impact of the school block grant, consistent with
equation (11) uses the form:
            ∆Tijkm (Yn ) = α + γ ⋅ Tijkm (Y0 ) + δ ⋅ BG + β ⋅ Z m + ε k + ε jk + ε ijk                     (15)

    The main dependent variable of interest is ∆Tijkm , which is the change in the normalized test

score on the specific test (normalized with respect to the score distribution of the comparison
schools), where i, j, k, m denote the student, grade, school, and mandal respectively. Y0 indicates

the baseline tests, while Yn indicates a test at the end of n years of the program. Including the
normalized baseline test score improves efficiency due to the autocorrelation between test-scores
across multiple periods. 35 These regressions also include a set of mandal-level dummies (Zm)
and the standard errors are clustered at the school level. We also run the regressions with and
without controls for household and school variables. They will allow us to capture any sources of
changes in user costs, as in (11).
    The BG variable is a dummy at the school level indicating if it was selected to receive the
school block grant (BG) program, and the parameter of interest is δ, which is the effect on the
normalized test scores of being in a school that received the grant. The random assignment of
treatment ensures that the BG variable in the equation above is not correlated with the error term,
and the estimate of the one-year and two-year treatment effects are therefore unbiased. 36



34
   As in the Zambia case, we used a logarithmic specification; estimating a linear model in levels of spending we
found identical results, including that we could not reject total substitution by households of the school grant in Y2.
35
   The inclusion of the baseline test score also allows us to control also for individual heterogeneity correlated with
baseline test-scores. In the case of Zambia, we explored adding this to the specification in table 4A and 4B, but, this
creates endogeneity problems for inference related to the variables of interest (spending). In the AP case, the
randomization ensures that the BG variable is uncorrelated with the error term. Since grade 1 children did not have
a baseline test, we set the normalized baseline score to zero for these children (similarly for children in grade 2 at the
end of two years of the treatment).
36
   We also check for differential post-treatment attrition of teachers and students and find that there is no differential
attrition or turnover of teachers between "block grant" and "control" schools. However, there is a small amount of
differential student participation in the test at the end of the first year of the program (with attrition from the baseline
test-taking sample of 5.4% and 8.2% in the treatment and control groups respectively). As weaker students may drop
out of the testing sample, this may bias our estimate of the first-year treatment effect downwards, but since the
magnitude of differential attrition is small (2.8%), this bias is likely to be quite small, especially since baseline
scores are controlled for. In the second year, however, there is no differential attendance on the end of year tests.

                                                            22
     Note that specification in (15) can be used to consistently estimate the one-year and two-year
effect of the program, but not the second year effect alone (with the second-year gains as the
dependent variable controlling for Y1 scores) because Y1 scores are a post-treatment outcome
that are correlated with the treatment. Thus, specifications with second-year gains as the
dependent variable controlling for Y1 scores will not provide consistent estimates of δ for the
second year of the program. We show these results for illustrative reasons, and to help
understand the mechanism for the differing results on 1-year and 2-year impacts of the program.
     Columns 1 and 4 of Table 9 show that students in schools that received the block grant
scored 0.09 standard deviations (SD) higher than those in comparison schools at the end of the
first year of the program for mathematics, and 0.08 SD higher for Telugu. Test scores were 0.04
SD and 0.07 SD higher for mathematics and Telugu at the end of the second year (Table 9 –
columns 3 and 6). The difference at the end of year one is significant for each subject, but not
so at the end of two years.        The addition of school and household controls does not significantly
change the estimated value of δ, again confirming the validity of the randomization (tables
available on request).
     It is striking that after two years of block grants, there is no significant effect on test scores,
despite the gains after the first year. The size of gains after two years (with point estimates
below the point estimates after Y1) suggest that the second year of block grants did not add
much to learning outcomes, while depreciation of earlier gains may explain that average gains
(in terms of point estimates) after Y2 are smaller than achieved after Y1, and not significant. 37
These findings are entirely consistent with the predictions of the model, and confirm the
considerable substitution in terms of household spending on education in response to the
program when anticipated.
     Finally, we tested for heterogeneity of the block grant (BG) program effect across student
and school characteristics by adding a set of characteristics and their interaction with the BG
variable in (15). The main result is the lack of heterogeneous treatment effects by several
household and child-level characteristics. 38 For example, if we expect poor households to be

37
   Columns (2) and (5) of Table 9 shows the results of estimating equation (15) with the second-year gains on the
left hand side. Recall that this estimate is biased as discussed above, but it suggests that the effect of the block grant
program in the second year alone was close to zero in mathematics and 0.05SD in Telugu (both of which are not
significantly different from zero).
38
   We tested the interaction of the program with school size, proximity to urban centers, school infrastructure,
household affluence, parental literacy, caste, sex and baseline test score.

                                                           23
more credit constrained and to be within their desired ‘optimal’ amount of spending on
education, then we would expect that they would offset less of the value of the grant and that the
grant would have a larger impact on learning outcomes of poorer households. This suggests that
even poor households were spending enough on education so as to almost completely substitute
away the value of the school grant from their own spending.


5   Robustness and Interpretation
    We find strong suggestive evidence from two different low-income countries for a model in
which households respond to anticipated school funding. The crowding out of private spending
is sufficiently substantial to lead to no impact on test scores from anticipated school grants, while
unanticipated changes positively impact the growth of test scores of children. In this section, we
discuss the robustness of our results and its interpretation.
5.1 What are the components of spending?
    One possible concern regarding our interpretation of the results is that the lack of
responsiveness by households to unanticipated funds arises because schools spend these funds on
different inputs with different parameters of (technical) substitution between household and
school funding. Simply put, it is possible that all the unanticipated grants were spent on hiring
teachers (who households cannot substitute for) and all the anticipated grants on textbooks
(which they can). We compare patterns of spending across various spending categories, and
show that this is not the case. In AP, the pattern of spending across various categories is almost
identical between the first and second years of the project (Table 7), and it seems clear that the
funds were spent on the same type of inputs both when they were unanticipated (first year) and
anticipated (second year). In Zambia, we cannot attribute school spending to specific sources of
funding (discretionary vs. rule-based). However, the total shares spent on those items most
suitable for substitution (books, chalks, and stationary) add up to 57% and 47% respectively for
schools without and with discretionary funding, suggesting that in both cases, substantial and
similar spending occurs on items that could be substituted by households.
    This also helps rule out explanations based on diminishing returns to the items procured or
the durable nature of school materials. In both countries, the majority of the grant is spent on
material that is used up during the school year (stationery, notebooks, practice books, etc). In the
AP experiment, it is possible that some of the classroom materials purchased may be durable,

                                                  24
and the results reflect diminishing returns to durables in the second year. However, we see that
the exact same fraction of the grant was spent on classroom materials in both years, suggesting
that even these materials needed to be replenished. We also explicitly record spending on
durables (bags, uniforms, plates, etc.) and find that these accounted for less than 10% of
spending in the first year, and under 1% in the second year.
5.2 Are the unanticipated grants “true” surprises?
   A further possible concern with our approach may be that the distinction between anticipated
and unanticipated funding is artificial, and households can similarly anticipate both sources after
all. For the AP program, this is hard to sustain: as mentioned earlier, the schools had no reason
whatsoever to expect the program in the first year, while the grant was eagerly anticipated by
schools in the second year. Also, as suggested earlier, most household spending on education
occurs at the start of the school year when the school typically provides parents with a list of
items to procure for their child for the school year. In the first year of the experiment, the
announcement of the grant program was made around one and a half months into the school year
and materials were typically procured a few weeks after that. Thus, it is highly likely that
materials bought with the grant supplemented the initial household spending and that the first-
year program effect represents the "production function" effect of additional spending on school
materials. In the second year of the program, field reports suggest that in many cases, treatment
schools reduced the list of what they expected parents to buy expecting to use the grant to buy
some of these items. Thus, the difference in the degree of anticipation of funds in the first and
second year is quite clear.
   Similarly, in Zambia the uncertainty related to the cash-budget meant that actual spending
and budgets were far apart. The typical arrival of these funds at varying points during the school
year suggest that households were unlikely to be able to respond to these (as suggested by the
positive test score gains in these schools in Table 4A and 4B, and the findings in Table 2). In
any case, we see clearly in Table 3 that households do respond substantially to variations in the
rule-based grants and that they spend much more/less in schools with lower/higher per-student
rule-based funding.
5.3 Budgetary Offsets
   A third possibility is that there are correlations between the two different types of funds that
may be confounding our results. In Zambia, we find a positive but insignificant relationship

                                                 25
between rule-based funding and discretionary funding [p-value=0.22]. In AP, the concern would
be if anticipated funds are offset by a reduction of other transfers to the program schools. We
measure the total grants received by the schools from all other sources and we verify that there is
no difference in year to year receipts of funds in either treatment or control schools. There is
also no significant difference between the amounts received in treatment and control schools in
any year, or a significant difference between any of these differences across the years (tables
available on request).
5.4 Storage and Smoothing
   In interpreting our results, a question that arises is whether households or schools could have
smoothed the unexpected grant by either saving some of the funds or storing some materials for
use in later years (if the materials had already been bought). We argue that this does not seem to
have taken place because the households don’t appear to reduce their expenditure in response to
the unanticipated grant in either AP or in Zambia. On the school side, the program design in AP
did not provide schools the option of saving funds. They could have saved materials, but they
spend on the same sets of materials in both years suggesting that storage was limited, and that the
grant led to a near one for one increase in learning materials in the first year. In Zambia, the cash
budget system in government spending would have given little scope for smoothing spending,
though some of the funds did get used for durable infrastructure.
   But even if some smoothing via savings, storage or durable goods spending by the school
may have been possible, the coefficient on the unexpected grant is a lower bound on the
production function parameter (because in this case, the full value of the grant will not have been
spent in the same time period) and our results show that the production function effect of the
school grant is positive – which would not have been apparent if the relationship between school
grants and test scores were to have been estimated using anticipated grants.
5.5 What did households substitute spending towards?
   One striking implication of our results is that while it was possible in production function
terms to obtain a significant increase in student test scores in both contexts for a relatively
inexpensive intervention (spending $3/student to raise test scores by 0.1 SD compares very
favorably with the cost effectiveness of other education interventions in developing countries),
parents chose to not make that investment in the next period when they could have continued
making it (in AP), and seem to offset rule-based grants completely in Zambia. While this result

                                                  26
suggests that the households had a low income elasticity of test scores, it is impossible to make
any further conclusions without further information on what the household spent the extra cash
on. Specifically, given the declining marginal benefit of spending on education in each particular
period, the household may still have found it better to save this money for spending on future
educational materials, rather than just spend it on goods and services this year. As we do not
have information on what the households did with the extra cash available, we cannot explore
this further. 39
     We summarize this section by noting that while having further disaggregated data on both
school and household expenditures would allow for an even more precise understanding of the
mechanism for our test score results, the combination of the household spending results and the
test score results are most parsimoniously explained by the theoretical framework laid out in this
paper. We consider but end up rejecting several alternative explanations for these results and
finding the same results in two contexts as varied as Zambia and India makes us confident that
our results present evidence of differential household responses to anticipated and unanticipated
school grants.


6    Conclusion
     Data on test-scores and household expenditures in the context of school grant programs in
Zambia and Andhra Pradesh in India suggest that grants anticipated by households crowd-out
private educational spending. Consequently, school grants that are fully anticipated have no
impact on test-scores. Unanticipated grants elicit no household responses and do have positive
impacts on learning.
     These results have implications for common estimation techniques in the educational
literature. The dominant technique for estimating the effect of school inputs on test scores is
based on the production function approach, where achievement (or changes in achievement) is
regressed on school inputs. Following Todd and Wolpin (2003), these estimates represent the
policy effect of school inputs that combines both the effect of inputs on test scores through the
production function, as well as household responses to such inputs. Our use of unanticipated



39
  What we do know from our evidence is that households did not spend it on other (non-education) inputs that may
raise child test scores directly, such as child nutrition; if so, we could have had substantial crowding out, but still a
positive impact on test-scores, which is rejected by our evidence.

                                                           27
inputs allows the estimation of both effects separately, thus shedding more light on the process
through which school inputs may or may not affect educational attainments.
     This distinction between anticipated and unanticipated inputs could account for the wide
variation in estimated coefficients of school inputs on test scores (Glewwe 2002, Hanushek
2003, or Kreuger 2003). The production function framework does not separate anticipated from
unanticipated inputs and so the regressor is a combination of these two different variables. The
estimated coefficient is bounded below by the policy effect and above by the production function
parameter; the distance from either bound depends on the extent to which the schooling inputs
were anticipated or not.       While experimental evaluations of education interventions typically
overcome selection and omitted variable concerns, the distinction highlighted in this paper is
relevant even for experiments, since the interpretation of experimental coefficients depends on
the time horizon of the evaluation and whether this was long enough for other agents (especially
households) to re-optimize their own inputs.
     Although we find evidence of high crowding out of anticipated inputs, our results do not
suggest an educational policy where inputs are provided unexpectedly. Although test scores in
the current period increase with unanticipated inputs, the additional consumption will push
households off the optimal path. In subsequent periods, therefore, they will readjust
expenditures until the first-order conditions are valid again – unanticipated inputs in the current
period will not have persistent effects in the future (except due to the durable nature of the good).
The policy framework that is suggested under this approach involves a deeper understanding of
the relationship between public and private spending, acknowledging that this may vary across
different components of public spending. Our key policy implication is that schooling inputs
that are less likely to be substituted away by households are better candidates for government
provision. 40
     What might such inputs be? One important example may be teaching inputs, whereby the
combination of economies of scale in production (relative to private tuition), difficulty of
substituting for teacher time by poorly educated parents, or the generic non-availability of trained
personnel in every village could make public provision more efficient (see Andrabi et al., 2009).

40
   An alternative could be to give very large grants to school. The anticipated grant in both countries was relatively
small. For example, in AP only 12% of households were spending less than the per pupil school grant. If a grant
larger than household spending had been given, then crowding out of household spending would have been
bounded, and the additional school grant may have had a positive impact on test-scores as total spending by schools
and households would have been increased.

                                                          28
In a parallel experiment on the provision of an extra teacher to randomly-selected schools in
Andhra Pradesh, Muralidharan and Sundararaman (2010) find that the impact of the extra teacher
was identical in both the first and second year of the project – suggesting that teacher inputs were
less likely to be substituted away. Similarly, inputs like school infrastructure that retain some
aspects of public-goods and would thus be under-provided by non-coordinating households are a
good candidate for government provision.
   The approach followed here of treating test scores as a household maximization problem
with the production function acting as a constraint explicitly recognizes the centrality of
households in the domain of child learning. This has important implications for both estimation
and policy and further research could potentially separate inputs with high/low degrees of
substitutability with regard to private expenditures. One hurdle for such studies is the lack of
matched school and household data and the identification of "surprises" in the provision of
inputs; long-term data on schooling inputs and panel data on student learning would allow for a
deeper understanding in varied contexts based on deviations from means, as is standard in the
consumption literature (following Hall 1978). Investments in such data collection will provide
the necessary infrastructure for evaluation of short, medium, and long-run impacts of education
policy innovations and should be a high priority for education policy makers and funders of
education research.




                                                 29
References

ANDRABI, T., J. DAS, and A. KHWAJA (2010): "Students Today, Teachers Tomorrow?
        Identifying Constraints on the Provision of Education," Harvard University.
AUTOR, D. H., and M. G. DUGGAN (2003): "The Rise in the Disability Rolls and the Decline in
        Unemployment," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118, 157-205.
BECKER, G. S., and N. TOMES (1976): "Child Endowments and the Quantity and Quality of
        Children," Journal of Political Economy, 84, S143-S162.
BOONPERM, J., J. HAUGHTON, and S. R. KHANDKER (2009): "Does the Village Fund Matter in
        Thailand?," The World Bank.
CASE, A., and A. DEATON (1999): "School Inputs and Educational Outcomes in South Africa,"
        Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114, F1047-F84.
CUTLER, D. M., and J. GRUBER (1996): "The Effect of Medicaid Expansions on Public Insurance,
        Private Insurance, and Redistribution," The American Economic Review, 86, 378-383.
DAS, J., S. DERCON, J. HABYARIMANA, and P. KRISHNAN (2003): "Rules Vs. Discretion: Public
        and Private Funding in Zambian Education," Development Research Group, The World
        Bank.
— (2004): "When Can School Inputs Improve Test Scores?" World Bank Policy Research
        Working Paper 3217.
DEATON, A., and J. MUELLBAUER (1980): Economics and Consumer Behavior. Cambridge, UK:
        Cambridge University Press.
DERCON, S., and P. KRISHNAN (2000): "In Sickness and in Health: Risk Sharing within Rural
        Households in Rural Ethiopia," Journal of Political Economy, 108, 688-727.
DINH, H. T., A. ADUGNA, and B. MYERS (2002): "The Impact of Cash Budgets on Poverty
        Reduction in Zambia: A Case Study of the Conflict between Well-Intentioned
        Macroeconomic Policy and Service Delivery to the Poor," The World Bank.
EISSA, N., and J. B. LIEBMAN (1996): "Labor Supply Response to the Earned Income Tax
        Credit," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111, 605-637.
FOSTER, A. D. (1995): "Prices, Credit Markets and Child Growth in Low-Income Rural Areas,"
        The Economic Journal, 105, 551-570.
GLEWWE, P. (2002): "Schools and Skills in Developing Countries: Education Policies and
        Socioeconomic Outcomes " Journal of Economic Literature, 40, 436-482.
GLEWWE, P., and M. KREMER (2006): "Schools, Teachers, and Education Outcomes in
        Developing Countries," in Handbook of the Economics of Education, ed. by E. Hanushek,
        and F. Welch: North-Holland.
HALL, R. E. (1978): "Stochastic Implications of the Life Cycle-Permanent Income Hypothesis:
        Theory and Evidence," The Journal of Political Economy, 86, 971-987.
HANUSHEK, E., and J. A. LUQUE (2003): "Efficiency and Equity in Schools around the World,"
        Economics of Education Review, 20, 481-502.
HANUSHEK, E. A. (2002): "Publicly Provided Education," in Handbook of Public Economics, ed.
        by A. J. Auerbach, and M. S. Feldstein. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 2045-2141.
— (2003): "The Failure of Input-Based Schooling Policies," Economic Journal, 113, F64-98.
HOUTENVILLE, A. J., and K. S. CONWAY (2008): "Parental Effort, School Resources, and Student
        Achievement," Journal of Human Resources, 43, 437-453.
JACOBY, H. G., and E. SKOUFIAS (1997): "Risk, Financial Markets, and Human Capital in a
        Developing Country," The Review of Economic Studies, 64, 311-335.


                                             30
KABOSKI, J. P., and R. M. TOWNSEND (2008): "A Structural Evaluation of a Large-Scale Quasi-
      Experimental Microfinance Initiative," Ohio State University.
KANYIKA, J., C. T. SAKALA, M. MWALE, R. MUSUKU, G. G. MWEEMBA, and T. NAKASWE-
      MUSAKANYA (2005): "Learning Achievement at the Middle Basic Level: Zambia's
      National Assessment Survey Report."
KRUEGER, A. (2003): "Economic Considerations and Class Size," Economic Journal, 113, 34-63.
MEYER, B. D. (1990): "Unemployment Insurance and Unemployment Spells," Econometrica, 58,
      757-782.
MOFFITT, R. A. (2002): "Welfare Programs and Labor Supply," in Handbook of Public
      Economics: Elsevier B.V., 2393-2430.
MURALIDHARAN, K., and V. SUNDARARAMAN (2010): "Contract Teachers: Experimental
      Evidence from India," UC San Diego.
— (2011): "Teacher Performance Pay: Experimental Evidence from India," Journal of Political
      Economy.
PRATHAM (2010): Annual Status of Education Report.
PRITCHETT, L., and D. FILMER (1999): "What Education Production Functions Really Show: A
      Positive Theory of Education Expenditures," Economics of Education Review, 18, 223-
      39.
REINIKKA, R., and J. SVENSSON (2004): "Local Capture: Evidence from a Central Government
      Transfer Program in Uganda," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119, 679-705.
TODD, P. E., and K. I. WOLPIN (2003): "On the Specification and Estimation of the Production
      Function for Cognitive Achievement," Economic Journal, 113, F3-33.
URQUIOLA, M. (2006): "Identifying Class Size Effects in Developing Countries: Evidence from
      Rural Bolivia," Review of Economics and Statistics, 88, 171-177.
URQUIOLA, M., and E. VERHOOGEN (2009): "Class-Size Caps, Sorting, and the Regression-
      Discontinuity Design " The American Economic Review, 99, 179-215.




                                            31
                                             Table 1: Summary Statistics of Sampled Schools

                                                                           Full          Urban          Rural          Remote       Difference (Col
Variable Type                  Variable
                                                                         Sample         Sample         Sample          Sample          3 - Col 4)
                               Size of average class in school           53.9892       40.7701         58.2003         68.0702             -9.86
Class Size Indicators
                               Students per good classroom               98.3198       102.4692        97.9581         91.0939              6.86
                               Does school have library                  0.1163         0.2167          0.0633         0.0606             -0.002
                               Does school have playground               0.9128         0.7833          0.9747            1               -0.025
Infrastructure
                               Does school have fence                    0.3198           0.8           0.0759         0.0303              0.045
                               Math textbooks per 100 pupils             29.4018       12.4983         34.0235         50.7878          -16.76**
                               English textbooks per 100 pupils          31.9922       18.9598         37.8634         42.8223             -4.95
School Inputs
                               Desks per 100 pupils                      40.5585        38.1258        38.6156         50.0305          -11.41**
                               Fraction Repeating                         0.0772        0.0468          0.0935         0.0937            -0.0002
School Performance
                               Fraction Dropouts in Primary              0.0423         0.0191          0.053          0.0579             -0.005
                               Imputed school level asset
Student Assets
                               indices                                   -0.1581         0.6134        -0.4804         -0.7892         0.308***
                               Did School receive discretionary
                               funds                                      0.2442          0.25          0.2911         0.1212            0.169*
                               Did School receive rule-based
                               funds                                      0.9419         0.9333         0.9241             1              -0.07
School Funding
                               Per-Pupil Discretionary Funds
                               (Kwacha)                                 10369.31       4280.306       11702.52        18248.62           -6546
                               Per-Pupil Rule-Based Funds
                               (Kwacha)                                 4997.677       2004.352       5750.567        8637.709        -2887.14***
Observations                                                              172             60             78              34

Notes: The table shows summary statistics for (a) all schools in the sample in Column (1); (b) schools in the sample that are in urban areas only in
Column (2); schools that are in the sample in rural regions but not in the remote sample that was also selected for the household survey Column
(3) and; schools that were in the remote sample only in Column (4). Column (5) reports tests of differences between schools in the rural and the
remote samples. School-level asset indices are the average wealth of students in the school, based on surveys with students who were also
tested. For the construction of the asset index, see Das et al. (2003) ***p<.01 **p<.05 * p<.1. 1 US dollar = 3570 Kwacha on 1 September 2001.
           Table 2: The Relationship between Household Spending and School Funding
                                           (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)
                                       Dependent Variable: Log of Household Spending on Child's Education
                                           OLS               OLS                 IV                IV
Rule Based Funds                        -0.716**         -0.843***          -1.124***          -0.946**
                                         [0.285]           [0.252]            [0.266]           [0.460]
Discretionary Funds                       0.0769                0.0713                0.0661               0.0627
                                          [0.109]              [0.0829]              [0.0910]             [0.0797]
Constant                                 14.69***             15.52***              18.42***             16.25***
                                          [2.617]              [2.454]               [2.383]              [3.561]
Geographic Controls                          N                    Y                     N                    Y
Child-level Controls                         N                    Y                     N                    Y
Household-level Controls                     N                    Y                     N                    Y
School-Level Controls                        N                    Y                     N                    Y
F-stat of First Stage                                                                 23.54                10.32
Observations                               1,195                1,116                 1,164                1,085
R-squared                                  0.053                0.239                 0.037                0.238
Notes: This table shows the relationship between household spending and funding received at the school. All
regressions exclude 2 private schools. We report OLS and IV coefficients for the response of household spending to
rule-based and discretionary funding at the school-level. Column (1) has no controls beyond rule based and
discretionary funds; column (2) control include province and rural dummies; child age, the square of age, and
gender; parental presence, parental literacy and household wealth measured through an asset index; and class-
size in the school, textbooks available per child for Mathematics and English and the number of desks and chairs
per 100 children. Columns (3) and (4) are the estimated coefficients from an instrumental variable specification
where we use the size of the school catchment as an instrument for per-student rule-based funding as discussed in
the text. The F-statistic of the first-stage for each specification is noted; we reduce the sample size by 2 schools for
whom this information is not available. Robust standard errors in brackets. *** p<.01, ** p<.05.



               Table 3: Household Spending and Rule-Based Allocations in the School
                                                                      Low Rule          High Rule
                                                                     Based Grant       Based Grant
Funding Type                                                                                              Difference
                                                                       Schools           Schools
                                                                       (N=17)            (N=17)
Average Per-Child     Mean                                              17882             12022            5860***
Household Expenditure
(Kwacha)              Observations (Households)                           612               620              1232
Rule-Based funds             Mean                                         5915            12158            -6243***
(Kwacha)                     Observations (Schools)                        17               17                34

Total Household and          Mean                                         23734           24124              -390
Rule-Based Funding
(Kwacha)                     Observations (Households)                    612               620              1232
Notes: Rule Based-Funds show the per-student funding received under the BESSIP funding. Total Household and
Rule-Based funding shows the sum of the two. The 34 schools in the sample are categorized into two equal groups
with low and high rule-based funding. *** p<0.01 p<0.1. 1 US dollar = 3570 Kwacha on 1 September 2001.
  Table 4A The Relative Impacts of Rule-Based Funds and the Receipt of Discretionary Funds on Test-Scores
                                                                                Dependent variable is the gain in normalized test-scores
                                                                                        English                      Mathematics
VARIABLES                                                                           [1]           [2]             [3]            [4]
Any Discretionary Funds Received                                                 0.128**       0.103**         0.0794*        0.0957*
                                                                                 [0.0583]      [0.0501]       [0.0457]        [0.0481]
Rule-Based Funds                                                                 -0.0272           -0.0184           -0.00416          -0.00445
                                                                                 [0.0343]          [0.0303]          [0.0216]          [0.0262]
Constant                                                                          0.664**          0.550**           0.467**            0.459*
                                                                                  [0.288]          [0.259]           [0.187]            [0.235]

Geographical controls                                                                Y                 Y                 Y                  Y
School controls                                                                      N                 Y                 N                  Y
Expenditure controls                                                                 N                 N                 N                 N
Lagged test scores                                                                   N                 N                 N                 N
Observations                                                                        172               171               172               171
R-squared                                                                          0.133             0.187             0.042              0.06


Notes: The table reports the estimated effects of rule-based and discretionary funds on yearly changes in English and Mathematics test-scores.
Discretionary Funds are treated as a binary variable, separating schools into those who received a positive amount versus thosse who received zero.
Column (1) reports the estimated coefficient with only geographical controls, in the form of indicator variables for whether the school is rural and
the province; Column (2) adds in school level changes in the head-teacher, the head of the Parent-Teacher Association and PTA fees; Column (3) and
(4) report the coefficients for Mathematics. All regressions are clustered at the district-level.*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
            Table 4B: The Relative Impacts of Rule-Based Funds and Discretionary Funds on Test-Scores
                                                                           Dependent variable is the gain in normalized test-scores+C46
                                                                                     English                        Mathematics
VARIABLES                                                                      [1]              [2]              [3]             [4]
Discretionary Funds                                                         0.0700**         0.0598**          0.0193          0.0287
                                                                            [0.0331]         [0.0274]         [0.0236]        [0.0240]
Square of Discretionary Funds                                               -0.00488*            -0.00422*            -0.000524            -0.00122
                                                                            [0.00274]            [0.00231]            [0.00185]           [0.00192]
Rule-Based Funds                                                              -0.025               -0.0159            -0.00603             -0.00617
                                                                             [0.0348]             [0.0314]            [0.0215]             [0.0261]
Constant                                                                      0.544*                0.439              0.461**              0.438*
                                                                              [0.313]              [0.287]             [0.204]              [0.248]

Geographical controls                                                            Y                    Y                    Y                   Y
School controls                                                                  N                    Y                    N                   Y
Expenditure controls                                                             N                    N                    N                   N
Lagged test scores                                                               N                    N                    N                   N
F-Test of equality of impact of discretionary and rule-                         4.27                2.87                 0.99                 0.98
based funds
P-Value of F-Test                                                              [.047]               [.10]               [0.32]               [0.33]
Observations                                                                     172                 171                 172                  171
R-squared                                                                      0.139                0.192               0.047                0.065


Notes: The table reports the estimated effects of rule-based and discretionary funds on yearly changes in English and Mathematics test-scores.
Discretionary Funds and Rule-Based Funds are treated as a continuous variable Column (1) reports the estimated coefficient with only geographical
controls, in the form of indicator variables for whether the school is rural and the province; Column (2) adds in school level changes in the head-
teacher, the head of the Parent-Teacher Association and PTA fees. Columns (3) to (4) report the coefficients for Mathematics. All regressions are
clustered at the district-level. F-test reported tests null hypothesis that impact of discretionary funding is equal to impact of rule-based funding at
mean levels of B26B22discretionary funding. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
           Table 5: Are receipts of discretionary funds correlated with observable school
                                           characteristics?
                                                [1]                          [2]                     [3]                  [4]
                                         Schools that did             Schools that
                                           not receive                   received
                                                                                                Difference           OLS Results
                                          discretionary               discretionary
                                             funding                      funding
Total enrolment at School                   887.3692                    989.5476                   -102.18           0.0000474
                                           [677.0056]                  [628.4058]                 [118.13]           [0.000132]
Average Wealth of Students                   -0.1942                      -0.0465                   -0.158              0.0364
in School                                    [.7971]                      [.7349]                   [.138]             [0.103]
Mean Math Score at                           -0.0194                      -0.0672                   -0.047              -0.139
baseline                                     [.4433]                      [.4226]                   [.077]            [0.0929]
Mean English Score at                        -0.0585                      -0.0516                   -0.007              0.105
baseline                                      [.438]                      [.5288]                   [.082]            [0.0860]
Fraction Repeating                            0.0768                       0.0786                   0.002               0.445
                                             [.0645]                      [.0579]                   [.011]             [0.597]
Fraction Dropouts in                          0.0447                       0.0349                    0.009              -0.555
Primary                                      [.0556]                      [.0556]                   [.009]             [0.661]
DEO office <5KM                               0.7308                       0.619                    0.112              -0.0657
                                             [.4453]                      [.4915]                   [.084]            [0.0760]
PEO office <25KM                              0.7077                       0.7857                   -0.078              0.129*
                                             [.4566]                      [.4153]                   [.075]            [0.0751]
Size of average class in                     56.2947                     46.9079                     9.38                0.151
school                                      [38.0703]                   [19.2398]                   [6.12]             [0.166]
Observations                                    130                          42                                           172
                                                                                                      R2                 0.04
                                                     F-Test (All Coefficients are jointly insignificant)                 1.58
                                                                                     P-Value of F-test                 [0.171]

Notes: The table shows the differences between schools that received any discretionary funds and those that did not. Columns
(1) and (2) show the mean values and Column (3) reports the results from the mean comparisons. Column (4) reports results
from a regression where we predict the receipt of any discretionary funding with school-level variables that would not have
responded to the receipt of funds. The F-test cannot reject that all variables we consider are jointly insignificant, suggesting that
schools that received discretionary funds were observationally similar to those that did not. For Columns (1) and (2), standard
deviations are reported in brackets; for Column (3) standard errors of the difference are reported in brackets and in Column (4)
we report the robust standard error after accounting for clustering at the district level.
                                Table 6: Sample Balance Across Treatments
                                                                      [1]                [2]                 [3]
                                                                                                       P-value (H0:
                                                                   Control          Block Grant
Variable type         Variable                                                                            Diff = 0)
                      Total Enrollment (Baseline:
School-level Variable                                               113.2              104.2                  0.39
                      Grades 1-5)
                      Total Test-takers (Baseline:
                                                                     64.9                62.3                 0.64
                      Grades 2-5)
                      Number of Teachers                             3.07                3.03                 0.84
                          Pupil-Teacher Ratio                        39.5                34.6                 0.17
                          Infrastructure Index (0-6)                 3.19                3.40                 0.37
                          Proximity to Facilities Index
                                                                    14.55              14.66                  0.84
                          (8-24)

Baseline test             Math (Raw %)                               18.4                16.6                 0.12
performance               Telugu (Raw %)                             35.0                33.7                 0.42
Notes: The table shows the sample balance between the treatment and control groups. The school infrastructure index
sums 6 binary variables (coded from 0 - 6) indicating the existence of a brick building, a playground, a compound
wall, a functioning source of water, a functional toilet, and functioning electricity. 2. The school proximity index
ranges from 8-24 and sums 8 variables (each coded from 1-3) indicating proximity to a paved road, a bus stop, a
public health clinic, a private health clinic, public telephone, bank, post office, and the mandal educational
resource center. 3. The t-statistics for the baseline test scores and attrition are computed by treating each
student/teacher as an observation and clustering the standard errors at the school level (Grade 1 did not have a
baseline test). The other t-statistics are computed treating each school as an observation.



                 Table 7: Spending of School Grant (Average per Block Grant School)

                                                                                Year 1                       Year 2
                                                                             Rs.            %         Rs.               %
Textbooks                                                                   110            1.1       246              2.6
Practice books                                                              1782          17.7       1703             17.8
Classroom materials                                                         2501          24.9       2354             24.6
Child Stationary                                                            4076          40.5       4617             48.2
Child Durable Materials                                                      864           8.6        88              0.9
Sports Goods and Others                                                      723           7.2        577              6.0

Average Total Expenditure per Block Grant School                            10057         100        9586             100

Notes: The table shows the average spending in Rupees and spending share in each year of the school grant.
  Table 8 : Household Expenditure on Education of Children in Block Grant Schools (relative
                            to comparison schools) over time
                                                         Dependent variable is log of household expenditure on
                                                                         children's education
                                                                  [1]                            [2]
  Block Grant School* Year 0                                      -0.021                              -0.017
                                                                  [0.033]                             [0.031]
  Block Grant School* Year 1                                      -0.043                              -0.038
                                                                  [0.028]                             [0.026]
  Block Grant School * Year 2                                     -0.25***                           -0.273***
                                                                   [0.04]                             [0.042]

  Household Controls                                                 No                                 Yes
  Observations                                                     34645                              31184
  R-squared                                                        0.142                              0.168
  P-value (BG * year 1 = BG * Year 2)                              0.000                               0.000

  Notes: Household expenditure on children's education is the sum of spending on textbooks, notebooks, workbooks,
  pencils, slates, pocket money for school, school fees, and other educational expenses. Block Grant is a dummy denoting
  whether the school was a treatment school receiving the block grant or not. In column [2], household controls included
  are student gender, caste, parental literacy and household affluence. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; ***
  significant at 1%




                          Table 9 : Impact of Block Grant on Student Test Scores
                                          Dependent Variable is Gain in Normalized Test Scores
                                        Mathematics                                       Language (Telugu)
                                [1]                [2]             [3]             [4]                 [5]            [6]
                                             Second-year                                         Second-year
                        First-year Gain                          Two-        First-year Gain                         Two-
                                                 Gain                                                Gain
                        (Unanticipated                           year        (Unanticipated                          year
                                             (Anticipated                                        (Anticipated
                             Grant)                              Gain             Grant)                             Gain
                                                Grant)                                              Grant)


Block Grant School            0.091               -0.008         0.039            0.079               0.047          0.065
                            [0.042]**            [0.049]        [0.049]         [0.038]**            [0.039]        [0.046]

Observations                  13778              12844            9891            13926              12878           9981
R-squared                     0.293               0.302          0.325            0.254              0.206           0.238
Notes: All regressions include mandal (sub-district) fixed effects and standard errors clustered at the school level.
Estimates of two-year gains do not include the cohort in grade 1 in the second year (since they only exposure to
one year of the program). All regressions include lagged test scores. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; ***
significant at 1%.
