                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          CROSS-COUNTRY COMPARISONS OF CORPORATE INCOME TAXES

                                         Kevin S. Markle
                                      Douglas A. Shackelford

                                       Working Paper 16839
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w16839


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2011




We appreciate the helpful comments from Rosanne Altshuler, Julian Alworth, Elizabeth Blankespoor,
Kim Clausing, Mihir Desai, Michael Devereux, Scott Dyreng, Kevin Hassett, Michelle Hanlon, Ken
Klassen, Mark Lang, Peter Merrill, Tom Neubig, Jana Raedy, Nemit Schroff, Dan Shaviro, Joel Slemrod,
Martin Sullivan, and workshop participants at the Institute for Fiscal Studies/European Tax Policy
Forum conference, the International Tax Policy Forum/Urban-Brookings Tax Policy Center Institution
conference, the Journal of the American Taxation Association Tax Research Conference, Duke University,
Northwestern University, New York University, the University of Michigan, and the University of
North Carolina. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Kevin S. Markle and Douglas A. Shackelford. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Cross-Country Comparisons of Corporate Income Taxes
Kevin S. Markle and Douglas A. Shackelford
NBER Working Paper No. 16839
February 2011
JEL No. H25,K34,M41

                                              ABSTRACT

To our knowledge, this paper provides the most comprehensive analysis of firm-level corporate income
taxes to date. We use publicly available financial statement information for 11,602 public corporations
from 82 countries from 1988 to 2009 to estimate country-level effective tax rates (ETRs). We find
that the location of a multinational and its subsidiaries substantially affects its worldwide ETR. Japanese
firms always faced the highest ETRs. U.S. multinationals are among the highest taxed. Multinationals
based in tax havens face the lowest taxes. We find that ETRs have been falling over the last two decades;
however, the ordinal rank from high-tax countries to low-tax countries has changed little. We also
find little difference between the ETRs of multinationals and domestic-only firms. Besides enhancing
our knowledge about international taxes, these findings should provide some empirical underpinning
for ongoing policy debates about the taxation of multinationals.


Kevin S. Markle
Tuck School of Business
Dartmouth College
New Hanover, NH
ksmarkle@gmail.com

Douglas A. Shackelford
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Kenan-Flagler Business School
Campus Box 3490, McColl Building
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3490
and NBER
doug_shack@unc.edu
1. Introduction

         This paper exploits recently available financial statement information about non-U.S.

companies to enhance our understanding of how taxes affect multinationals and to provide some

empirical underpinnings for the ongoing debates in the Unites States, the United Kingdom, and

other countries about competition in the market for tax domicile.1 It is widely accepted among

American tax practitioners and corporate managers that U.S. domicile results in higher total

worldwide taxes, new companies anticipating substantial foreign operations should not

incorporate in the U.S., and companies domiciled outside the U.S. have a tax advantage in the

market for corporate control (see Samuels, 2009, Carroll, 2010, among many others). Reasons

include the U.S.’s use of a worldwide tax system, which diminishes the advantages of operating

through subsidiaries located in low-tax foreign countries and makes the U.S. somewhat unique

among its trading partners, limits on the deductibility of some expenses, a relatively restrictive

controlled foreign corporation (CFC) regime, and aggressive federal tax administration.2 As

evidence that other countries dominate the U.S. as a domicile for multinationals and that

companies currently domiciled in the U.S. would leave if the tax costs of exiting were not

prohibitive, critics of the current U.S. system point (as one example) to the strong legislation and

political pressure that were needed to stem the exodus of U.S. companies through inversions


1
  By “domicile,” we mean the location of the firm for tax purposes. There is no standard definition of domicile. For
example, domicile is the legal residence or site of incorporation in the U.S., but the location of operational
headquarters in the UK.
2
  In overly simplistic terms, countries with territorial systems only tax the domestic income of companies domiciled
in their country. In contrast, countries with worldwide systems tax all income (domestic and foreign) of their home
companies and provide foreign tax credits to prevent double taxation of foreign profits. Timothy McDonald, Vice
President of Finance and Accounting for Procter & Gamble, likely spoke for many U.S. managers when he called
the Netherlands, who have a territorial system with few restrictions on the deductibility of expenses related to
foreign activities, the model system for taxing multinationals (Tuerff, et al., 2008, p.79). Consistent with American
companies envying their Dutch competitors, allegedly fewer than five of the 20 largest Dutch companies are paying
any corporate income tax to the Netherlands (Dohmen, 2008).
(reincorporations in low-tax countries with no operational impact), following Stanley Works’

highly controversial aborted move to Bermuda in 2002.3

         However, concerns about domicile competitiveness are not limited to the U.S. In his

study of 278 changes in multinational headquarters involving 19 countries from 1997 to 2007,

Voget (2008) shows that relocating to reduce global taxes is a widespread phenomenon. Most

recently, the UK has seen several companies leave for domiciles in tax havens.4 In fact, the

Financial Times (September 21, 2008) quoted an anonymous source saying, “As we understand

it, half the FTSE 100 is looking at this [redomiciling outside the UK.].” (Braithwaite, 2008).5

This inability to compete for domicile contributed to the UK’s recent adoption of a territorial

system of taxing the foreign profits of its multinationals.6



3
   See Desai and Hines (2002) for detailed discussions of the inversions. Capturing the fiery rhetoric in 2002
concerning U.S. inversions, Johnston (2002) reported, “Senior senators from both parties used blunt language today
to denounce companies that use Bermuda as a mail drop to reduce their American income taxes by tens of millions
of dollars, calling them ‘greedy’ and ‘unpatriotic’ tax evaders whose actions could not be tolerated ‘in a time of
war’.” In March, 1999, these issues were center stage in a famous exchange during the testimony of Bob Perlman,
Vice President of Taxes for Intel Corporation, before the Senate Finance Committee. Perlman stated, “…if I had
known at Intel's founding (over thirty years ago) what I know today about the international tax rules, I would have
advised that the parent company be established outside the U.S. This reflects the reality that our Tax Code
competitively disadvantages multinationals simply because the parent is a U.S. corporation.” (Perlman, 1999). The
Senate Finance Committee's ranking Democrat, New York Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan retorted, "So, you
would have left the United States for the tax shelters of the Cayman Islands. Do you think that the Marines are still
down there if you need them?...So money matters more to you than country?...I am sure you will reconsider it, but if
you do move, well, just keep in check with the American consul. You might never know." (United States Senate
Committee on Finance, 1999, p.17.)
4
   The exodus is not limited to corporate domicile. Jones and Houlder (2010) report the one-quarter of London’s
hedge fund employees have recently moved to Switzerland to avoid higher taxes.
5
  In 2008, Henderson Group, Charter, Shire, WPP, and the United Business Media, emigrated to Ireland and the
Regus Group to Luxembourg (Werdigier, 2008 and Faith, 2008), while Kingfisher, Brit Insurance, RSA Insurance,
and Prudential, among others, threatened to leave (Werdigier, 2008, Braithwaite, 2008). Colin Meadows, the Chief
Administrative Officer for Invesco, who moved left the UK for Bermuda in December, 2007, stated “…we wanted
to make sure the transaction in moving our domicile was tax neutral for our shareholders. Moving to the U.S. would
not have been a tax neutral situation. When it came down to it, it was a very short list of places that we considered
and Bermuda was at the top.” (Neil, 2007). Decentering also may explain some of the departures (Desai, 2008).
However, whether the departures are solely or partially tax-driven, the larger and longer-lasting implications for the
British people may be the newly formed companies that will never have any roots in the UK.
6
   Although UK multinationals widely welcomed the exemption of foreign dividends under a territorial system, some
question whether it is enough to stifle the exodus. Ian Brimicombe, head of tax at AstraZeneca, doubted that the
change in the law would bring back the firms that had already exited the UK and noted that companies with
intellectual property or finance subsidiaries were still disadvantaged in the UK. (Houlder, 2008).

                                                          2
         Conversely, scholars have long documented that multinationals are adept at arranging

their affairs to undo differences in taxation across countries.7 By shifting income from high-tax

to low-tax countries through transfer pricing, using hybrid entities that are treated as corporations

in some countries and flow-through entities in others, stripping profits from high-tax countries

through intracompany financing, repatriating under favorable tax conditions, and other tax

avoidance mechanisms, multinationals mitigate the impact of domicile in a high-tax.8 As a

recent example, Bloomberg (October 21, 2010) claims that by routing its offshore rights to

intellectual property through two Irish subsidiaries, a Dutch subsidiary, and a Bermuda entity,

Google reduced its total tax rate on foreign profits to 2.4%, saving $3.1 billion over the last three

years (Drucker, 2010).9

         Some add that the tax avoidance opportunities that arise from conducting business in

multiple countries gives multinationals an advantage over their domestic-only counterparts.10

With regards to any possible domicile disadvantages that U.S. multinationals might face,

Stephen Shay, the deputy assistant secretary for international tax affairs at the U.S. Treasury,

asserts that the size of the U.S. domestic market and the fact that other countries with smaller



7
  See Blouin and Krull (2009), Huizinga and Laeven (2008), Desai, et al (2006), Gordon and Hines (2002),
Shackelford and Shevlin (2001), Collins and Shackelford (1997), among many others, over the last two decades.
8
  Consistent with U.S. multinationals’ exploiting their ability to report profits in locations with more favorable tax
systems than the U.S., the foreign affiliates of American companies reported more of their aggregate net income in
the Netherlands (13%), Luxembourg (8%), and Bermuda (8%) than any country in 2006
(http://www.bea.gov/international/di1usdop.htm). Other locations with profits that far exceeded assets, sales and
employees were Ireland (7%), Switzerland (6%), Singapore (4%), and UK islands in the Caribbean (3%). For
comparison, 7% of the aggregate net income of U.S. foreign affiliates was reported to Canada (the U.S. largest
trading partner) and the UK, while only 2% was reported in high-tax Japan and Germany.
9
  Although we cannot verify these figures, a casual review of Google’s financial statements suggests that they pay
substantially less on their foreign profits that would be expected, given their presence in many relatively high-tax
countries.
10
   For example, after the HM Revenue and Customs National Audit Office (2007) reported that a third of the UK’s
700 largest companies paid no tax in the 2005-2006 financial year, Bill Dodwell of Deloitte stated, “That 700 of the
largest companies and groups are only paying 54 per cent of corporation tax shows the giant contribution of small
companies. It is probably because many are less international and so have different planning opportunities.”
(Houlder, 2007). Referring to U.S. multinationals, Johnston (2008) adds “…very few grasp how corporate taxes
favor multinationals over domestic firms.”

                                                          3
economies have to rely more on cross-border trading renders the U.S. unique and incomparable

with other countries, thus justifying differences in the U.S. taxation of multinationals (Coder,

2010). In effect, he argues that the economic advantages of the U.S. market offset any tax

disadvantages associated with U.S. domicile.

         As a result of these conflicting perspectives about whether multinationals are overtaxed

or undertaxed, it is an empirical issue whether domicile substantially affects a multinational’s

total worldwide taxes.11 To shed light on this question, we use firm-level financial statement

information to estimate the extent to which the location of a firm’s operations affects its global

corporate income taxes.12 We measure corporate income taxes by estimating country-level

effective tax rates (ETRs). In particular, we regress firm-level ETRs (based on cash taxes paid

and current and total tax expense as reported in firms’ financial statements) for 28,343 firm-years

spanning 82 countries on categorical variables for the domicile of the parent and whether the

company is a multinational. The regression coefficients on the categorical variables provide

estimates of country-level ETRs for both domestic firms (those operating in only one country)

and multinationals. Besides comparing multinational ETRs across domiciles, we test whether

domestics and multinationals face similar ETRs and how ETRs vary over time and across

11
   The tax domicile debate entered the U.S. Presidential debate on September 26, 2008, when Republican
Presidential candidate Senator John McCain stated, “Right now, American business pays the second-highest
business taxes in the world, 35 percent. Ireland pays 11 percent. Now, if you're a business person, and you can
locate any place in the world, then, obviously, if you go to the country where it's 11 percent tax versus 35 percent,
you're going to be able to create jobs, increase your business, make more investment, et cetera. I want to cut that
business tax. I want to cut it so that businesses will remain in—in the United States of America and create jobs.”
His opponent, then-Senator Barack Obama, countered, “Now, John mentioned the fact that business taxes on paper
are high in this country, and he's absolutely right. Here's the problem: There are so many loopholes that have been
written into the tax code, oftentimes with support of Senator McCain, that we actually see our businesses pay
effectively one of the lowest tax rates in the world.”
12
   Ideally, companies would be randomly assigned to countries and permitted time to rearrange their accounting,
legal, investing, financing, production, marketing, and other activities in light of the tax particulars of their assigned
country. We would then compare the global taxes for each company, recognizing that their international tax
planning acumen might enable the companies assigned to high-tax countries to undo any tax disadvantages.
Unfortunately, such experiments are impossible. Thus, we are relegated to examining the actual taxes paid (as
estimated using financial statement disclosures) by multinationals domiciled in countries for non-random reasons,
which we can only partially control for in our tests.

                                                            4
industries. We then add categorical variables that denote the location of the firm’s foreign

subsidiaries, enabling us to estimate the marginal ETR impact for every domicile of foreign

subsidiaries, including tax havens.

       The principal finding from the study is that domicile substantially affects multinationals’

ETRs. Even though many firms reportedly engage in increasingly aggressive international tax

planning with transfer pricing, hybrid entities and other tax avoidance strategies, they apparently

are unable to completely undo the differences in tax law across countries. Consequently, many

countries continue to collect large sums of corporate income taxes from multinationals even

though tax havens and other low-tax countries exist. In fact, we find that the ETRs for

multinationals in high-tax countries roughly double those in low-tax countries. In particular,

multinationals domiciled in Japan face the highest ETRs, followed by those domiciled in the

U.S., France and Germany. Multinationals domiciled in tax havens usually enjoy the lowest

ETRs. In some countries, multinationals face higher ETRs than their domestic counterparts; in

others, multinationals face lower ETRs. There is no global pattern.

       Furthermore, we find that, although ETRs have steadily declined worldwide over the last

two decades (most notably in Japan), the ordinal rank from high-tax countries to low-tax

countries has changed little. Furthermore, ETRs vary widely across industries throughout the

world with retailers and construction typically facing ETRs much higher than those of miners

and information firms. However, the variation is similar across countries. In almost all countries,

the same industries are high-tax and low-tax, and high-tax countries tend to tax all industries

more heavily than low-tax countries do. We also find the ETR for a multinational is greater if its

subsidiaries are located in high-tax countries than if its subsidiaries are located in low-tax

countries. For example, U.S. multinationals can reduce their ETR by locating a subsidiary in a



                                                  5
tax haven. A subsidiary in the Singapore (Ireland) reduces the cash ETR of the typical U.S.

multinational by 2.0 (1.6) percentage points.

       Data limitations have prevented scholars from estimating the marginal tax cost associated

with the domicile of multinationals. An early study, Collins and Shackelford (1995), uses total

income tax expense to compute ETRs for four countries (Canada, Japan, the UK, and the U.S.)

and ten years (1982-1991). Subsequently, Collins and Shackelford (2003) adds Germany and

estimates ETRs from 1992-1997; however, with data for only eight Japanese firm-years and 36

German firm-years, they are effectively limited to studying three countries. In both studies, they

conclude that the parents of multinationals domiciled in the U.S. and the UK faced similar ETRs,

both of which exceeded the parent ETRs in Canada. In neither study did they have information

about the location of the company’s subsidiaries. Two other studies compare (total income tax

expense) ETRs across countries. Lu and Swenson (2000) and Lee and Swenson (2008)

document average ETRs for a wide range of countries for 1995-1998 and 2006-2007,

respectively. Using the Global Vantage and Compustat Global databases, they calculate country-

level ETRs and use them as a basis for comparison for the Asia-Pacific countries that were the

focus of their studies. Neither study separates domestic-only and multinational corporations or

has information on the location of firms’ subsidiaries. As a result, inferences in both studies are

limited to cross-country comparisons at the aggregate and industry levels.

       Dyreng and Lindsey (2009) exploit text-searching software to collect foreign operations

information for all U.S.-incorporated firms in the Compustat database between 1995 and 2007

and estimate the average worldwide, federal, and foreign tax rates on U.S. pre-tax income. Their

estimate of a 1.5 percentage point reduction in ETRs for U.S. companies that have activities in a




                                                 6
tax haven is comparable with our haven estimates. A limitation of their study is that they do not

have access to data for companies domiciled outside the U.S.

         The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 develops the regression

equation used to estimate the ETRs. Section 3 details the sample selection. Sections 4, 5, and 6

present the empirical findings. Closing remarks follow.



2.       Regression Equation

         To compare the tax rates of multinationals and domestic firms across countries and to

determine whether multinationals and domestics in the same country face different tax rates, we

could simply use the actual firm-level ETRs. However, erroneous inferences about the level of

taxation across countries could be reached because companies are not randomly assigned across

countries. For example, if the technology sector faces relatively low taxes throughout the world

because of tax incentives for research, then countries with disproportionately large number of

technology firms might appear to enjoy lower levels of taxation than other countries when the

difference actually arises because of the industry mix. Therefore, to control for such possible

industry, year, and firm size differences across countries, we estimate a modified version of the

pooled, cross-sectional regression equation developed in Collins and Shackelford (1995):13

                                                                ∗


                                                                                                         1


where:                        the effective tax rate for firm i in year t.

13
  Collins and Shackelford’s (1995) regression model includes categorical variables indicating whether the firm’s
income statement is consolidated or restated in accordance with U.S. GAAP. We exclude all unconsolidated firm-
years from our sample to avoid potentially including both parents and their subsidiaries as separate observations.
We cannot include the restatement variable because our data do not include it.

                                                         7
                             an indicator variable equal to 1 if firm i is domiciled in country j in year

                             t, equal to 0 otherwise.

                             an indicator variable equal to 1 if firm i has a foreign subsidiary in year

                             t, equal to 0 otherwise.

                             an indicator variable equal to 1 if firm i is identified as being in

                             industry k (by two-digit NAICS) in year t, equal to 0 otherwise.

                             an indicator variable equal to 1 for firm-years for which t = m, equal to

                             0 otherwise.

                             the percentile rank of the size of variable n for firm i in year t.

                             n={Assets, Revenue, Owners’ Equity}.

        We suppress the intercept so that the coefficients on the COUNTRY variables can be

interpreted as the marginal cost of domiciling in a country, i.e., the effective tax rate for domestic

firms.14 Throughout the paper, we refer to the coefficient on the COUNTRY variable as the

domestic ETR. Suppressing the intercept also means that the coefficient on the COUNTRY*MN

variables is the incremental tax cost for multinationals (as compared with the domestic-only

firms) in that country. Positive values are consistent with multinationals in a country facing

higher ETRs than their domestic counterparts face. Negative values are consistent with

domestics in a country facing higher ETRs than their multinational counterparts face.

Throughout the paper, we refer to the sum of the coefficients on the COUNTRY and the

COUNTRY * MN variables as the multinational ETR.15


14
   To estimate equation (1), one industry and one year have to be excluded from the regression. To determine which
industry to leave out, we calculate the mean ETR in each industry (two-digit NAICS) and then determine the median
of those means. The industry with the median mean is the one left out. We implement a similar procedure on the
years.
15
   Note that the magnitude of the domestic and multinational ETRs cannot be directly compared with the actual
ETRs from the financial statements, which serve as the dependent variable. The domestic and multinational ETRs

                                                        8
         The coefficients on INDUSTRY and YEAR are used to determine whether ETRs vary

across industries and time. Three control variables are intended to capture size (SIZE): the

percentile ranks of Total Assets, Revenues, and Equity. Prior studies of the impact of size on

ETRs have been inconclusive. Rego (2003), Omer et al. (1993), and Zimmerman (1983) find a

negative relation, consistent with economies of scale and political costs. Conversely, Armstrong,

et al. (2010), Jacob (1996), Gupta and Newberry (1997) and Mills (1998) find no relation.

         The ETRs are collected from each firm’s financial statements.16 The ETR denominator is

net income before income taxes (NIBT). Since financial reporting rules vary across countries

and thus affect the computation of NIBT, we conduct sensitivity tests using total revenues and an

adjusted net income as denominators.17 Results are qualitatively the same.

         Three different numerators are used in our ETR computations: (i) actual cash taxes paid

(cash ETR), (ii) current worldwide income tax expense (current ETR), and (iii) total worldwide

income tax expense (total ETR).18 All measures are collected from the company’s publicly

available financial statements. Because the focus of this study is on the actual corporate income

taxes paid, cash ETR is the superior numerator.19 Unfortunately, not all countries require firms


are the tax rates, conditional on industry, year, and size. That said, our empirical analysis shows that the estimated
ETRs are very similar to the actual ETRs from the financial statements.
16
   Note that the ETRs in this study are not marginal tax rates, as detailed in Scholes, et al., 2009. They ignore
implicit taxes, cannot assess who bears the burden of corporate income taxes, and cannot capture incentives to
employ new capital (see Fullerton, 1980, and Bradford and Fullerton, 1981, for a discussion of marginal effective
tax rates). Neither are they the tax rates related to investment decisions developed in Devereux and Griffith (1998)
and Gordon, et al (2003).
17
   Adjusted net income is intended to add back two key expenses whose accounting rules vary across countries,
namely depreciation expense and research and development expense. Using revenues as the denominator goes even
further and eliminates any cross-country variation in expenses.
18
   See Hanlon and Heitzman (2010), Graham, et al, 2011, Dyreng et al, 2008, and Hanlon (2003), among others, for
detailed discussions of these three measures, how they are computed, and potential limitations.
19
   One disadvantage of the cash ETR, compared with the current and total ETRs, is that it includes all taxes paid
during the year regardless of the year in which the income related to those taxes was earned. For example, cash
taxes paid could include additional taxes arising from an audit of past years’ tax returns. Thus, the numerator may
include taxes related to income from years, other than the current year, while the denominator (book income before
taxes) is limited to income from the current year. In contrast, with current income tax expense (which is designed to
capture the taxes paid in the current year attributable to economic activity during the current year) as the numerator,
both the numerator and the denominator contain the current year’s economic activities alone. That said, because our

                                                          9
to disclose the actual taxes paid during that year in their financial statements. Thus, to expand

our sample, we turn to the current ETR in some tests. However, it, too, is not a mandatory

disclosure in all countries. Thus, to maximize the observations in the study, we also report the

total ETR.



3. Sample

        We use two different databases to collect a sample of firms for this study. To collect

information about the location of ultimately-owned subsidiaries, we use the Orbis database. 20

We include all parents that have at least one subsidiary.21 We then match these parents to their

financial statement information in the Compustat databases. We collect three different tax

variables: total tax expense, current tax expense, and cash taxes paid. The main tests in the paper

use current tax expense, so it is that sample we describe in detail here. If a firm-year does not

report current tax expense but does report both total and deferred tax expense, we calculate

current tax expense as total less deferred. As a validity check on the data, we delete all

observations for which the difference between the ETR with total tax expense in the numerator

and the ETR with the sum of current and deferred tax expense in the numerator is greater than

one percentage point.22 We attempt to mitigate the impact of outliers and errors in the data by

limiting the sample to observations with non-negative ETR less than or equal to 70%.




estimates are based on a large sample of firm-years, we doubt that any mismatching for the cash ETR affects the
inferences drawn from this analysis. Consistent with that expectation, conclusions are qualitatively identical
whether cash taxes paid, current tax expense, or total tax expense is the numerator.
20
   Bureau van Dijk collects information directly from Annual Reports and other filings. In addition, it obtains
information from several information providers, including CFI Online (Ireland), Dun & Bradstreet, Datamonitor,
Factset, LexisNexis, and Worldbox.
21
   We define an “ultimately-owned” subsidiary as one for which all links in the ownership chain between it and its
ultimate parent have greater than 50% ownership.
22
   To further reduce concerns about inaccurate data, we eliminate from the sample any country for which more than
50% of the observations of current tax expense are zero.

                                                        10
         The Orbis subsidiary measure has one serious flaw. Orbis only reports the subsidiary

information as of the most recent updating of the information.23 We are unable to assess the

extent to which this data limitation affects the conclusions drawn from this study. However, to

mitigate the potential for miscoding the existence and location of foreign subsidiaries, we limit

the primary tests in this paper to firm-years since 2004.24 Our logic is that the foreign subsidiary

coding is correct for 2009, has fewer errors in 2008 than in 2007, and has fewer errors in 2007

than in 2006, and so forth. We arbitrarily select the last five years for which we have data as the

cut-off for our primary tests in the hope that the miscoding is of an acceptable level for these

most recent years. In subsequent tests, we present estimated coefficients from separate

regressions for each year, and in untabulated tests, we estimate one regression that uses all of the

firm-years. Conclusions are similar regardless of the sample period.

         Another potential limitation of using Orbis is that it may fail to identify all of the firm’s

subsidiaries, a potential limitation that we are unable to fully assess.25 However, it seems

reasonable that if Orbis were to overlook some subsidiaries that they would be those that are

smaller, less significant and potentially inactive. Since we are aggregating all firms into a single

country-wide ETR, we trust that imperfections in the data will have limited impact on the


23
   For example, if a company had no subsidiary in Canada before 2009 (the most recent year in the database) and
then incorporated a subsidiary in Canada in 2009, we would erroneously treat the company as having had a
Canadian subsidiary for all years in our sample. Likewise, if a company had a subsidiary in Canada for all years
before 2009 and then liquidated the Canadian subsidiary in 2008, we would erroneously treat the company as not
having had a subsidiary in Canada for any year in our sample.
24
   Another advantage of limiting the analysis to recent years is that it mitigates potential survivorship bias. The
Orbis database is limited to companies presently in existence. Thus, our analysis is limited to firms that have
survived throughout the investigation period. By restricting the sample to firm-years since 2004, we reduce the
deleterious effects of survivorship bias.
25
   In an attempt to assess the potential magnitude of this problem (at least for U.S. firms), we compare the list of the
countries that Orbis identifies with the list of countries that Dyreng and Lindsey (2009) identify using a search of
the 10-K, Exhibit 21, filed by U.S. multinationals. Dyreng and Lindsey (2009) list the percentage of U.S.
multinationals having material operations in each foreign country. When we calculate that same percentage using
the Orbis data, we find that our calculated percentage is within 10 percentage points of that of Dyreng and Lindsey
(2009) for 84 of the 92 countries reported in both studies. This gives us some assurance that the data are reasonably
complete, at least for U.S. firms, but the differences indicate that there are imperfections in our data.

                                                           11
conclusions. Nevertheless, despite these possible problems with using Orbis, we use it because

no other publicly-available database provides as much information about as many firms and

countries as it does.

        Our sample selection process yields a main sample for the years 2005-2009 of 28,343

firm-years spanning 82 countries, ranging from only one firm-year in six countries to 9,452 firm-

years in Japan.26 We combine the countries with fewer than 200 observations into six categories:

Africa, Asia, Europe, Latin America, Middle East, and Tax Havens. The remaining fifteen

countries are included on their own and our main tests are conducted and results are reported

using these 21 countries and groups. For the 21 countries and groups, Table 1 reports the firm-

year means of Sales, Assets, Equity, and Pretax income, dichotomized into 13,917 domestic-only

firms and 14,426 multinationals. Not surprisingly, multinational firms average more sales,

assets, equity, and pretax income than domestics do.

        The next two columns of Table 1 present the mean and median ETRs, respectively, where

                                    ⁄                     . These are the actual ETRs from the firms’

financial statements, not ETRs estimated from regression analysis. The domestics

(multinationals) have mean ETRs of 28% (27%) and median ETRs of 30% (28%). The final

column presents the average statutory tax rate for the country-years in the sample.27 The

numbers reported are the weighted average rates, where the weighting was done by number of

firm-years. In the full sample, domestics and multinationals faced average statutory tax rates of

39%.



26
   An advantage of investigating this period is that it includes both economic expansion (2005-2007) and contraction
(2008-2009), potentially permitting us to generalize beyond a single phase of the business cycle.
27
   We use the combined corporate statutory tax rate calculated for the 30 OECD countries and available at
www.oecd.org (Table II.1). For the non-OECD countries in our sample, we use the maximum rate in data kindly
provided by Kevin Hassett.

                                                        12
        In general, the three tax rate columns paint a similar picture. Countries with high

statutory tax rates tend to have high ETR. Two exceptions are Canadian and German domestic

companies, both of whom have mean current ETRs that are more than 20 percentage points

lower than their statutory rates, consistent with a high statutory rate but a narrow tax base. The

U.S. also has a relatively large spread with the mean current ETR for multinationals 11

percentage points below the statutory tax rate.



4. Primary Findings

     4.1. Do the ETRs estimated from the regression coefficients differ from the actual ETRs?

        Table 2 presents the domestic-only ETRs, which are the COUNTRY coefficients from

estimating equation (1), and the multinational ETRs, which are the sum of the COUNTRY and

the COUNTRY*MN coefficients. Results are presented using all three numerators, cash taxes

paid (cash ETR), current income tax expense (current ETR) and total income tax expense (total

ETR).

        The actual ETRs from the financial statements (those shown in Table 1) are reported in

columns immediately to the left of the estimates.28 There is little difference between the mean of

the actual ETRs and the estimates from equation (1). For the six pairings of actual and estimated

ETRs (domestic cash ETRs, multinational cash ETRs, domestic current ETRs, multinational

current ETRs, domestic total ETRs and multinational ETRs), the correlation is never less than

94%. Furthermore, the difference between the actual ETR and the estimated ETR is never more




28
  To illustrate, for Australian companies, using cash taxes paid, the mean raw ETR from the financial statements for
domestic-only firms is 26%, while the estimated cash ETR for domestics is 23%. The same figures for
multinationals are 24% (raw) and 22% (estimated). The remaining columns are when the numerator is current ETR
and total ETR, respectively.

                                                        13
than six percentage points.29 Thus, we infer from the similarity between the actual and estimated

ETRs that the control variables (for industry, year and size) have little impact on the coefficients

of interest. This pattern holds throughout the paper, suggesting that the inferences drawn in this

study would be similar whether we used the actual ETRs from the financial statements or the

ETRs estimated in the regression. For brevity, we will focus exclusively on the estimated ETRs

in the remainder of the paper.



     4.2. Do ETRs differ between domestics and multinationals?

         Next, we use Table 2 to compare the estimated ETRs for domestic-only firms with those

for multinationals. (Asterisks indicate statistically significant differences between multinational

and domestic estimates.) We have enough firm-years to report estimated domestic cash ETRs

for eight countries or groups of countries (Australia, Canada, Malaysia, UK, U.S., Asia, Europe,

and Latin America).30 All estimated domestic cash ETRs for these countries (Table 2, column 2)

are within five percentage points of their multinational counterparts (Table 2, column 4), and the

correlation between the two sets of ETRs is 84%. In three cases, the multinational and domestic

cash ETRs are significantly different from each other at the 0.05 level: Cash ETRs for Canadian

multinationals (19%) exceed those for its domestics (14%). The ETRs for Europe are lower for

their multinationals (21% vs. 24%). The U.S. multinational cash ETR estimate is significantly




29
   Interestingly, when the numerator is cash taxes paid (current income tax expense), the estimated ETR never (only
once) exceeds the raw ETR. The pattern flips when the numerator is total tax expense. There, the estimated ETR
exceeds the raw ETR in all, but two, cases.
30
   Although we have enough observations (216) for Japan to report their cash ETRs, we chose to omit them from
Table 2 because there appear to be errors in the data. Only 3% of the Japanese companies reporting current tax
expense also report cash taxes paid. This suggests that either few companies report cash taxes paid in Japan (and
they may not be representative of the Japanese population) and/or the data are incomplete or erroneous for this item.
Either explanation could lead to erroneous inferences about the cash taxes paid by Japanese companies; thus, we err
on the side of caution. Such dramatic differences are not found for any other country.

                                                         14
greater than the U.S. domestic cash ETR estimate, although by just one percentage point (21%

vs. 20%).

       As mentioned above, there are more firm-years when current income tax expense or total

income tax expense are used as the numerator. This larger number of observations enables us to

report 17 (20) domestic (multinational) current ETRs and 18 (21) domestic (multinational) total

ETRs. The correlation between these domestic ETRs and their multinational counterparts is 73%

for the current ETRs and 89% for the total ETRs. The mean of the absolute values of the

difference between the domestic and the multinational ETRs is three (two) percentage points for

both current (total) ETRs with no difference exceeding six percentage points.

       Twelve of the 17 countries with both domestic and multinational current ETRs have

domestic and multinational ETRs that are statistically different from each other. However, no

clear directional pattern exists. In seven cases the multinationals ETR are larger; in five cases

the domestic ETRs are greater. A similar split exists among the total ETRs. Multinational total

ETRs exceed domestic ones for five countries/groups while domestic total ETRs are larger in six

cases. Among U.S. firms, multinationals face a 23% current ETR, while domestics have a 19%

current ETR, but the total ETRs for U.S. multinationals and domestics are the same (30%).

       We infer from this analysis that although about half of the countries have domestic and

multinational ETRs that are statistically different from each other, the direction is not consistent

(i.e., sometimes the domestics have higher ETRs and sometimes the multinationals do).

Although there are surely cases where transfer pricing, hybrid entities, and other tax plans enable

multinationals to pay less tax per dollar of profit than domestics do, we do not find evidence to

support those who claim that multinationals’ consistently pay lower taxes. Likewise, we find no

support for contentions that multinationals consistently operate at a tax disadvantage compared



                                                 15
with their domestic counterparts because of expense allocations, foreign tax credit limitations, or

other restrictions that potentially result in taxation both at home and abroad.

       That said, two caveats bear mentioning. First, these inferences depend critically on the

data correctly classifying firms as multinational and domestic and, as acknowledged above, the

data are imperfect. Second, the decision to operate abroad is endogenous. It is possible that the

firms that expand into foreign markets are those with the best ability to avoid the higher tax costs

that arise from being a multinational. Alternatively, the firms that choose to become

multinationals may be those with the best ability to exploit the tax advantages arising from being

able to spread income across multiple countries. Thus, readers should be cautious in interpreting

these coefficients as the change in ETRs that would arise if domestics became multinationals or

multinationals reverted to domestic-only status.



   4.3. Does the domicile of a multinational affect its ETR?

       Table 2, column 4 reports estimated multinational cash ETRs for 13 countries, ranging

from 11% (Middle East) to 22% (Australia, France, Germany, and UK) with mean (median)

[standard deviation] of 18% (18%) [4%]. The U.S. multinational cash ETR is 21%. The 20

estimated multinational current ETRs (column 8) range from 9% for Bermuda (followed by 10%

for the Cayman Islands and 13% for the Tax Havens) to a high of 31% for Japan (which exceeds

the next highest, the U.S., by eight percentage points) with mean (median) [standard deviation]

of 17% (17%) [5%]. The polar countries are the similar when we shift from current to the

estimated multinational total ETRs (column 12), which range from 16% for Cayman Islands

(followed by Bermuda at 17% and the Tax Havens at 18%) to 39% for Japan (followed by the




                                                   16
U.S. at 30%) with mean (median) [standard deviation] of 24% (25%) [5%].31 We infer from this

analysis of cash, current, and total multinational ETRs that the domicile of the multinational

significantly affects a firm’s ETR. The estimated ETRs for the highest taxed countries are

always at least double those for the least heavily taxed countries. In short, domicile appears to

matter for multinational corporations. The rank order of the countries holds across ETR

measures.

         Hereafter, current ETRs alone are reported because they allow us to study more countries

than would be possible with cash ETRs, and, although total ETRs would enable us to add Africa

to the analysis, current ETRs better approximate the more desirable, but too often unobservable,

measure, actual cash taxes paid.32 In addition, no distinction is made between domestic and

multinational ETRs because we find no consistent differences between them.



     4.4. Have ETRs changed over time?

         The findings above are for firm-years from 2005 to 2009. By combining years, we

increase the number of observations per country, enabling us to study more countries. However,

by combining years, we may mask cross-temporal changes in tax law. Thus, we next report

annual estimated current ETRs, using the complete sample of domestic and multinational firm-

years and modifying equation (1) to allow annual estimates for each country and dropping the

separate estimates for multinationals (COUNTRY*MN). These estimated regression coefficients

enable us to analyze the changes in ETRs from 1988 to 2009 for each country. By examining

more than two decades of ETRs, we can see their sensitivity to expansions and recessions.

31
   It is not surprisingly that current ETRs are substantially less than total ETRs since deferred tax liabilities usually
exceed deferred tax assets (see Poterba et al. 2011 and Raedy et al., 2011, among others).
32
   The inferences drawn from using current and total ETRs are identical, as would be expected since the Pearson
correlation coefficient between the two estimated ETRs is 95%. The correlation between cash and current (total)
ETRs is 73% (86%).

                                                            17
         Table 3 reports the annual estimated current ETRs. Percentages are only presented if

there are at least 20 observations, but all available firm-years are included in the regressions. We

find that the high-tax to low-tax rank across countries has changed little over the two decades. In

1988, the first year for which we have data, the Japanese ETR was the highest at 44% (20

percentage points ahead of the next country, UK). In the most recent year for which we have

data, 2009, they were the highest at 30% (five percentage points higher than France, the country

with the next largest ETR). In fact, in every year Japanese current ETRs are substantially higher

than those in any country.33 Ignoring Japan, the U.S., UK, France and Germany have had the

highest current ETR in 19 of the 22 years, and none of those countries’ ETRs is ever more than

nine percentage points below the penultimate ETR. In 1989 (the first year for which we report

their ETRs), the Tax Havens enjoyed the lowest multinational ETR at 22%, two percentage

points below the next lowest ETR (Canada’s). Since then, the Tax Havens, the Cayman Islands,

Bermuda, and Taiwan have never had a year where their ETR was more than ten percentage

points above the minimum ETR.

         Over the two decades, ETRs fell steadily. For the nine countries with enough

observations to report annual ETRs in both 2009 and 1989, all had lower ETRs in 2009 than in

1989 with a mean and median decline of 12 percentage points. The largest ETRs drops were 22

percentage points for Japan and 15 percentage points for Switzerland and the UK. The U.S. had

a decline of 12 percentage points from 32% in 1989 to 20% in 2009. Thirteen of the 17 countries

with enough observations to compute annual ETRs in both 2009 and 1999 experienced a

reduction in their ETR with a mean (median) decline of 3 (5) percentage points. The largest

33
   Though beyond the scope of this study, Japan’s remarkable ability to sustain substantially higher tax rates than its
trading partners throughout two decades warrants further investigation. Ishi (2001) and Griffith and Klemm (2004)
(among others) document the gap, but we are aware of no study that attempts to ascertain the reasons why the gap
has persisted for such a long period. That said, Japan is currently debating a reduction in their corporate income tax
rate from 40% to 35%, which would be effective April 1, 2011.

                                                          18
declines in ETR were 12 percentage points (Japan and Germany). The U.S. ETR fell percentage

points from 25% in 1999 to 20% in 2009.34

        Of course, the relatively low ETRs in 2009 may reflect the worldwide recession. Indeed,

six countries (Bermuda, Japan, Sweden, Switzerland, the UK and Europe) never experienced

lower ETRs than they did in 2009. Furthermore, when we compare 2009 ETRs with those in

2006, we find that the 2006 ETRs are 2 percentage points higher, on average. Furthermore,

when we compare 2006 ETRs with 1999 ETRs, we find no decline in ETRs, on average. We

infer from this analysis that ETRs did fall during the latest recession, whether this was caused by

declining profitability (recall that we limit our sample to profitable companies) or a resumption

of the long, slow slide in ETRs is indeterminable. Furthermore, it is possible that ETRs in 2006

were higher than would have been the case, had the economy not been so strong during the

middle years of that decade. Nevertheless, the particularly low ETRs in the latter years of the

decade should be cautiously interpreted in light of the global economic downturn.

        To summarize, despite steady global declines in ETRs, the rank order of countries has

remained remarkably constant over time. Japan’s ETRs continued to far exceed those from any

other country. In fact, the smallest Japanese ETR over the two decades (30% in 2009) would

have exceeded the ETR for any other country in any year since 2000. Similarly, the tax havens

have consistently enjoyed the lowest ETRs. However, the spread between high-tax countries and

tax havens has narrowed over the two decades because the tax havens began with low tax rates

and maintained them, while all high-tax countries have reduced their ETRs. The U.S. ETR has

declined at the average rate, keeping it among the highest taxed countries and substantially

trailing only those in Japan.

34
  These findings are consistent with those of the 2008 study by the OECD discussed in Hodge (2008) which
documented that 2008 was the seventeenth consecutive year in which the average statutory corporate tax rate in non-
U.S. OECD countries fell while the U.S. rate remained unchanged.

                                                        19
     4.5. Do ETRs vary across industries?

        To assess whether ETRs vary across industries, we estimate a modified equation (1)

using current ETRs and industry groupings based on two-digit NAICS codes. We group two-

digit codes to ensure that each reported industry has at least 800 firm-years. All observations are

included in the regressions, but only cells with 20 or more observations are reported.35

Manufacturers comprise 41% of the firm-years.

        Table 4 shows considerable variation across industry ETRs. Averaging across all

countries, we find that the average current ETR ranges from Mining at 11% to Retail Trade at

27%. Retail Trade has the highest ETR in the U.S. and Japan. When we limit the analysis to the

13 countries/groups with ETRs for at least five industries, we find that the maximum rate appears

in different industries for different countries. Finance has the highest rate for three countries

(France, India and Sweden). Other is highest in Germany, Europe, and Latin America. The only

industries that are never the highest are Manufacturing, Mining, and Real Estate.

        Mining is clearly the least taxed industry. Averaging across all countries, its 11% ETR is

seven percentage points below Information. Moreover, for the six countries reporting Mining

ETRs (Australia, Canada, Japan, the UK, the U.S., and Europe), the Mining ETR is the lowest

across all industries. Among the seven other countries with at least five industries, thrice

Information has the lowest ETR.

        Despite the variation across industry ETRs, those countries with high ETRs in general

tend to have high ETRs across most industries and those countries with low ETRs in general tend

35
  Requiring 20 observations ensures that the reported ETR is not driven by a few country-years. However, readers
should be cautious in interpreting these figures for countries with fewer observations because they may represent a
handful of companies who appear in multiple years. More reliance can be placed on their countries with larger
samples. Those include Canada, Japan, Taiwan, the UK, the U.S., Europe, and the Tax Havens, each of which totals
more than 500 observations (see Table 1).

                                                        20
to have low ETRs across most industries. Japanese ETRs equal or exceed those from all other

countries in every industry, except Mining. Consistent with its being a tax haven, Bermuda has

the lowest ETRs in four of the five industries in which it has enough observations to report an

ETR. The U.S. has the lowest Mining ETR at 6%.

       Countries also differ substantially in the extent to which ETRs vary across their

industries. Using the coefficient of variation for each country’s industry ETRs as a standardized

measure of the spread, among those countries with at least five ETRs, we find that Bermuda, at

12%, has the least variation among industry ETRs. India (34%), Australia (33%) and the U.S.

(32%) have the most variation, suggesting that those countries have more industry-specific

provisions than do other countries.

       We infer from the results in Table 4 that ETRs vary widely across industries and industry

ETRs vary widely within countries. Nonetheless, the relative ETR across industries seems

similar across all countries. Furthermore, high-tax countries tend to tax all industries more than

low-tax countries do. Finally, scholars should note that failure to control for cross-industry

variation in ETRs could lead to erroneous inferences about tax burdens across countries. For

example, although only 3% of our sample companies are in Mining, 24% of Canadian companies

are in that industry. Since Mining is a lightly taxed industry, Canada might appear to be a lower-

taxed country than would be the case if its industry mix was more representative of the global

mix. This difference in industry mix should not affect our earlier estimates, however, because

we control for industry in equation (1).



   4.6. Additional Tests




                                                21
        The data enable us to conduct a battery of additional tests and robustness checks, which

we discuss briefly in this section. In every case, the inferences drawn above hold.

        One, it is difficult to determine where the profits generated from intangible assets are

earned. As a result, firms with large amounts of intangible assets may be better able to avoid

taxes (see discussions in Huizinga et al., 2008, Mutti and Grubert, 2007, and Desai et al., 2006,

among many others). To assess whether firms with greater amounts of intangibles have lower

ETRs, we would ideally sort firms based on their levels of intangible assets. Unfortunately,

information about the amount of intangible assets is not publicly available. Thus, we turn to an

observable figure, total research and development expenses, which, we assume, is positively

correlated with the firm’s level of intangibles. We estimate equation (1) for those firm-years

with positive values for research and development expenses, modifying the equation to include a

categorical variable for those firm-years where research and development expense as a

percentage of total assets is above the median. Consistent with high intangible firms having

lower ETRs, we find that the coefficient on the categorical variable is -2.0% and highly

significant.

        Two, some have conjectured that a territorial system collects less revenue than a

worldwide system. Concerns about the revenue implications of excluding dividend taxation

under a territorial system has become of central importance since the UK and Japan in

December, 2008, decided to revamp their international tax laws by shifting from a worldwide tax

system to a territorial tax system. Meanwhile, President Obama has proposed to strengthen the

U.S.’s worldwide tax system by restricting deferral of U.S. taxation on foreign profits, while

U.S. multinationals are coalescing around a territorial system with generous deductions of




                                                 22
worldwide expenses.36 To test the impact of a worldwide system on ETRs, we estimate equation

(1), after adding a categorical variable equal to one if the parent country has a worldwide tax

system, and zero otherwise. Contrary to expectations, the estimate of the coefficient on the

worldwide indicator is -1.4% and significant, indicating that, on average, firms domiciled in

worldwide countries face lower ETRs.

        Three, in countries with imputation, the corporate income tax serves as a form of

withholding tax because the corporate tax (or some part of it) can be used to offset shareholders’

dividend taxes. Thus, it is possible that corporate tax planning is less important in imputation

countries because firms in those countries have less incentive to lower their ETRs than do those

in classical systems, such as the U.S., where corporate taxes do not offset shareholder taxes. We

test this possibility by modifying equation (1) to include a categorical variable that indicates

whether the firm is domiciled in a country with any form of imputation. We find that the

estimated coefficient on the imputation variable is insignificant.

        Four, another cross-country difference is whether tax losses can be carried back to offset

the prior year’s taxable income.37 When we add a categorical variable indicating whether a

country permits losses to be carried back, we find that the coefficient on that variable is

insignificant.38


36
   See Weiner (2009), United States House of Representatives (2007), Clausing and Avi-Yonah (2007), and The
President’s Advisory Panel on Federal Tax Reform (2005), among many others, for proposals about U.S.
international tax law reform. Interestingly, a principal cost of repealing deferral for some companies would be the
deleterious impact on book income. Under current tax law, APB 23 permits firms to classify foreign profits as
permanently reinvested, which enables them to report no deferred income taxes for any possible U.S. taxes to be
paid at repatriation (see Graham et al., 2010, Graham et al., 2011 and Shackelford et al., 2011, among others).
Repealing deferral would render this discretion under APB 23 irrelevant. This possibility led Ralph Hellmann, lead
lobbyist for the Information Technology Industry Council, to state that the benefit of APB 23 deferral “…hits the
bottom line of companies more than any other issue right now. We have to defeat it [repeal of deferral].” (Drucker,
2009).
37
   This information is obtained from International Tax Summaries prepared by Deloitte and available through its
website.
38
   We conduct no tests concerning the carryforward of losses because Estonia is the only country that does not
permit it.

                                                        23
           Five, the corporate income tax is only one of many taxes, and in many countries, it is a

relatively minor source of government revenue. To the extent countries rely on alternative taxes,

they may need less revenue from corporate income taxes, which are the sole tax used to compute

ETRs. Alternatively, high income tax countries may levy high taxes across the board.

Consistent with a trade-off among revenue sources, we find that the value-added tax rate is

negatively correlated with ETRs.39 When we exclude companies domiciled in the U.S. (the only

major country without a value-added tax), the correlation is even more negative. To determine

whether the value-added tax affects the inferences drawn above, we include the value-added tax

rate in equation (1) and find a positive and significant coefficient estimate. However, inferences

about the relative ETRs across countries are unaltered.

           Six, we include the maximum statutory corporate income tax rate in equation (1). As

expected, we find a positive coefficient on the statutory rate, and the relative ranks of the

countries/groups somewhat altered. This implies that the ETRs are driven by differences in both

tax rates and tax bases.

           Seven, the sample excludes all firm-years with losses (i.e., negative NIBT). In this

sensitivity test, we add back the 11,416 firm-years with losses and actual ETRs (from the

financial statements) that equal zero and estimate equation (1).40 By definition, adding these loss

firm-years lowers the estimated ETRs. We find that the inclusion of loss firm-years has

inconsequential impact on the relative high-tax to low-tax rank across the countries: the Japanese

ETR remain the highest at 21%, three percentage points above the African ETR. The Bermudan

ETR is the lowest at 2%, two percentage points below the Cayman Islands’ ETR.




39
     We thank Kevin Hassett for providing us with the valued-add tax data.
40
     Consistent with the main tests, we exclude observations for which the absolute value of ETR is greater than 70%.

                                                           24
       Eight, the sample includes firm-years with zero ETRs as long as their NIBT was positive.

In this robustness check, we drop those 1,372 firm-years with non-positive ETRs as reported in

the financial statements. By definition, eliminating these zero ETR firms increases the estimated

ETRs. We find that the deletion of non-positive ETRs has inconsequential impact on the relative

high-tax to low-tax rank across the countries: Japanese ETR is 36%, ten percentage points above

that for the U.S., the country with the next highest ETR. Bermudan and Cayman Islands' ETRs

are the lowest at 13%.



5. Results from Comparing Foreign Subsidiaries

   5.1. How much does the location of its foreign subsidiaries affect a multinational’s ETR?

       In this section, we expand the domestic-multinational dichotomy to consider whether the

domiciles of foreign subsidiaries affect ETRs. We begin by turning our attention to tax havens,

the most extreme example of a low-tax country. If companies domiciled in tax havens enjoy

lower ETRs than companies domiciled in other countries (as the evidence above suggests), then

it follows that multinationals with tax havens should have substantially lower ETRs than

multinationals without tax havens.

       To test this proposition, we modify equation (1) by adding a categorical variable

indicating whether a multinational had a tax haven, interacting it with the COUNTRY*MN

variable in equation (1), and estimating the equation. Surprisingly, we find that multinationals

with tax havens do not have lower ETRs than multinationals without havens (results are

untabulated). In fact, the current ETR, averaged across all countries is 17% for multinationals

without havens and 19% for multinationals with havens. Both figures are 23% for American

multinationals, and for almost half of the countries/groups (including France, India, Japan, the



                                                25
UK, and all three listings of tax havens) the spread is within percentage point. One reason that

having a haven may not result in a lower ETR is that the countries that establish tax havens are

countries that would have substantially higher ETRs, if they had no haven. Therefore, havens

may lower ETRs, but not enough to overcome the boost to ETRs arising from higher

profitability. Unfortunately, we cannot observe the counter-factual, i.e., comparing

multinationals with havens to those same companies if they had no havens. Nonetheless, this

initial test provides no evidence that the location of the subsidiary affects the worldwide ETR.

         Next, we move beyond a tax haven dichotomy to consider all countries where foreign

subsidiaries exist. In Equation (1), we use the presence of a foreign subsidiary to distinguish

multinationals from domestic-only firms. Here, we replace that single categorical variable with

categorical variables for all locations of foreign subsidiaries. The coefficients on the foreign

subsidiary variables enable us to assess the extent to which the location of a foreign subsidiary

affects the ETRs of the worldwide enterprise. The regression equation is:




                                                                                            2

where:                    an indicator variable equal to 1 if firm i reports a subsidiary in country

                          k, equal to 0 otherwise.

All other variables are defined the same as in equation (1). The estimated regression coefficients

on SUB are the estimated impact on ETRs arising from having a subsidiary in a particular foreign

country.

         We continue to use the same 21 groups as in the previous section for the parents but

allow countries to have their own SUB indicator if they host subsidiaries of 500 or more parents.

Each firm-year has one country in which its COUNTRY variable is coded one. However, it has n

                                                 26
SUBs coded one, where n is the number of different countries in which the parent has at least one

subsidiary.41

        We use the same sample of 28,343 firm-years (from 2005-2009) with current income tax

expense as the numerator for the ETR that was used in Table 2. For these firm-years, there are

80,723 SUB variables with a value of one. All 56subsidiary locations have at least 200 firm-

years. The UK is the most popular location for foreign subsidiaries with 7,608 firm-years.

        Table 5 shows the regression coefficient estimates for COUNTRY and SUB. The

COUNTRY coefficients from equation (2) should be the same as the COUNTRY coefficients

from equation (1), except to the extent that identifying the location of a firm’s foreign

subsidiaries, as opposed to just identifying the existence of a foreign subsidiary provides

information. It seems plausible that knowing the subsidiary’s domicile would substantially

affect inferences because foreign subsidiaries are not randomly distributed across parents.

Multinationals from some countries might be more likely to operate in high-tax countries (e.g.,

French companies may be more likely to have a subsidiary in high-tax Germany than would be

Taiwanese companies, which might partially account for the higher ETRs in France.). That said,

we find that specifying the location of the foreign subsidiary in the regression only results in only

one COUNTRY coefficients changing more than three percentage points from the corresponding

COUNTRY coefficients in Table 2. The domestic Indian ETR rises from 15% to 19%.

        We now turn our attention to the SUB coefficients. We expect cross-country variation in

the SUB coefficients to the extent that locating a foreign subsidiary in a country affects the

multinational’s ETR. For example, if a firm can shift profits from a high-tax country to a tax

haven, then its ETR should be lower and the SUB coefficient for the haven should reflect those

41
  For example, if a U.S. parent has subsidiaries in Canada, Germany, and Bermuda,          ,            ,
            , and                would be coded one, while all other          and   variables would be coded
zero.

                                                      27
tax savings. These SUB coefficients are conditional on the location of all other foreign

subsidiaries. Thus, they can be interpreted as the incremental impact on ETRs of having a

subsidiary in a particular foreign country.

       The SUB coefficients range from a 1.6 percentage points decrease in ETRs for

multinationals with a subsidiary in the Tax Havens to a 2.6 percentage points increase in ETRs

for multinationals with a subsidiary in Croatia. Besides the Tax Havens, the dozen most

negative SUB coefficients include tax havens, such as the Singapore (-1.2 percentage points) and

Bermuda (-0.7 percentage points) plus a country widely associated with global tax mitigation,

Hong Kong, at -0.8 percentage points. These findings are consistent with a foreign subsidiary in

at least some tax havens lowering the parent’s ETR. However, interestingly, two other countries

associated with tax avoidance, the Netherlands and Ireland, have positive coefficients.

       Not surprisingly, some of the more positive SUB coefficients include countries with

relatively high taxes, e.g., France (1.3 percentage points), the UK (1.2), Italy (0.9) and Japan

(0.7). However, once again the results are a bit mixed. When we segregate the sample based on

OECD membership, we find no evidence that subsidiaries located in (usually high-tax) OECD

countries boost the ETRs of their multinational enterprise more than subsidiaries located in other

(often lower taxed) countries.

       Contrary to high-tax countries resulting in highly tax subsidiaries, we find that having a

U.S. subsidiary lowers a multinational’s ETR by 0.5 percentage points. This finding is

consistent with the U.S. Government Accountability Office’s (2008) report that U.S.-controlled

U.S. companies pay more taxes than foreign-controlled U.S. companies. It provides support for

arguments by U.S. companies that they face a competitive disadvantage in the U.S. marketplace,

since most non-U.S. multinationals (Japanese multinationals being the notable exception) already



                                                 28
lower ETRs before the added bonus of an ETR reduction when they establish an American

subsidiary.

       Finally, we measure the correlation between the COUNTRY coefficients and the SUB

coefficients in Table 5 for the 20 countries/groups with both COUNTRY and SUB coefficients. If

countries tax their domestic-only firms similarly to the foreign-controlled subsidiaries domiciled

in their country, then the COUNTRY coefficients (indicating ETRs for domestic-only firms)

should be positively correlated with the SUB coefficients (indicating the incremental ETR for

multinationals with subsidiaries in that country). Consistent with this expectation, we find a

positive correlation between the COUNTRY and SUB coefficients of 37%, which is significant at

the 0.05 level using a one-tailed test. We interpret these findings as evidence that countries that

tax their domestic-only firms heavily also tax their foreign subsidiaries heavily and vice versa.

Though not surprising, to our knowledge, this is the first documentation that domestic-only firms

and foreign subsidiaries in the same country face relatively similar levels of taxation.

       We infer from this array of tests that some evidence exists that the domicile of the

subsidiary affects the overall firm ETR; however, the evidence is far from overwhelming.

Although we find no ETR difference between multinationals with tax havens and those without,

some SUB coefficients are consistent with low-tax countries lowering overall ETRs and high-tax

countries increasing them. Yet, there are notable exceptions to this pattern, e.g., Ireland, the

Netherlands and the U.S. Nevertheless, we do find that countries that tax parents heavily tend to

tax foreign subsidiaries heavily and vice versa. All in all, the evidence is mixed about whether

the domicile of the foreign subsidiary affects the multinational’s overall effective tax rate.



   5.2. Parent-subsidiary interactions



                                                 29
        One possible reason for the mixed findings in the prior section is that we restrict the SUB

coefficient to be the same, regardless of the domicile of the parent. For example, establishing a

subsidiary in Ireland may substantially lower an American firm’s ETR while having little effect

on the ETR of a multinational domiciled in the UK. If so, by forcing the same SUB coefficient

on Ireland for all countries, we may be masking its differential impact across countries. Thus, in

this section, we alter the research design to allow for the possibility that foreign subsidiaries

affect the ETRs of their parents differently depending on the domicile of the parent.

        To conduct this extension, we modify equation (2) by replacing the SUB variables with

interactions between the COUNTRY and SUB variables. We then compare the coefficients on

the interactions to assess the extent to which subsidiaries affect parents differently, depending on

whether the parent is in a high-tax or low-tax country.

                                                            ∗


                                                                                                       3

        Table 6 presents the estimated interaction coefficients (no coefficients are shown unless

there are at least 50 observations in a cell) for major parent locations and select subsidiary

countries. The dependent variable is always current ETR, except for the last column, which

reports results for the U.S. only, using the cash ETR as the dependent variable (no other country

has enough cash ETR observations to warrant tabulation).42

        There are far too many COUNTRY*SUM coefficients in Table 6 to cover them in any

detail here. Thus, for brevity, we comment only on U.S. inbound and outbound activities and

leave the many other statistics in this table for the reader to peruse. Beginning with inbound


42
  Each number in Table 6 represents the marginal ETR impact from a particular parent-subsidiary country mix. For
example, on the first line the -8.9 means that a French parent has a 8.9 percentage points lower current ETR, on
average, if it has a subsidiary in Argentina.

                                                      30
investment, Table 5 shows that a subsidiary in the U.S. lowers a multinational’s current ETR by

0.5 percentage points, on average. Table 6 expands the analysis to show that having a subsidiary

in the U.S. affects a multinational differently, depending on its domicile, suggesting that the SUB

coefficient constraint in equation (2) materially affects inferences. We find that the marginal

effect of an American subsidiary on current ETRs ranges from a decrease of 1.9 percentage

points for a European parent to an increase of 3.8 percentage points for a German parent.

         For outbound investment from the U.S., we turn to the last column in the table, which

shows the marginal effect on cash taxes paid for an American multinational having operations in

various countries. We find weak evidence that investments in developed, (generally) high-tax

countries increase U.S. companies’ cash ETRs. Locating a subsidiary in an OECD country listed

increases the American multinational’s cash ETR by 0.2 percentage point, while a subsidiary in a

non-OECD country drives down the U.S. multinational’s ETR by 0.5 percentage point. The

difference is significant at the 10% level.

         However, locating a subsidiary in a tax haven (Ireland, Luxembourg, Singapore or the

Tax Havens) lowers U.S. multinationals’ cash ETRs by -1.2 percentage points, on average.43

This is significantly less than the 0.05 percentage point increase for the non-haven countries (at

the 0.05 level). Moreover, if tax havens are typically paired with subsidiaries in high-tax

locations (e.g., if Bermudan subsidiaries always co-exist with higher taxed British subsidiaries),

then clustering effects among subsidiaries may understate the importance of tax havens because

the tax haven coefficients may be capturing some of their companion high-tax countries’ impact

on ETRs (Dyreng et al, 2011).



43
  Even though they are computed with different data and methodology, this study’s 1.2 percentage point cash ETR
reduction for these four tax havens is similar to Dyreng and Lindsey’s (2009) 1.5 percentage point estimate for tax
haven activity by U.S. multinationals.

                                                         31
6. Closing Remarks

       To our knowledge, this paper provides the most comprehensive analysis of international

corporate income tax expense to date. It is the first study to compute effective taxes using cash

taxes paid and current and total income tax expense data for thousands of companies around the

world. Our principal findings include: The domiciliary location of a multinational company

substantially affects its worldwide tax liability. Japanese multinationals consistently face the

highest ETRs. American multinationals face among the next highest ETRs. Tax haven

multinationals enjoy the lowest ETRs. Multinationals and domestic-only firms face similar

ETRs. ETRs declined worldwide over the last two decades; however, the ordinal rank from

high-tax countries to low-tax countries remained remarkably constant. ETRs vary considerably

across industries. The evidence mostly shows that the location of its foreign subsidiaries affects

a multinational’s worldwide ETR.

       Understanding the role that domicile plays in multinational decisions is central to both

scholarly and policy discussions about international taxes. Two decades ago, the taxation of

multinationals was an obscure area of the law, understood by few practitioners, rarely mentioned

in policy circles, and largely ignored by academe. Today, globalization has made the taxation of

international commerce relevant to most businesses, central to policy discussions about jobs,

trade, and competitiveness, and an area of principal interest to scholars in economics,

accounting, law, finance, and related fields. The ETR estimates in this study should provide

useful and needed quantitative information as policymakers, business, and scholars around the

globe grapple with the complexities surrounding the taxation of multinational activities.

       By shedding light on the importance of domicile for multinationals, the paper is

particularly timely for American policymakers as the U.S. struggles to respond to Japan and the



                                                 32
UK’s recent decisions to adopt territorial taxation, which have left the U.S. as the sole major

power still employing a system of worldwide taxation. To the ire of many U.S.-domiciled

multinationals, President Obama has proposed strengthening the worldwide system through

further restrictions on the deferral of U.S. tax on foreign profits. U.S. multinationals appear to be

coalescing around territorial taxation as long as expenses related to foreign-source income can

still be deducted against U.S. income. The findings in this study may hasten the development of

U.S. tax reform by showing that U.S. multinational ETRs are among the highest in the world.

Moreover, if territorial taxation further lowers the taxes on Japanese and British multinationals,

then the U.S. may be forced to provide some tax relief for its multinationals to maintain some

level of international tax competitiveness.

       Further work is warranted to understand how the tax order of countries has remained so

steady over two decades of radical worldwide changes in tax policy, financial reporting,

economic development, law, politics, technology, and many other areas. Although tax rates have

fallen dramatically over the last 20 years, high-tax countries remain high-tax, and low-tax

countries remain low-tax. Perhaps globalization permits countries to change their tax systems

but forces a herding effect because tax changes in one country reverberate around the globe (see

Griffith and Klemm, 2005, for a discussion of tax competition among OECD countries). If so,

countries, including the U.S., may find it difficult to sustain policies that do not conform to

international norms.

       As with any empirical study, simplifying assumptions are necessary. We close by

repeating a few of the key caveats in this paper. First, although the data are superior to any in the

past, they are incomplete. We have accounting information, not actual tax returns. We only

know the location of foreign subsidiaries in the most recent year of the data. The data may not



                                                 33
capture all foreign subsidiaries. Furthermore, our analysis assumes that the decision to locate a

subsidiary in a foreign country is made without consideration of the portfolio of current

subsidiary locations or possible ones in the future. Finally, although we have the most extensive

database to date, some countries have a limited number of domiciled companies. Therefore,

readers should interpret data for small countries with some caution. That said, the study is the

best attempt to date to compare the effective tax rates of all publicly-traded companies around

the globe.




                                                34
                                           References

Armstrong, Christopher S., Blouin, Jennifer L., and David F. Larcker, 2010. “The Incentives for
      Tax Planning,” University of Pennsylvania working paper.

Atwood, T.J., Michael S. Drake and Linda A. Myers, 2010. “Book-Tax Conformity, Earnings
      Persistence and the Association between Earnings and Future Cash Flows,” Journal of
      Accounting and Economics, forthcoming.

Blouin, Jennifer and Linda Krull, 2009. “Bring it home: A Study of the Incentives Surrounding
       the Repatriation of Foreign Earnings under the American Jobs Creation Act of 2004,”
       Journal of Accounting Research: 1027-1059.

Bradford, David and Don Fullerton, 1981. “Pitfalls in the construction and use of effective tax
       rates,” in Depreciation, Inflation, and the Taxation of Income from Capital, edited by C.
       Hullen, Urban Institute Press: Washington, D.C., 251-278.

Braithwaite, Tom. 2008. “Kingfisher considers switching tax base,” FT.com, September 21,
       http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/def9277a-880f-11dd-b114-0000779fd18c.html.

Carroll, Robert, 2010. The Importance of Tax Deferral and A Lower Corporate Tax Rate. Special
        Report No. 174. Tax Foundation: Washington, DC, February.

Clausing, Kimberly A. and Reuven S. Avi-Yonah, 2007. Reforming Corporate Taxation in a
       Global Economy: A Proposal to Adopt Formulary Apportionment. The Brookings
       Institution: Washington DC, June.

Coder, Jeremiah, 2010. “Shay Cautions Against Comparing Tax System to Foreign Regimes,”
       Tax Notes, March 1.
       http://services.taxanalysts.com/taxbase/taxnotes.nsf/(ME/BEEDD8BFDBD0A46F852576
       D9000E30DA?OpenDocument&highlight=0,stephen+shay

Collins, Julie H. and Douglas A. Shackelford, 1995. “Corporate domicile and average effective
       tax rates: The cases of Canada, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States,”
       International Tax and Public Finance 2:1, May, 55-83.

Collins, Julie H. and Douglas A. Shackelford, 2003. “Do U.S. multinationals face different tax
       burdens than do other companies?” in Tax Policy and the Economy 17, edited by James
       M. Poterba, National Bureau of Economic Research and MIT Press (Cambridge, MA.),
       141-168.

Collins, Julie H. and Douglas A. Shackelford, 1997. “Global Organizations and Taxes: An
       Analysis of the Dividend, Interest, Royalty, and Management Fee Payments between
       U.S. Multinationals’ Foreign Affiliates,” Journal of Accounting and Economics 24 (2):
       151-173.



                                               35
Desai, Mihir, 2008. “The Decentering of the Global Firm,” Harvard University working paper.

Desai, Mihir, (2006, May 9). Reform alternatives for the corporate tax. Testimony before the US
       House of Representatives Committee on Ways and Means, Subcommittee on Select
       Revenue Measures, Corporate Tax Reform public hearing . Washington DC.

Desai, Mihir, Foley, C. F., and James R. Hines, Jr., 2006. “The Demand for Tax Haven
       Operations,” Journal of Public Economics 90, no. 3 (March), 513-531.

Desai, Mihir and James R. Hines Jr. 2002. “Expectations and Expatriations: Tracing the Causes
       and Consequences of Corporate Inversions,” National Tax Journal 55 No. 3: 409-440.

Devereux, Michael P. and Rachel Griffith, 1998, “The Taxation of Discrete Investment
      Choices”, The Institute for Fiscal Studies working paper.

Dohmen, Joep, 2008, “Multinationals betalen vrijwel geen belasting,” NRC Handelsblad,
     February 21,
     http://www.nrc.nl/economie/article1855259.ece/Multinationals_betalen_vrijwel_geen_be
     lasting.

Drucker, Jesse, 2010, “Google 2.4% Rate Shows How $60 Billion Lost to Tax Loopholes,”
      Bloomberg, October 21.

Drucker, Jesse, 2009, “Titans Vow Overseas-Tax Fight,” Wall Street Journal, April 22.

Dyreng, Scott D., Michelle Hanlon, and Edward L. Maydew, 2008. “Long-run corporate tax
      avoidance,” The Accounting Review 83:1, 61-82.

Dyreng, Scott D. and Bradley P. Lindsey, 2009. “Using Financial Accounting Data to Examine
      The Effect of Foreign Operations Located in Tax Havens and Other Countries on U.S.
      Multinational Firms’ Tax Rates.” Journal of Accounting Research 47:5, 1283-1316.

Dyreng, Scott D., Bradley P. Lindsey, Kevin S. Markle, and Douglas A. Shackelford, 2011.
      “Taxes and the Clustering of Foreign Subsidiaries.” University of North Carolina
      working paper.

Faith, Joanna, 2008, “WPP quits UK over foreign profits debate,” International Tax Review,
        September 30, http://www.internationaltaxreview.com/?Page=9&PUBID=210&ISS=
        24960&SID=711808.

Freedman, Judith, 2004. Aligning taxable profits and accounting profits: Accounting standards,
      legislators and judges. eJournal Tax Research , 2 (1), 71-99.

Freedman, Judith, 2008. Financial and tax accounting: Transparency and truth. In W. Schon
      (Ed.), Tax and Corporate Governance (pp. 71-92). Springer Science.



                                              36
Fullerton, Don, 1980. “Which effective tax rate?” National Tax Journal 37(1), 23-41.

Gordon, Roger and James Hines, 2002. “International Taxation,” in Alan Auerbach and Martin
      Feldstein (eds.), Handbook of Public Economics IV, Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1935-
      1995.

Gordon, Roger, Laura Kalambokidis, and Joel Slemrod, 2003, “A New Summary Measure of the
      Effective Tax Rate on Investment”, NBER working paper.

Graham, John, Michelle Hanlon, and Terry Shevlin, 2010, “Barriers to Mobility: The Lockout
      Effect of U.S. Taxation of Worldwide Corporate Profits,” National Tax Journal 63,
      forthcoming.

Graham, John, Jana Raedy and Douglas Shackelford, 2011. Research in accounting for income
      taxes, University of North Carolina working paper.

Griffith, Rachel, and Alexander Klemm, 2004, “What Has Been The Tax Competition
        Experience Of The Last 20 Years?”, The Institute for Fiscal Studies working paper.

Gupta, S. and K. Newberry. 1997. “Determinants of the Variability in corporate effective tax
       rates: Evidence from longitudinal data.” Journal of Accounting and Public Policy 16, 1 –
       34.

Hanlon, Michelle, 2003. “What can we infer about a firm’s taxable income from its financial
      statements?” National Tax Journal LVI, 831-863.

Hanlon, Michelle and Shane Heitzman, 2010. A review of tax research. MIT working paper.

Hanlon, Michelle, Stacie Kelley Laplante, and Terry Shevlin, 2005. Evidence for the possible
      information loss of conforming book income and taxable income. Journal of Law and
      Economics XLVIII: 407-442.

HM Revenue and Customs National Audit Office, 2007, Management of Large Business
     Corporation Tax, July 25.

Hodge, Scott A., 2008, “U.S. Corporate Taxes Now 50 Percent Higher than OECD Average.
      Fiscal Fact No. 136,” Tax Foundation, August 13, 2008,
      http://www.taxfoundation.org/news/show/23470.html

Houlder, Vanessa, 2007. “A third of UK’s big business pays no corporation tax,” Financial
      Times, August 27, http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/e42282d6-54ea-11dc-890c-
      0000779fd2ac.html

Houlder, Vanessa, 2008. “Treasury proposes change to corporate taxation,” Financial Times,
      December 9, http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/9863b5fa-c63f-11dd-a741-
      000077b07658.html?nclick_check=1.

                                               37
Huizinga, Harry and Luc Laeven, 2008. “International Profit Sharing Within Multinationals: A
       Multi-Country Perspective,” Journal of Public Economics 9: 1164-1182.

Huizinga, Harry, Luc Laeven, and Gaetan Nicodeme, 2008. “Capital Structure and International
       Debt Shifting,” Journal of Financial Economics 88 (1), April, 80-118.

Ishi, Hiromitsu, 2001. “The Japanese Tax System, Third Edition.” Oxford University Press.

Jacob, John, 1996. “Taxes and transfer pricing: Income shifting and the volume of intrafirm
        transfers.” Journal of Accounting Research 34(2): 301-311.

Johnston, David Cay, 2002, “Senators Assail Corporate Use Of Bermuda as Tax Shelter,” New
       York Times, March 22, 2002.

Johnston, David Cay, 2008, “The Price of Civilization,” Tax Notes, June 23, 1269-1270.

Jones, Sam and Venessa Houlder, 2010, “Hedge Fund Exodus Costs UK £500m,” Financial
       Times, October 1.

Lee, Namryoung and Charles Swenson, 2008, “Are Asia-Pacific Companies Effective in
       Managing Their Tax Burdens? A Global Analysis,” Asia-Pacific Journal of Taxation
       12:2, Autumn/Winter, 41-53.

Lin, Kenny Z., 2006. The impact of tax holidays on earnings management: An empirical study
       of corporate reporting behavior in a developing-economy framework. The International
       Journal of Accounting 41, 163-175.

Lu, Joe and Charles Swenson, 2000, “Tax Burdens around the World: How Do Asia Pacific
       Companies and Countries Compare?” Asia-Pacific Journal of Taxation 4:4, Winter, 97-
       104.

McClelland, John and Lillian Mills, 2007. Weighing benefits and risks of taxing book income.
      Tax Notes , 114, 779-787.

Mills, L. 1998. “Book-tax differences and Internal Revenue Service adjustments.” Journal of
        Accounting Research 36(2): 343-356.

Mutti, John H. and Harry Grubert, 2007, “The Effect of Taxes on Royalties and the Migration of
        Intangible Assets Abroad,” NBER Working paper No. 12348.

Neil, Scott, 2007. “Invesco: Coming to Bermuda was ‘an easy choice,” The Royal Gazette,
       December 6,
       http://www.royalgazette.com/siftology.royalgazette/Article/article.jsp?articleId=7d7c337
       30030002&sectionId=65.



                                               38
Omer, T., K. Molloy, D. and D. Ziebart. 1993. “An investigation of the firms size—effective tax
      rate relation in the 1980s.” Journal of Accounting, Auditing and Finance 8(2): 167-182.

Perlman, Bob, 1999. Testimony before United States Senate Committee on Finance,
      International Tax Issues Relating to Globalization, March 11, 58-70.

Poterba, J., Rao, N., & Seidman, J. (2011). “Deferred tax positions and incentives for corporate
       behavior around corporate tax changes.” National Tax Journal, forthcoming.

Raedy, Jana, Seidman, Jeri, and Douglas Shackelford (2011). “Is there information content in the
       tax footnote.” University of North Carolina working paper.

Rego, Sonya Olhoft, 2003. “Tax-Avoidance Activities of U.S. Multinational Corporations,”
       Contemporary Accounting Research 20:4, Winter, 805-833.

Samuels, John M., 2009. “American Tax Isolationism,” Tax Notes (June 29): 1593-1599.

Scholes, Myron, Mark Wolfson, Merle Erickson, Edward Maydew, and Terry Shevlin, 2009.
       Taxes and Business Strategy, 4th edition, Pearson Prentice Hall: Upper Saddle River,
       New Jersey.

Shackelford, Douglas. (2006, May 9). Testimony before the US House of Representatives
      Committee on Ways and Means, Subcommittee on Select Revenue Measures, Corporate
      Tax Reform public hearing . Washington DC.

Shackelford, Douglas A. and Terry Shevlin, 2001. “Empirical tax research in accounting,”
      Journal of Accounting and Economics 31:1-3, September, 321-387.

Shackelford, Douglas A., Joel B. Slemrod, and James M. Sallee, 2011. “Financial Reporting,
      Taxes, and Real Decisions: Toward a Unifying Framework,” University of Michigan
      working paper.

Tuerff, T. Timothy, Daniel Shaviro, Douglas A. Shackelford, Timothy M. McDonald, and
        Michael Mundaca, 2008, “Session 4: Alternatives for Taxation of Foreign Source
        Income,” Taxes—The Tax Magazine, June, 71-86.

The President’s Advisory Panel on Federal Tax Reform, 2005. Simple, Fair, and Pro-Growth:
       Proposals to Fix America’s Tax System. U.S. Government Printing Office: Washington,
       DC, November.

United States Government Accountability Office, 2008, Tax Administration: Comparison of the
       Reported Tax Liabilities of Foreign- and U.S.-Controlled Corporations, 1998-2005.
       July.




                                               39
United States House of Representatives (2007), H.R. 3970, Tax Reduction and Reform Act of
       2007, http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-
       bin/getdoc.cgi?dbname=110_cong_bills&docid=f:h3970ih.txt.pdf.

United States Senate Committee on Finance, 1999. International Tax Issues Relating to
       Globalization, March 11.

Voget, Johannes, 2008. “Headquarter Relocations and International Taxation,” Tilburg
       University working paper.

Weiner, Joann M., (2009), “How Obama May Reform International Taxation,” Tax Notes
      International 53:13, March 30, 2009, 1150-1153.

Werdigier, Julia, 2008, “British Companies Emigrating Over Taxes,” The New York Times,
      September 5, http://www.nytimes.com/2008/09/05/business/worldbusiness/05tax.html.

Zimmerman, J., 1983. “Taxes and firm size.” Journal of Accounting and Economics 5, 119-149.




                                              40
Table 1 – Summary statistics by country/group. 2005-2009.




                                                                                                                Pretax Income


                                                                                                                                       current ETR


                                                                                                                                                              current ETR
                                                                                                                                                                            Statutory
                                                                           Revenue




                                                                                                                                                     Median



                                                                                                                                                                                        tax rate
                                                                                                    Equity
                                                                                        Assets




                                                                                                                                Mean
                                                              N
                                     DOM                 13,917           993         2,266        543          93                     28                     30                        39
Full sample
                                     MNAT                14,426        5,309         14,386      2,553         587                     27                     28                        39
                                     DOM                    104        1,416          2,404        563         125                     22                     25                        30
AUSTRALIA
                                     MNAT                   342        2,311         12,549      1,775         505                     22                     26                        30
                                     DOM                     29        1,004          2,546      1,566         276                      5                      2                         0
BERMUDA
                                     MNAT                   289          840          1,307        474         110                     12                      9                         0
                                     DOM                    568          997          1,809        641         118                     14                      7                        36
CANADA
                                     MNAT                   603        2,359          7,062      1,936         417                     21                     21                        36
                                     DOM                      9          201            308        215          42                     10                      8                         0
CAYMAN ISLANDS
                                     MNAT                   198          312            454        259          52                     13                     11                         0
                                     DOM                    150          389          4,109        594          69                     25                     28                        35
FRANCE
                                     MNAT                   212       17,583         67,342      8,325       1,828                     23                     25                        35
                                     DOM                    116        3,837          2,347        506         100                     16                     13                        37
GERMANY
                                     MNAT                   324       13,431         51,792      5,902       1,060                     24                     25                        37
                                     DOM                    113          597          1,657        363         109                     22                     23                        34
INDIA
                                     MNAT                   269          774          1,350        491         135                     17                     14                        34
                                     DOM                  6,194          703          2,574        377          45                     37                     41                        40
JAPAN
                                     MNAT                 3,258        5,563         11,256      2,308         341                     36                     37                        40
                                     DOM                    174          465          1,503        374          61                     19                     19                        27
MALAYSIA
                                     MNAT                   107          615          6,346        650         144                     17                     18                        27
                                     DOM                     71          575          1,203        729         165                     18                     19                        29
SOUTH AFRICA
                                     MNAT                   150        2,466          9,150      1,342         422                     25                     26                        29
                                     DOM                     94          243            682        284          61                     10                      2                        28
SWEDEN
                                     MNAT                   196        2,268          9,033      1,545         386                     18                     20                        28
                                     DOM                     50        1,461          3,127      1,591         394                     17                     15                        21
SWITZERLAND
                                     MNAT                   164        8,574         62,774      4,848       1,093                     19                     18                        21
                                     DOM                    207        1,139          1,887        718         111                     20                     20                        25
TAIWAN
                                     MNAT                   689        1,993          1,984        795         147                     18                     17                        25
                                     DOM                  1,047          344            683        306          60                     20                     22                        30
UNITED KINGDOM
                                     MNAT                   892        5,452         34,334      3,211         788                     24                     26                        30
                                     DOM                  3,830        1,655          2,366        771         152                     23                     25                        39
UNITED STATES
                                     MNAT                 5,244        6,358         11,496      2,964         804                     28                     30                        39
                                     DOM                     13          269          1,026        189          51                     21                     23                        26
AFRICA
                                     MNAT                    25          471          3,042        532         128                     21                     21                        30
                                     DOM                    210          826          1,662        444         110                     21                     20                        32
ASIA
                                     MNAT                    67        1,981          5,736      1,130         240                     18                     19                        31
                                     DOM                    556          642          1,327        440          97                     21                     21                        23
EUROPE
                                     MNAT                   842        5,325         22,379      2,458         616                     21                     22                        29
                                     DOM                    166        1,366          1,976        815         159                     21                     21                        30
LATIN AMERICA
                                     MNAT                   111        4,179          8,632      2,070         849                     24                     22                        28
                                     DOM                     47          480          1,771        325         104                     11                     10                        15
MIDDLE EAST
                                     MNAT                   110          965          5,473        898         192                     17                     11                        31
                                     DOM                    169        1,297          5,393      2,509         367                     10                      8                        18
TAX HAVENS
                                     MNAT                   334        1,788          9,465      2,179         328                     15                     14                        18
This table presents the means of the variables by country/group and firm type (DOM = domestic, MNAT = multinational). All figures are in
millions of U.S. dollars. ETR = current tax expense/pretax income. Statutory rate is the weighted average maximum corporate rate for the group,
weighted by number of observations.



                                                                     41
Table 2 – Main results. Pooled sample 2005-2009.
                                                            cash ETR                                             current ETR                                              total ETR
   AdjR2                                             0.71                                                   0.80                                                   0.87
   N                                              12,509                                                 28,343                                                 41,642
                                             Domestic                Multinational                  Domestic                 Multinational                 Domestic                 Multinational
                                          Actual Estimate           Actual Estimate              Actual Estimate            Actual Estimate             Actual Estimate            Actual Estimate
   AUSTRALIA                                 26        23              24        22                 22        20               22        19                26        27               26        26
   BERMUDA                                                             14        14                                            12          9                                          16        17
   CANADA                                      15            14        20        19*                   14           13         21        18*                  23           23         26        26*
   CAYMAN ISLANDS                                                                                                              13        10                                           15        16
   FRANCE                                                                 27            22             25           23         23        19*                  27           28         29        28
   GERMANY                                                                25            22             16           15         24        19*                  27           29         29        29
   INDIA                                                                  18            17             22           19         17        13*                  26           26         21        22*
   JAPAN                                                                                               37           33         36        31*                  42           41         39        39*
   MALAYSIA                                    19            19                                        19           16         17        15                   23           24         19        20*
   SOUTH AFRICA                                                                                        18           16         25        20*                  25           26         29        28*
   SWEDEN                                                                                              10           10         18        14*                  19           21         25        25*
   SWITZERLAND                                                            19            15             17           18         19        14*                  19           22         21        21
   TAIWAN                                                                                              20           17         18        14*                  20           21         18        19*
   UNITED KINGDOM                              22            20           24            22             20           17         24        20*                  23           24         27        26*
   UNITED STATES                               22            20           25            21*            23           19         28        23*                  29           30         30        30
   AFRICA                                                                                                                                                                             26        28
   ASIA                                        26            24                                        21           20           18            16             23           23         21        21*
   EUROPE                                      26            24           23            21*            21           20           21            18             25           26         25        26
   LATIN AMERICA                               19            19           19            16             21           18           24            19             24           25         23        23*
   MIDDLE EAST                                                            11            11                                       17            14             13           15         18        19*
   TAX HAVENS                                                             18            16             10           10           15            13*            16           18         17        18

This table presents the results of estimating          ∑                     ∑                 ∗                        on three separate samples, each with         calculated as the tax measure in the
column heading scaled by pretax income. The subcolumns titled Actual report the mean           as reported on the financial statements. The subcolumns titled Estimate report the estimates of the
coefficients. The Domestic Estimate is the estimate of for each country/group. The Multinational Estimate is the estimate of ( +           for each country/group. All available observations were
included in the estimation, but estimates are only reported for countries/groups having 50 or more observations. * indicates that is statistically significant at the 5% level, i.e., that the number in the
Domestic Estimate column is statistically different from the number in the corresponding Multinational Estimate column. For example, the estimate of cashETR for Canadian domestic firms (14%) is
statistically different from the estimate for Canadian multinational firms (19%).


                                                                                                     42
Table 3 – Results by year, 1988-2009. Current tax expense. Multinationals and Domestics pooled.

                               1988    1989    1990    1991    1992    1993    1994    1995    1996    1997       1998    1999    2000    2001    2002    2003    2004    2005      2006    2007    2008    2009
AdjR2                          0.92    0.92    0.90    0.91    0.90    0.89    0.88    0.87    0.87        0.87   0.86    0.84    0.84    0.82    0.79    0.77    0.78    0.79      0.80    0.82    0.81    0.79
N                              2,295   2,460   2,501   2,510   2,543   2,744   3,253   3,736   4,307   4,545      4,364   4,773   4,834   4,365   4,890   5,780   6,415   6,298     7,532   5,848   4,318   4,347
AUSTRALIA                               29      22                              22      20      22          22     19      20      22      16      18      16      19      21        23      21      18      17
BERMUDA                                                                         10              12           9      9      10       7      11      11       8       9      10        11      12      12       7
CANADA                          14      24      15      19      21      19      22      21      22          20     19      21      21      20      19      15      18      19        18      18      16      15
CAYMAN ISLANDS                                                                                                                                      8       8       8      12        11       9      13      13
FRANCE                                  29      21      26      24      23      25      27      29          29     29      28      27      26      25      25      24      25        21      22      18      25
GERMANY                                                                                         29          33     32      31      31      27      26      28      21      18        21      19      20      19
INDIA                                                   22      12       8      13      12      17          12      6       9       8      12      15      12      13      17        17      18      19
JAPAN                           44      52      41      48      46      43      45      44      44          43     43      42      41      38      36      32      33      34        34      34      36      30
MALAYSIA                                                32      25      25      28      25      27          22     21       5      21      23      22      18      20      20        17      16      17      15
SOUTH AFRICA                                                                                                16     14      13      18      18              16              20        21      20      21      20
SWEDEN                                                                          20      15      18          19     18      19      20      22      18      15      16      15        15      13      15      11
SWITZERLAND                             26      19      27      20      12      22      20      22          19     20      19      21      21      19      19      20      20        17                      11
TAIWAN                                                                                          12           8     12       8       8       8      12      11      12      15        15      15      18      16
UNITED KINGDOM                  24      33      25      31      27      24      28      26      28          25     24      24      23      22      22      20      20      19        20      20      22      18
UNITED STATES                   22      32      23      30      26      23      27      26      27          25     24      25      25      23      21      18      20      24        23      24      23      20
ASIA                                                                    12      18      20      22          21     18      18      23      20      16      14      22      21        22      18      20      16
EUROPE                                  27      20      24      20      17      21      21      23          22     22      25      25      24      25      23      22      22        20      20      20      17
LATIN AMERICA                                                            8                      15          12     10      13      19      15      21      14      16      22        19      20      22      18
MIDDLE EAST                                                                                                        13      13      15      18      16      15      14      17        18
TAX HAVENS                              22      15      18      16      12      17      16      18          16     13      16      16      14      14      14      16      15        14      11      13      11


This table presents the results of estimating    ∑                                 on separate samples for each year.                                        ⁄                    . Each cell reports the estimate
of for each country/group. Estimates are reported for country-years with 20 or more observations.




                                                                                                      43
Table 4 – Results by industry. 2005-2009. Current tax expense. Multinationals and Domestics pooled.




                                                                                                       Manufacturing




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Transportation
                                          Construction




                                                                                                                                                                                                           Retail Trade
                                                                                                                                                                Professional
                                                                                 Information




                                                                                                                                                                                      Real Estate
                                                                                                                       (31, 32, 33)
                                                                Finance




                                                                                                                                      Mining




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (44, 45)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (48, 49)
                                                                                                                                                        Other
                                                         (23)


                                                                          (52)


                                                                                               (51)




                                                                                                                                               (21)




                                                                                                                                                                               (54)


                                                                                                                                                                                                    (53)
       AdjR2                                       0.80              0.74                0.78                    0.84                     0.63        0.84               0.83                 0.79                  0.89                        0.83
       N                                         1,071              2,897              1,815             11,002                                812    4,229            1,522                        952           1,534                               919
       AUSTRALIA                                                          24                   26                      23                       8      24                      24
       BERMUDA                                                            11                                           10                              12                                           12                                                14
       CANADA                                            19               18                   14                      19                       9      20                      26                                         23                          15
       CAYMAN ISLANDS                                                                                                  12                              14
       FRANCE                                            27               29                   15                      27                              24                      23                   15
       GERMANY                                                            18                   18                      24                              24                      19                   19
       INDIA                                             23               27                   13                      19                                                      12
       JAPAN                                             33               30                   36                      34                      14      39                      39                   38                    41                          39
       MALAYSIA                                          24               21                                           14                              21
       SOUTH AFRICA                                                       18                                           22                              20
       SWEDEN                                                             19                   11                      19                              17                      13                   12
       SWITZERLAND                                                        18                                           18                              17
       TAIWAN                                                                                                          16                              24                                                                                             15
       UNITED KINGDOM                                    26               19                   17                      22                      15      22                      25                   19                    24                          19
       UNITED STATES                                     30               20                   19                      26                       6      27                      27                   19                    31                          19
       AFRICA                                                             23
       ASIA                                              20               22                                           16                              24
       EUROPE                                            22               23                   19                      22                      13      24                      18                   14                    22                          13
       LATIN AMERICA                                     19               23                   17                      20                              24                                                                 24
       MIDDLE EAST                                                        20                                           14                              16
       TAX HAVENS                                        11               14                   14                      15                              16                      17                   17                                                16

This table reports the results of estimating        ∑                                  for each industry (two-digit NAICS numbers included in
each group are included in parentheses. Each cell reports the estimate of for the given country in the given industry. All firm-years in 2005-
2009 in the industry were included in the regressions. Estimates are reported for country-industries with 20 or more observations.
                        ⁄                  .




                                                                                                      44
Table 5 – 2005-2009. Current tax expense. Subsidiary specification.

AdjR2                                 0.80
N                                   28,343
Parents                           Estimate     Subsidiaries                      Estimate     Subsidiaries                       Estimate
AUSTRALIA                               19     ARGENTINA                               0.6    LUXEMBOURG                              (0.5)
BERMUDA                                 10     AUSTRALIA                               0.1    MALAYSIA                                (0.9)
CANADA                                  16     AUSTRIA                                (0.7)   MEXICO                                   0.7
CAYMAN ISLANDS                          11     BELGIUM                                 0.3    NETHERLANDS                              0.3
FRANCE                                  21     BERMUDA                                (0.7)   NORWAY                                   0.9
GERMANY                                 18     BRAZIL                                 (0.5)   PERU                                     0.5
INDIA                                   15     BULGARIA                               (1.3)   POLAND                                   0.2
JAPAN                                   33     CANADA                                  0.6    PORTUGAL                                 0.4
MALAYSIA                                16     CAYMAN ISLANDS                         (0.1)   ROMANIA                                  0.0
SOUTH AFRICA                            19     CHILE                                   1.1    RUSSIA                                  (0.6)
SWEDEN                                  12     CHINA                                  (0.3)   RUSSIAN FEDERATION                      (0.3)
SWITZERLAND                             15     COLOMBIA                                1.4    SINGAPORE                               (1.2)
TAIWAN                                  15     CROATIA                                 2.6    SLOVAKIA                                (1.6)
UNITED KINGDOM                          18     CZECH REPUBLIC                         (0.4)   SOUTH AFRICA                             2.5
UNITED STATES                           21     DENMARK                                (0.1)   SOUTH KOREA                             (1.6)
AFRICA                                  22     ESTONIA                                (0.4)   SPAIN                                   (1.2)
ASIA                                    19     FINLAND                                (0.2)   SWEDEN                                  (0.2)
EUROPE                                  19     FRANCE                                  1.3    SWITZERLAND                              0.8
LATIN AMERICA                           19     GERMANY                                (0.5)   THAILAND                                (0.7)
MIDDLE EAST                             13     GREECE                                 (0.5)   UNITED KINGDOM                           1.2
TAX HAVENS                              12     HONG KONG                              (0.8)   UNITED STATES                           (0.5)
                                               HUNGARY                                 0.1    VENEZUELA                               (0.8)
                                               INDIA                                  (0.4)   AFRICA                                   2.1
                                               IRELAND                                 0.4    ASIA                                     0.3
                                               ITALY                                   0.9    EUROPE                                  (1.4)
                                               JAPAN                                   0.7    LATIN AMERICA                            1.3
                                               LATVIA                                  0.3    MIDDLE EAST                              0.7
                                               LITHUANIA                               0.4    TAX HAVENS                              (1.6)


This table presents the results of estimating    ∑                    ∑                          . The Parents column reports the estimate
of for each country/group. The Subsidiaries column reports the estimate of   for each country/group.
                                 ⁄            .




                                                                   45
Table 6 – 2005-2009. Current tax expense. Subsidiary specification.




                                                                                                                        SWITZERLAND
                                                                                  GERMANY




                                                                                                                                                                            USA Cash
                                                                                                           SWEDEN




                                                                                                                                       TAIWAN
                                                                      FRANCE




                                                                                                                                                          EUROPE
                                                         Parents




                                                                                                 JAPAN




                                                                                                                                                                    USA
                                                                                                                                                   UK
                            Subsidiaries
                            ARGENTINA                               (8.9)                       (1.1)                                             2.8    6.0       (0.3)   (0.0)
                            AUSTRALIA                                           (1.1)           (0.8)                                             0.5              0.9     1.1
                            AUSTRIA                                 (0.6)       (2.5)           0.6       4.3       (0.3)                        (0.8)   1.7       (0.7)   0.7
                            BELGIUM                                 (4.8)       (5.3)           0.4       (3.8)     1.3                           2.0    1.0       0.8     1.4
                            BERMUDA                                                                                                                                (1.8)
                            BRAZIL                                   1.7         1.4            (2.0)               (2.0)                         1.7    3.8       (0.5)   (0.5)
                            BULGARIA                                                                                                                     2.5       (9.3)
                            CANADA                                   0.8        (3.5)           (2.6)               (0.9)                        (0.2)   (0.5)     1.8     1.4
                            CAYMAN ISLANDS                                                                                                                         1.3
                            CHILE                                  11.7                         (0.3)                                             7.3    (1.5)     0.3     2.3
                            CHINA                                                               1.3                                   (0.4)                        (1.8)   (1.6)
                            COLOMBIA                                                                                                                               2.6
                            CROATIA                                                                                                                      0.2       4.3
                            CZECH REPUBLIC                          (1.9)        5.2            0.8                 (6.5)                        (3.5)   (0.6)     (0.1)   0.4
                            DENMARK                                  3.6        (1.1)           3.5       1.5                                    (2.2)   (1.0)     (0.7)   (1.4)
                            ESTONIA                                                                       5.1                                            (0.1)     0.3
                            FINLAND                                 (7.6)        1.5            0.1       5.2                                     0.7    0.4       (0.3)   0.5
                            FRANCE                                              (1.9)           1.8       4.0       4.8                           1.0    (0.2)     1.0     1.1
                            GERMANY                                 (6.7)                       (0.0)     1.0       (4.3)             2.2         2.7    (1.1)     (0.7)   (2.0)
                            GREECE                                  (8.8)        3.5                                                            (10.3)             (2.6)   (0.4)
                            HONG KONG                                                           (0.9)                                                              (0.8)
                            HUNGARY                                 (2.7)       (4.0)           4.4                                                      1.9       (2.4)   0.8
                            INDIA                                                               0.8                                                                (1.5)   (2.7)
                            IRELAND                                  6.1         0.5            (1.0)                                             0.8    (1.5)     (0.5)   (1.6)
                            ITALY                                    5.8         2.0            0.6       1.2       1.2                           2.8    (0.7)     1.5     1.7
                            JAPAN                                    6.8        (1.2)                               (0.8)             (2.6)       2.4    (5.9)     0.4     0.2
                            LATVIA                                                                                                                       (2.7)
                            LUXEMBOURG                              (3.1)        2.5            (2.3)                                            (3.4)   0.5       (0.8)   (1.1)
                            MALAYSIA                                                            (1.2)                                                              0.1     1.0
                            MEXICO                                  (2.2)        1.3            (0.5)               0.0                          (0.4)   2.8       0.9     1.4
                            NETHERLANDS                             (0.3)        3.9            (1.1)     (7.3)     (1.7)             0.3         3.8    (1.2)     (0.1)   (0.5)
                            NORWAY                                   2.7        (6.8)           (1.4)     1.0                                     6.0    (0.4)     0.5     0.3
                            PERU                                                                                                                                   (1.3)
                            POLAND                                 10.7          1.5            (0.6)     (1.5)     8.2                          (3.6)   (0.7)     2.1     2.7
                            PORTUGAL                                (2.3)        3.8            0.2                                              (3.1)   (0.4)     1.1     (0.9)
                            ROMANIA                                 (2.9)        3.9            2.1                                                      (0.8)     1.9     (0.3)
                            RUSSIA                                                                                                                       (4.0)     1.1
                            RUSSIAN FEDERATION                       3.6        (5.3)           (0.5)                                            (0.1)   1.2       (1.6)   (1.6)
                            SINGAPORE                              16.3                         (1.9)                                             1.6              (1.4)   (2.0)
                            SLOVAKIA                                 0.0       (11.1)           (1.7)                                                    (0.6)     (2.9)
                            SOUTH AFRICA                                                                                                                           3.7
                            SOUTH KOREA                            (15.8)        4.7            1.0                                                                (2.4)   (2.4)
                            SPAIN                                   (4.6)        4.4            (1.1)     5.8       2.3                          (1.5)   0.4       (1.6)   (2.2)
                            SWEDEN                                  (2.0)        7.5            0.9                 (0.5)                        (1.6)   (3.2)     0.8     (0.6)
                            SWITZERLAND                            (10.9)       (1.2)           (1.5)     (4.0)                                  (0.9)   2.9       0.6     0.1
                            THAILAND                                                            (1.2)                                                              (0.8)   (0.8)
                            UNITED KINGDOM                           1.1         1.4            0.5       (0.4)     (8.6)             (1.3)              2.4       2.3     0.5
                            UNITED STATES                           (0.8)        3.8            (0.8)     3.2       3.7               (1.5)      (1.9)   0.1
                            VENEZUELA                                                           4.5                                                                0.5
                            AFRICA                                 (11.9)                                                                         2.9              4.5     3.9
                            ASIA                                                                (0.6)                                                              1.8     (0.6)
                            EUROPE                                 17.4          4.0                                                                               (1.7)   (1.4)
                            LATIN AMERICA                                                                                                                          0.9     (0.1)
                            MIDDLE EAST                                                                                                                            3.6     1.0
                            TAX HAVENS                                                                                                (2.1)              (3.5)     (2.2)   (0.2)

This table presents the results of estimating        ∑                                      ∑                       ∗                                    on a subsample of the sample described in Table
1 for which we have necessary subsidiary information. Each cell reports the estimate of     for the interaction of the given parent and subsidiary variables. For
example, the estimate of for the interaction term                 ∗                 is -0.3. All interaction terms were included in the estimation, but estimates are
only reported for cells with 50 or more observations.                              ⁄                   for all columns except the last. The last column reports the
results of a separate regression with                       ⁄                  .


                                                                                                     46
