                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   DOES LESS INCOME MEAN LESS REPRESENTATION?

                                          Eric J. Brunner
                                         Stephen L. Ross
                                       Ebonya L. Washington

                                        Working Paper 16835
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16835


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2011




We thank Robert Erikson, Alan Gerber, Joanna Lahey and seminar participants at RAND, Stanford
GSB, University of Connecticut, UCLA’s Anderson School, University of Maryland, University of
Virginia, University of Wisconsin’s Institute for Research on Poverty and Yale’s Institution for Social
and Policy Studies for their suggestions. We thank Meredith Levine for superb research assistance.
We thank the National Science Foundation for financial support. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Eric J. Brunner, Stephen L. Ross, and Ebonya L. Washington. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Does Less Income Mean Less Representation?
Eric J. Brunner, Stephen L. Ross, and Ebonya L. Washington
NBER Working Paper No. 16835
February 2011, Revised January 2012
JEL No. D72

                                                  ABSTRACT

We assemble a novel dataset of matched legislative and constituent votes and demonstrate that less
income does not mean less representation. We show 1) The opinions of high and low income voters
are highly correlated; the legislator’s vote often reflects the desire of both. 2) What differences in representation
by income exist, vary by legislator party. Republicans more often vote the will of their higher income
over their lower income constituents; Democratic legislators do the reverse. 3) Differences in representation
by income are largely explained by the correlation between constituent income and party affiliation.


Eric J. Brunner                                           Ebonya L. Washington
Quinnipiac University                                     Yale University
Department of Economics                                   Box 8264
275 Mount Carmel Avenue                                   37 Hillhouse, Room 36
Hamden, CT 06518                                          New Haven, CT 06520
Eric.Brunner@quinnipiac.edu                               and NBER
                                                          ebonya.washington@yale.edu
Stephen L. Ross
University of Connecticut
Department of Economics
341 Mansfield Road, Unit 1063
Storrs, CT 06269-1063
stephen.l.ross@uconn.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w16835
“You see, the rich are different from you and me: they have more influence. It’s partly a matter
of campaign contributions, but it’s also a matter of social pressure, since politicians spend a lot
of time hanging out with the wealthy. So when the rich face the prospect of paying an extra 3 or
4 percent of their income in taxes, politicians feel their pain — feel it much more acutely, it’s
clear, than they feel the pain of families who are losing their jobs, their houses, and their
hopes.”
                                                       --Paul Krugman (2010)


       Do politicians better represent the interests of their higher income constituents? Perhaps

because of the increasing costs of campaigns, or the greater participation of high income citizens

in the political process or because politicians more often hail from the higher classes themselves,

the popular belief is that the answer is yes. However, the academic evidence on the topic has thus

far been inconclusive. In this paper, we compile a unique dataset of legislative and constituent

votes in order to present the first direct empirical evidence on whether less income means less

representation in legislative voting.

       Previous work has been unable to answer the question of whether lower or higher income

voters are better represented in legislative voting because of data limitations. Bartels (2008)

regresses the DW Nominate score, a summary measure of the liberal/conservative leaning of a

United States senator’s voting record, on the mean liberal/conservative leaning (seven point

scale) of lower, middle and upper income survey respondents in the senator’s state. He finds that

the ideology of the highest income group enters with a significantly larger coefficient than that of

the lowest income group; he concludes that higher income state residents are better represented

than their lower income counterparts. Bhatti and Erikson (2011) revisit Bartels’ analysis to

address a weighting issue and sample size limitations. While in most specifications the authors

find that the liberalness of higher income voters enters with a larger coefficient than that of lower
income voters, the difference is not statistically significant. In contrast to Bartels, these authors

conclude that higher income constituents are not better represented.1

         Despite the innovations made by Bhatti and Erikson (2011) the limitation of both studies

and of much of the work on representation by constituent category (e.g., income, party) is that

the authors do not have measures of constituents’ preferences on legislative votes. A

constituent’s view is represented in the legislator’s vote when the legislator casts the same vote

the individual would have cast, had that individual been in a position to do so. A group, such as

the poor, is represented when the legislator casts the vote that the majority of the group would

have cast. Therefore to answer the question of whether the poor or the rich are better represented

in terms of legislative voting, one needs three key variables, preferably for a variety of legislative

votes: 1) whether the legislator voted yes or no; 2) whether the poor constituents wanted the

legislator to vote yes or no; and 3) whether the wealthier constituents wanted the legislator to

vote yes or no. As Matsusaka (2001) lays out in detail2 the limitation of using proxy variables,

such as liberal/conservative score, to stand in for an individual’s vote choice, is that we lack the

ability to map from that proxy to actual vote choice. Does a 3 on the 7 point liberal/conservative

measure mean that the individual wants the legislator to vote in favor of extending affirmative

action in granting government contracts? Does a score of 60 out of 100 on favoring increased

abortion access mean that the individual wants the legislator to vote against increasing the

waiting period for abortion access? Or do only those with scores above 70 favor a no vote? The

problem becomes even more intractable when we allow for heterogeneity in respondents’ views



1
  In addition to these two papers, there is a companion literature that takes the legislation, rather than the individual
legislator, as the unit of observation and runs similar regressions with legislative outcome on the left hand side and
proxies for high and low income voter views on an issue on the right hand side. See for example Gilens (2008),
Rigby and Wright (2011), Ura and Ellis (2008) and Wlezien and Soroka (2011).
2
  Erikson, Wright and McIver (1993) cover this point briefly.


                                                                                                                            2
of the liberal/conservativeness of the status quo. If respondents who rate themselves 60 and 70

also rate current laws as 60 and 70 respectively then both prefer the status quo.

         Without knowledge of the function that transforms proxy measures into vote desires,

proxies cannot be used to measure legislative voting representation, overall or by income group.

Thus previous work could not provide the most basic fact about representation by income group:

On average, do legislators more often vote the desires of their higher or lower income

constituents? As noted earlier, previous authors instead regressed legislative voting on the

ideology of low and high income voters. Matsusaka (2001) further criticizes the authors of

studies of this vein for drawing conclusions about average representation of different groups (in

this case low and high income voters) based on the coefficients obtained from regressions since

the estimated slope can only tell us about representation on the margin, but not on average. The

more insurmountable issue, however, is that because we are unable to map from

liberal/conservative self ratings to desired voting outcomes, we cannot make inferences about

representation on the true margin of interest.

         We overcome these data limitations by turning to the state of California. Because of the

state’s extensive use of ballot initiatives we are able to identify 77 times over the years 1991-

2008 during which state legislators and the public voted on the same proposal.3 For these 77

votes we have the three key variables (how each legislator voted, how residents of the poorest

neighborhoods in each legislative district voted and how the residents of the wealthiest

neighborhoods in each legislative district voted) necessary for a descriptive analysis of the

relative representation of lower and higher income voters.



3
 Our use of the term “initiative” and other direct democracy terminology is based on the language used in the
California constitution and statues. In some cases, these terms conflict with the traditional terminology used within
Political Science and Political Economy. See Matsusaka (2005) for the standard terminology.


                                                                                                                    3
       We use these data to describe how patterns of representation vary by constituent income.

We present three key findings. First, we demonstrate that the majority of the time the legislator

votes the will of both lower and higher income voters. The legislative vote choice matches

his/her constituents’ vote choice about 75 percent of the time; this finding is true for constituents

residing in both higher and lower income neighborhoods. Representation of both groups is only

possible because the views of the two groups are highly correlated.

       Second, we show that on average legislators are more likely to vote like lower income

than higher income voters, but that representation by income varies by legislator party.

Democratic legislators, more numerous than their Republican counterparts, vote with their

median low income constituent about five percentage points more often than their median high

income constituent. For Republican legislators the pattern is reversed; these legislators vote the

will of their high income constituents about three percentage points more often than the will of

their lower income constituents. These differences in the average representation of higher and

lower income constituents are small in part because of the high level of agreement between

constituents across class lines.

       Differences in representation at the margin, however, are quantitatively more substantial.

We turn to legislative decision function models, regressions of legislator vote on the median

view of lower and higher income voters, to show that Democratic legislators’ marginal

propensity to vote liberally when lower income voters prefer such a vote is 28 percentage points

higher than when higher income voters so desire. For Republican legislators the figure is 17

percentage points in favor of higher income voters. This basic pattern of Democrats’ better

representing low income voters on average and on the margin, and Republicans’ votes better




                                                                                                     4
reflecting the views of high income voters is robust to varying definitions of high and low

income voters.

         Finally, we ask what explains the fact that representation of constituents of various

income groups varies by legislator party. We augment our legislative decision function models to

control for possible mechanisms. We rule out a correspondence between the median voter’s

views and high income voters’ views in Republican led districts and between the median voter’s

views and low income voters’ views in Democratic led districts. We similarly can rule out

participation as the mechanism as participation is increasing in income in both Democratic and

Republican districts. However, for politicians of both parties, the differences in the coefficients

on the views of low and high income voters are attenuated substantially by the correspondence

between high (low) income voters’ views and Republican (Democratic) voters’ views. Thus

rather than providing evidence for the underrepresentation of the financially disadvantaged, our

results serve to confirm the underrepresentation of the politically disadvantaged, those voters

who find themselves represented by a politician of the opposing party.4

         We present our findings, after first detailing our data in the next session.

DATA

         Our data section is divided into three parts. In the first sub-section, we describe our

sample votes, note the strengths and limitations of our data and discuss generalizability. In the

second sub-section, we describe how we categorize each piece of legislation as a liberal or

conservative bill. In the final sub-section, we present descriptive statistics by income category.

Sample of Issues



4
 Fiorina (1974) makes the theoretical point. Levitt (1996) and Mian, Sufi and Trebbi (2010) provide empirical
support. The theoretical section of Lee, Moretti and Butler (2004) discusses why politicians from a given party
provide more representation of the views of constituents of the same party.


                                                                                                                  5
         In order to assess the relative degree to which the views of various constituencies are

represented by their legislator’s voting, we need data on legislative votes that include three

variables: 1) how the legislator voted; 2) how low income voters wanted the legislator to vote on

the issue and 3) how high income voters wanted the legislator to vote on the issue. While the

legislator’s vote is public record, knowing how the constituents would have voted had they been

in a position to vote directly is more elusive. We turn to the state of California for our analysis

because in California the constituents, through ballot propositions, were in such a position. Over

the nine two-year legislative sessions that span the years 1991-20085 we identify 77 times when

the same issue was voted on by both representatives on the floor of the legislature and the public

in either a general or primary election.6

         While surveys occasionally ask how respondents would vote on a measure currently or

formerly under consideration by the legislature,7 our matched pairs have significant advantages

over survey responses. First, the number and variety of issues that we cover is much larger.

Second, the number of individual opinions aggregated into district/income cells, is also larger8

than in a survey and thus the public vote is less prone to classical measurement error. Third, the

match between the legislative vote and the public vote is quite precise (many times worded

identically) so the public vote is likely a better measure of the public’s desired outcome on the

legislative vote than the response to a survey question’s simplified version of a legislative issue.9


5
  Our sample period begins with the first congressional session whose electoral data are available in the Statewide
Database and ends with the last session available at the time of data collection.
6
  With the exception of measures that the public voted on in the 2002 and 2004 primary elections for which
electronic data are not yet available. Sixty-six bills were voted on by both chambers; while eight were voted on by
the lower house, the Assembly, alone and three were voted on by the upper house, the Senate, alone.
7
  For example, Matsusaka (2010) uses National Election Studies questions with dichotomous response choices to
examine whether citizen’s preferences are better reflected in state law in states with direct democracy.
8
  Bhatti and Erikson (2011) have 150,000 individuals overall and 15,000 in California, we have approximately
150,000 (300,000) individuals 18 and over who cast a ballot on each of our issues in each assembly (senate) district.
9
  Finally, because the public never has the opportunity to vote on many of the issues that state and federal legislators
do, it may be the case that constituents are more thoughtful about their vote choices than their survey responses.


                                                                                                                       6
       Our 77 votes can be classified into two matching types: mandatory (56) and non-

mandatory (21) matches. Mandatory matches occur when the legal process requires that voters

vote on the same issue with the same wording that legislators voted on previously. In order to

pass a bond act, make a change to the constitution or amend legislation passed through a public

proposition, both houses of the legislature must approve the measure by a 2/3 supermajority and

the public must pass the measure by a simple majority. The second type of mandatory match

happens when voters wish to overturn a law passed by the legislature. Voters collect signatures

to get the measure placed on the electoral ballot and then need a simple majority vote to

overturn. Non-mandatory matches, in contrast, are not stipulated by law. They generally arise

because a group works to pass the same legislation through both ballot initiative and through the

legislative process, either simultaneously or sequentially. Laws, that do not amend the

constitution, can be passed through either public or legislative initiative. We identified these non-

mandatory matches by reading through the contents of legislation and ballot initiatives. For more

details on how we chose our sample votes, please see the Data Appendix.

       California’s expansive use of direct democracy ensures that our sample of bills is broad.

Because the state not only requires a large number of issues to be voted on by the public, but also

makes it relative easy for citizens to put initiatives on the ballot, our dataset includes votes on a

variety of topics including courts, education, elections, employment, energy, the environment,

health, infrastructure and taxation—issues that are decided on by legislative bodies throughout

the nation up to the national congress. For example, our dataset includes votes on issues such as

raising the minimum wage, increasing the top marginal income tax rate, requiring employers to

provide basic health care coverage and establishing a single payer health care system, all issues

that have been debated and voted on by many state legislatures and at the national level.




                                                                                                        7
         In 74 of our 77 matched pairs, the legislature votes before the public. This timing raises

the concern that a citizen’s vote on an issue may be influenced by the legislative vote on that

same issue cast by his/her state representative. If that were the case then our measure of public

opinion would not be a good proxy for public opinion at the time the legislative vote occurred. If

low and high income voters were differentially influenced by the votes of their representatives,

then our measure of the difference between low and high income representation would be biased

by the difference in the degree to which these two groups copy the behavior of the

representative.

        However, the idea that constituents vote according to the preferences of their legislators

seems improbable for two reasons. First, when asked directly voters do not name their

representatives as being influential in their proposition voting.10 Second, constituents are

unlikely to know how their state legislators voted. The 2006 Cooperative Congressional Election

Survey (CCES) asked respondents how their US senators voted on six high profile issues during

the 2005-06 congressional session: stem cell research, Iraq withdrawal, immigration reform,

minimum wage increase, capital gains tax increase and the Central American Free Trade

Agreement. The average fraction correct was 49% which is clearly an upper bound for

knowledge11 in our sample of less salient votes conducted by a political body that receives less

media attention.12 Further, to the degree voters are knowledgeable about their representatives’



10
   In a 1990 California Field Poll, reported on in Bowler and Donovan (1998), voters were asked in an open ended
format what sources they turn to when deciding how they will vote on statewide ballot propositions. The top ten
were ballot pamphlet (54%), newspaper editorials (47%), TV editorials (33%), friends (22%), TV ads (21%), direct-
mail ads (20%), newspaper ads (18%), radio editorials (10%), radio ads (6%), and the League of Women Voters
(2%). The ballot pamphlet gives pro/con views on the issue from noted politicians who are generally known
statewide, but does not list the votes of the state legislators.
11
   Knowledge includes correct inference based on legislator characteristics, such as party. The 49% rate is better
than what would be expected with random guessing because there was a “don’t know” option.
12
   Songer (1984) demonstrates that Oklahoma voters’ knowledge of the policy positions of their state legislators is
less than half their knowledge of the positions of their federal representatives. In fact Hogan (2004) argues that


                                                                                                                  8
behavior that knowledge is increasing in income amongst both Democrats and Republicans and

amongst constituents in both Democratic and Republican districts.13 Thus our average

representation findings —Republican legislators voting more in line with high income voters and

Democratic legislators voting more in line with low income voters—seem unlikely to be driven

by differences in the propensity of high and low income voters to copy the voting behavior of

their representative. And while we have only three matched vote pairs in which the public voted

first,14 we note that the pattern of average representation by income is robust to a focus on these

votes in which the public could not have been influenced by observing their legislators’ votes.

         We recognize that despite the large number of matched pairs some readers may be

concerned about the generalizability of a study that focuses on issues voted on by both the

legislature and the public in a single direct democracy state. We briefly provide some

background to suggest that our findings may generalize to other contexts. First, California is not

alone; according to the Initiative and Referendum Institute15 over half of the states have

provisions for direct democracy. Second, direct democracy does not provide legislators with

additional information on voters’ views, and certainly not differentially for one income group

over another, as voters cast their ballots a median time of 187 days after representatives. In both

states with and without direct democracy (and in California on legislative bills with and without

an accompanying public vote) legislators gather information on constituent opinion through

direct communication with voters and through their own polling. Third, although we can only

include in our sample those issues on which both the legislature and the public cast ballots,



because of voters’ lack of knowledge about state politics, policy responsiveness is less important for the reelection
of state legislators than for those at the federal level.
13
   Authors calculations using the 2006 CCES.
14
   The bills are AB1184 (1998) on increasing the minimum wage, AB83 (1998) on raising the top marginal tax rate
and AB118 (2008) on a proposed a tax whose revenues would be used to promote alternative energy.
15
   Website http://www.iandrinstitute.org/statewide_i%26r.htm accessed on April 7, 2011.


                                                                                                                        9
because of the continual threat of public referendum, incentives for a legislator to align his/her

vote with the median vote, or more relevant to our study, the median high or low income

constituent’s vote, do not vary based on whether a public vote follows the legislative vote.

Despite this suggestive evidence, we recognize that whether the results generalize beyond

California is ultimately an empirical question for future research.

        A final caveat about our data is that we capture only the views of those who cast ballots.

Just as with survey data, to the extent that the views of nonparticipants differ from political

participants, our results speak only to the differential representation of political participants.

Legislative and Constituent Vote Coding

        In order to address the question of how representation in legislative voting varies with

constituent income, we collect data on legislative and constituent votes on each of the 77 issues.

Vote choice (yes/no/abstention) for the 80 assembly members and 40 senators in the legislature

at the time of the vote was obtained from web sources and state archives, as detailed in the Data

Appendix. Constituent vote choice on corresponding ballot issues at the census tract level, was

obtained from The Statewide Database, maintained by the Institute of Governmental Studies

(IGS) at the University of California at Berkeley.16

        For ease of interpretation of regression models, we recode both legislative and public

votes from yes or no to liberal or conservative. We determine whether the yes or no side of each

vote is the liberal side by turning to the tract-level returns from the ballot initiative. For each

public vote we run the following regression:

        1)          PercentYes = 1(Percent Registered Democrats) + 2 (Percent Registered

                    Republicans) + 


16
  Located at http://swdb.berkeley.edu/, the Statewide Database provides data on aggregate vote outcomes and voter
registration for statewide primary and general elections held in California since 1990.


                                                                                                               10
where PercentYes is the percentage of yes votes among those voting on the initiative. We

classify a yes vote as a liberal vote if Bˆ1  Bˆ 2 and a yes vote as a conservative vote if Bˆ 2  Bˆ1 .17,18

Summary Statistics by Income Tercile

         We aggregate census tracts to assembly/senate district income terciles to create variables

on the political views of the lowest, middle and highest income voters, or more specifically the

views of voters residing in the lowest, middle and highest income neighborhoods, in each

district. Income terciles are created based on average household income for the tracts within the

district,19 as configured when the legislature voted on the measure.20 In creating terciles, we

weight by share of residents who are citizens aged 18 and over so that each tercile has an equal

number of eligible voters, and therefore equal electoral power. The header row of Table 1 gives

the mean minimum and maximum average household income for each tercile.

         While our basic definition of high and low income is operationalized based on within

district terciles, we also present results based on statewide terciles and within district quintiles

and deciles to demonstrate robustness to more extreme definitions of high and low income. We


17
   We classify observations in which legislators abstain (both because of absences and active abstentions) as
missing. Largely because of abstentions and to a small degree because of vacancies we lose about 10 percent of our
target sample of 8680. (80 assembly members *74 votes + 40 senators * 69 votes = 8680). There are 809 abstentions
and 58 votes missing due to vacancies. While we find that Democrats are more likely to abstain the more
conservative their constituents are on the issue and Republicans are more likely to abstain the more liberal their
constituents are on the issue, we find that representatives of both parties are less likely to abstain when there is an
above median difference of opinion between low and high income areas in their district. Thus we do not believe that
abstentions are biasing our results.
18
   To examine the validity of our vote coding and our matching of voters to districts, we aggregated our data to the
district/issue level and ran models of legislative vote on median vote. We know from previous work, for example,
Snyder (1996) using California data, that our dependent and independent variables should be strongly correlated. As
a validity check of our data assembly process we were comforted to find that this result was robust to leaving the
votes in their original yes/no form, coding the votes liberally/conservatively, trimming the sample to exclude those
votes that are least partisan and most likely to be misclassified, limiting the sample to either the hand matched or the
mandatory matched votes and limiting the focus to the three issues on which the public voted first, which
demonstrates that the correlation is not driven by voters copying their representatives. These results are detailed in
the Data Appendix.
19
   Our census data are based on 2000 tract definitions using Summary Table Files from the 1990 and 2000 Decennial
and the American Community Survey 2005-2009. For the 1990 Decennial Census, we use estimates for 2000 tract
definitions provided by Geolytics, Inc. Non-census year income data are created by tract level linear interpolation.
20
   Because of redistricting this may differ from the configuration of the districts when voters voted on the initiative.


                                                                                                                    11
use within district terciles as our basic specification because such terciles are defined for all

districts in our sample21 and are less subject to measurement error.22

         In the remainder of the table we provide summary statistics by income terciles. In Panel

A we present a variety of measures of political behavior designed to demonstrate that

relationships between income and political behavior that the literature has identified previously

hold in our dataset. We see that participation (as measured by registration, turnout for

propositions or turnout for the highest office on the ballot) is increasing in income. While we do

not have data on turnout in primaries for the highest office on the ballot for all years, we do note

that proposition turnout in both primary and general elections is increasing in income, suggesting

a positive income gradient even in the more highly partisan first round of voting.

         In Table 1, we also show the well established correlation between income and

conservatism:23 Registration for the Republican Party is increasing in income; support for the

Democratic Party in terms of registration and vote choice is decreasing in income. Both the

participation and political preference patterns hold across all districts and within both Republican

and Democratically led districts.

         In the remainder of Table 1 we present the variables we use to measure representation by

income group. Previous studies have employed proxies such as self identification on a seven

point liberal/conservative scale or a five point pro choice/pro life scale to stand in for vote

preference on a particular issue. Matsusaka (2001) points out that such variables do not allow a

researcher to measure representation. While a score of 6 out of 7 on a conservatism scale tell us



21
   Not all districts include census tracts that fall in both the top and bottom income terciles statewide.
22
   Because we construct percentiles based on average tract income rather than individual household income (which
is not available linked to voting records) each percentile will include some misclassified voters, voters residing in
tracts whose average income falls within a different percentile than their own household annual income does. As we
decrease the size of the percentiles, we likely increase the number of misclassified households.
23
   See for example Brunner, Ross and Washington (2011) and Leigh (2005).


                                                                                                                  12
that the individual rates him/herself as fairly conservative, what the measure cannot tell us is how

conservatively the individual rates the status quo policy. Without this second piece of

information, we do not know whether the individual would prefer for his/her representative to

vote for the more liberal or the more conservative side of the issue. To analyze to what extent a

legislator represents (votes according to the wishes of) his/her constituency one must know both:

1) how the legislator voted and 2) how the constituency wanted the legislator to vote on the

issue. Our matched legislative/constituent vote pairs provide this information for 77 issues.

       In Panel B we present these key variables. In the first row of the panel we see that in 60

percent of our legislator/issue observations the legislator votes the liberal side of the issue. This

is not surprising; Democrats are a majority in both bodies in all of our legislative sessions.

Democratic legislators vote liberally 74 percent of the time; Republican legislators do so 39

percent of the time. Overall and in both Democratic and Republican-led districts, constituents’

propensity to vote liberally on an issue, like their propensity to vote for a Democratic candidate,

is decreasing in income. However, we note that the income conservatism gradient is far less

steep for issues than for candidates. Just as at the national level (Stimson, 2011), Table 1 shows

that in California, across income groups, party polarization is greater than issue polarization.

       In the next row of Panel B we provide summary statistics on an indicator for whether the

majority of the focal group favored the liberal view on the legislation. This variable is directly

comparable in units to Legislator Voting Liberally, also an indicator variable. Comparing these

two rows we see that voters residing in Democratic and Republican-led districts hold views that

are much closer to each other than do Democratic and Republican legislators. Democratic

legislators have a higher propensity to vote liberally than their constituents of any income

category and Republican legislators have a lower propensity than their constituents, again




                                                                                                     13
regardless of income. Just as at the national level (Ansolabehere and Jones, 2010) California

constituents’ views are far less polarized than their legislators. In the next section, we detail how

we use these unique California data to describe representation by income.

METHODOLOGY

         The goal of our investigation is to describe how legislative representation varies by

income. To do so, we characterize the degree to which legislative voting represents constituent

views in two complementary ways. First, we ask on average are legislators more likely to vote

with one income group more than another? To answer this question we calculate what political

scientists term congruence, an indicator, that varies by legislator/issue, for whether the vote of

the legislator matches the vote of the majority of his/her constituents.24 We calculate this

measure for different constituent income groups and ask whether the legislator’s propensity to

vote with different groups varies significantly.

         The second way in which we characterize relative representation by income is on the

margin, an approach more familiar to and more typical of political economists. Specifically, we

run legislative decision function models of the form of (2):

         (2)      Legislator_vote_Liberal =  +  Constituency_vote_Liberal_Top)

         +Constituency_vote_Liberal_Bottom) + 

Where Legislator_vote _Liberal is an indicator for whether the legislator voted liberally on the

legislation and Constituency_vote_Liberal_Top(Bottom) are indicators for whether the majority

of constituents in the top (bottom) income group voted liberally.25 and then measure the

degree to which the higher and lower income groups appear to “influence” the legislator’s vote.


24
   Besley and Coate (2008) also employ this definition of representation in their theoretical examination of how
direct democracy affects representation.
25
   Standard errors are clustered by legislator/chamber. Thus, for legislators who serve in both the assembly and the
senate during the sample time period, votes cast in each of the two chambers are in separate clusters.


                                                                                                                   14
If ->0, this is evidence that the legislator weighs the higher income group’s opinions more

heavily in the decision function. If -<this suggests that the lower income group is more

influential. We employ indicators for constituent view rather than continuous measures so that

the interpretation of is the marginal impact of the median higher (lower) income voter’s

support for the legislation.26 Taken together, these measures allow us to describe both how

frequently legislators vote in accordance with varying income groups and how likely the

legislator is to favor one group over the other when two income groups disagree.

REPRESENTATION

Does representation vary by income?

         Before we examine how representation varies with constituent income, we first note the

overall levels of representation as measured by congruence. Legislators vote the will of their

median constituent 76 percent of the time, we show in the second column of the first row of

Table 2 Panel A. This table presents measures of the frequency with which the legislator votes

congruently with low income (first column), all (second column) and high income (third column)

constituents. In the first row of the table the income groups are defined by terciles. The .771 in

the first cell shows that on average legislators vote with the majority of the bottom income tercile

of their constituency 77 percent of the time and with the top 75 percent of time. Even when we

stratify the congruence measures by legislator party we see that the lowest congruence measure

(between Democratic legislatures and high income voters) is 74 percent. Differences between

congruence with residents of the district’s highest and lowest income neighborhoods differ by

only 5.2 percentage points for Democrats (Panel B) and 2.5 percentage points for Republicans.

26
  With continuous measures of constituent support, correlations between legislator vote and constituent view may
be driven by variation in constituent view far from the 50% threshold. Consequently, utilizing continuous measures
may lead one to find that the group that appears to more greatly influence the legislator is the group that is actually
less well represented on average. Further, the discrete measure is the empirical operationalization of our definition
of representation: voting with the majority of the constituency.


                                                                                                                     15
         The high level of congruence with both high and low income voters on these 77 issues is

the result of great congruence between the lower and higher income voters’ views themselves. In

fact, the correlation in the two groups’ majority opinion is 0.81. This correlation is driven neither

by the small size of the districts27 nor by great homogeneity in terms of district income or

political beliefs, that may result from the state districting process. The correlation is similarly

high for assembly and senate districts despite the fact that senate districts are twice as large. The

correlation is still high (0.77) when terciles are defined relative to state, rather than district

income. The key is that the opinions of voters of varying incomes move together across issues. In

fact the correlation is 0.77 and .73 when we examine the co-movement in opinions of the top and

bottom quintiles and deciles, respectively.28 Thus our first finding is that the opinions of high and

low income voters are highly correlated and that the legislator’s vote typically represents the

views of both groups of voters in his/her district.

         As to the issue of whether representation varies by income, Table 2 demonstrates that the

answer depends on party. As shown in Panel A, overall, voters in the lowest income tercile are

significantly more likely to see their legislator vote their will than the will of their higher income

counterparts. (P values for t-tests of the difference in congruence for top and bottom terciles are

found in the fourth column of the table.) However, when we divide the sample by party in the

subsequent panels, we see that the relatively higher representation of lower income voters is

driven by the more numerous Democratic legislators, who vote congruently with high income

voters 74 percent of the time and with low income voters 79 percent of the time. Democratic

legislators are significantly more likely to vote with the median low income voter than with the

27
   In fact California legislative districts are large relative to other states. A California assembly person represents 3.5
times as many people as a New York assembly person and 4.6 times as many as a member of the Illinois assembly.
California’s state senate districts are larger than US House districts.
28
   Similarly, Hajnal, Gerber and Louch (2002) document that minority voters in California are on the winning side
of a majority of initiatives and conclude, therefore, that that they are not disadvantaged by direct democracy.


                                                                                                                        16
median voter overall. (See the next to last column of the table for the p-value on the test of

equality.) The Republican pattern, on the other hand, is reversed. Republican legislators vote

with their high income voters 77 percent of the time and with their low income voters 74 percent

of the time. For Republican legislators there is no significant difference in congruence with the

median voter in the highest income tercile and the median voter overall.

       While the differences in congruence with lower and higher income voters are small for

legislators of both parties, we can gain a sense of their economic significance by comparing these

differences to differences in representation by constituent party. In specification 6, we calculate

legislative congruence with voters, not by income, but by party terciles. For Democratic

(Republican) legislators the top tercile column now shows congruence between the legislative

vote and the neighborhoods in the top third of the distribution in fraction Democratic

(Republican) registrants. Consistent with Fiorina’s (1977) dual constituency hypothesis which

posits that legislative voting is more heavily influenced by their support constituency than by

their remaining constituents, we see that Democratic legislators are nine percentage points more

likely to vote with voters in their most Democratic neighborhoods and that Republican

legislators are three percentage points more likely to vote the will of voters in their most

Republican neighborhoods. Thus our findings on the difference in representation by income,

which are over half the size of the difference in representation by party for Democrats and over

2/3 the size of the difference in representation by party for Republicans, are sizable relative to

the most important dichotomy—party—in American politics.

       In Table 3, we quantify the size of the differences in representation by income in another

way. Here, we turn to regression models of the form of (2). Because the coefficients in the

regression are identified by variation in the views of higher and lower income constituents, the




                                                                                                     17
decision function regressions can be used to quantify the difference in the marginal propensity

for the legislator to vote liberally with the median low or high income voter, when these two

voters’ views are at odds. In the “Basic Terciles” section of the table we see that overall

legislators are 32 percentage points more likely to vote liberally if the lowest income tercile

wants a liberal vote, but only 26 percentage points more likely to vote liberally when the highest

income voters so desire. But this difference is not statistically significant, we see in the row “Test

of Equality”.

         However, when we examine the question by party, we find larger and statistically

significant differences. When low income voters prefer a liberal vote, Democratic legislators are

40 percentage points more likely to vote in that direction, but when their highest income

constituents want such a vote, they are only 12 percentage points more likely. For Republican

legislators we see the reverse, with marginal associations of 20 and 36 percentage points for

lower and higher income voters, respectively.29 Like the difference in average representation by

income, the differences in marginal representation by income are both statistically and

economically significant in that they are similar in magnitude to differences in legislative

representation of constituents of the same and the opposition parties.30 The 28 and 17 percentage

point absolute differences in income representation, for Democrats and Republicans respectively,

between the coefficients on the bottom and top income terciles give a sense of how large the

differences in average representation would be if the top and bottom income groups always

disagreed on their policy position. That we showed in Table 3 that absolute differences in

29
   While the frequency with which the legislator votes in agreement with the constituents is the same whether we
code bills as yes/no or liberal/conservative, the coefficients on the income tercile variables are sensitive to coding.
However, our results are not driven by our coding. Leaving both the independent and dependent variables in their
uncoded yes/no form we still find that the influence of high (low) income voters on Republican (Democratic)
legislative voting is significantly greater than the influence of low (high) income voters.
30
   Coefficients (standard errors) in regressions of Democratic [Republican] legislative liberal voting on the median
view in the neighborhoods with their highest and lowest fraction of same party registrations are highest: .435 (.023)
[.361 (.028)] and lowest .091 (.020) [.203 (.029)].


                                                                                                                     18
average representation were 3-5 percentage points highlights the high frequency with which

there is agreement across income groups on preferred policy. The difference between average

and marginal representation results also serves to illustrate Matsusaka’s (2001) warning on the

danger of inferring average representation based on coefficients from models of legislative

voting decisions.

           In the second section (top, middle) of Table 3 we augment the model to include an

indicator for whether the median voter overall prefers a liberal vote on the issue. Consistent with

previous empirical work, the median view is a positive (significant, except in the case of

Democratic legislators) predictor of the legislator’s vote.31 However, the inclusion of this control

does not change the basic pattern of our findings. The robustness to the inclusion of the median

view is not surprising for the overall and Democratic legislator results given that we saw in

Table 2 that legislators overall (driven by Democratic legislators) vote significantly more

congruently with the median low income voter than the median voter overall. In fact, while the

addition of the median voter’s view to the Democratic specification results in both coefficients

falling by about 3 percentage points, the difference between the marginal associations of the

legislative vote to the views of low and high income voters remains large (26 percentage points)

and statistically significant. For Republicans, on the other hand, who we saw in Table 2 vote the

high income view no more often statistically speaking than the median view overall, the addition

of the median view shrinks the low income coefficient by 7 percentage points and the high

income coefficient by 11 percentage point, clearly attenuating the difference in the marginal

association of the legislative vote with the views of high over low income constituents.

Nonetheless, the remaining difference, 13 percentage points, is statistically significant. Thus

31
     See for example Gerber and Lewis (2004), Levitt (1996) and Stratmann (1995, 1996)




                                                                                                   19
Table 3 demonstrates that while there are small differences in representation by income when

measured by congruence, we see large differences (that vary by legislator party) in the relative

weight of the two groups in the legislator’s decision function.

           One concern about both our congruence and regression results is that they may be

sensitive to the construction of our income groups. Thus far we have defined income terciles

within congressional districts. But because of gerrymandering or residential segregation, the

variation in income within district may not be reflective of the variation in income within the

state. In fact in the final year of our sample, 12% (16%) of low income terciles included tracts

that had greater average household income than the mean (median) of minimum income in high

income terciles. In the third specification in Table 2 we examine robustness to creating terciles

based on state income. Within a year the cut offs for low and high income are the same across all

districts for these terciles.32 Sample size decreases in these specification because not all districts

have neighborhoods in both the lowest and highest statewide income tercile. Results are robust to

a change from district to statewide income terciles. The Democratic congruence with low over

high income terciles increases by about a percentage point. Republican congruence with high

over low income terciles remains both qualitatively and quantitatively unchanged.

           Looking at representation on the margin we again find that results are robust to moving

from district to state terciles. (See Table 3, top right panel) While the absolute differences in the

top and bottom income view coefficients shrinks for legislators of both parties, we still find in

the Democratic specifications that the low income coefficient is significantly larger. For

Republicans we continue to find that high income voters appear to have significantly greater

weight in the decision function.



32
     The average range for the low (high) state income terciles in 2006 dollars is $6,401-$59,373 (82,911-$454,934).


                                                                                                                   20
        A second concern about our income terciles33 is that they may be too large and therefore

mask differential treatment of the very rich and very poor. We address this concern by defining

high and low income based on quintiles and then deciles. As we move to finer percentiles the

high and low income groups become more distinct. The difference in mean income between top

and bottom terciles is $55,000; the figure grows to $73,000 and then $94,000 as we move to

quintiles and then deciles.34 If a focus on these finer percentiles reveals representation patterns

that differ from those we find using terciles then this would suggest that large income groupings

may be masking differential representation of those in the income tails. But in fact the

movement to quintiles only exacerbates the differences in congruence by income. The difference

in Democratic legislator congruence (bottom over top income group) groups grows from 5.2

percentage points with income terciles to 6.8 percentage points using income quintiles and

finally to 8.5 percentage points using deciles. The Republican difference (top over bottom

income group) in congruence grows from 2.5 to 3.1 and finally to 3.5 percentage points.

        Both the pattern and the magnitude of the regression results are also robust to finer

income definitions as shown in the left and middle bottom panels of Table 3. Differences in the

marginal association between legislative vote and the views of the top and bottom income groups

grow for both Democratic and Republican legislators as we move from terciles to quintiles. As

we move to deciles, the greater responsiveness of Democrats to low income voters is basically

unchanged compared to quintiles; however the greater marginal association between high over

low income voters and Republican legislative voting shrinks slightly, but remains statistically




33
   A third concern is that economic well-being can vary within income depending on household size. However, we
note that results are robust to measuring well-being using poverty status, which accounts for household size.
34
   The means are in 2006 real dollars. The mean differences are 55, 72 and 93 thousand dollars for Democratic-led
districts and 56, 74 and 94 for Republican-led districts.


                                                                                                                21
significant.35 Thus we find no evidence that either our average or marginal representation

findings are driven by coarse income groupings. Given the similarity in our findings to varying

the definition of income, in the interest of brevity and to reduce measurement error, in the

remainder of the paper we focus on within district terciles.

         Thus far we have examined all issues collectively. In the final specification of both

Tables 2 and 3, we ask whether the representation patterns we find extend to the issues on which

high and low income voters have the highest levels of disagreement. We classify bills as high or

low disagreement based on the difference in the propensity of voters in the highest and lowest

state-level income terciles to vote liberally on the legislation. In other words, we ask for the state

overall, on which propositions did high and low income voters vote the most differently? We

classify as high disagreement those matched bill-propositions in which the constituent

disagreement by income was at the 75th percentile of disagreement or higher.36

         Because we focus on those bills on which high and low income voters disagree, there is

of course less opportunity for legislators to vote the will of both groups at the same time. And in

fact we see that the difference in congruence with top and bottom income groups grows, as we

show in specification 5 of Table 2. The Democratic difference in congruence with low income

relative to high income groups more than doubles (from .052 to .117). The Republican difference

35
   The pattern of quintile and decile results for both Democratic and Republican legislators is robust to controlling
for the views of the middle three (eight) quintiles (deciles) separately in place of the view of the median voter.
36
   The median difference in the fraction of high and low income voters statewide voting liberally is .036; the 75th
percentile is .067. The minimum is .001 and the maximum is .131. Mean disagreement in the high disagreement
sample is .096; the mean is .048 in the sample overall. Results are robust to classifying high disagreement as a
difference above the median or to a subjective coding of the bills whose primary subject is taxation. The six taxation
bills are 1) AB 2181(1991-1992 session) which sought to impose sales tax on previously exempt articles, 2) AB 83
(1997-1998) which sought to raise the top marginal tax rate, 3) ACA 10 (1997-1998) which outlined criteria for
local jurisdictions to enter into sales tax revenue sharing agreements, 4) ACA 22 (1997-1998) which sought to allow
the transfers of assessed property value to new property if original was environmentally contaminated, ACA 40
(1991-1992) which concerned property tax exemptions and SCA 4 (2003-2004) which sought to restrict state control
over local property tax revenue. One concern about this test is that the issues on which high and low income voters
have the largest difference in propensity to vote liberally are not necessarily the same votes on which the median
high and low income voters differ. But in fact all of the issues on which the median high and low income voters
disagree statewide are included in the above median disagreement sample.


                                                                                                                   22
in congruence increases just as notably (from .025 to .065). Marginal results, already identified

off of instances where low and high income groups disagree even in the full sample, show less

change as we hone in on bills in the top quarter of disagreement. The pattern of our regression

results is robust, but because of the smaller sample size significance levels are not. We continue

to find that Democratic legislators have a significantly higher propensity to vote liberally when

low income voters prefer such a vote, relative to when high income voters so desire. For

Republicans we also continue to see the same pattern as previously—that the marginal

association between the median high income voter’s preferences and the legislative vote is

greater than the marginal association between the median low income voter’s preferences and the

legislative vote. However the ten percentage point difference is not statistically significant in this

smaller sample.37

         Overall the results of Tables 2 and 3 point to two key findings: 1) Legislators vote the

views of both their high and low income voters about 75 percent of the time. The legislators are

on average able to represent both types of voters because the opinions of high and low income

voters are highly correlated. 2) What differences there are in representation by income vary by

legislator party. On average and on the margin Democratic legislators are more likely to vote the

will of their low income voters. Republicans legislators’ votes are more likely to track the views

of their higher income voters.

Why does representation by income vary by legislative party?

         While the results of Tables 2 and 3 tell us that representation varies by legislator party,

they do not provide any indication of why. Democratic legislators may better represent low

income voters because of shared political view. The views of higher income voters may be better


37
  The significantly greater weight of high income voters in Republican legislators’ decision functions is robust in
terms of magnitude and significance if we do not control for the median voters’ view.


                                                                                                                      23
represented by Republican legislators because Republican legislators are responsive to the fact

that higher income voters are more politically active.

         We explore potential mechanisms in Table 4. We return to models of marginal

differences in representation (equation 2) and ask whether the addition of control variables

drawn from the legislative voting literature explain away the differences in representation by

income. For comparison we present the basic model with median voter control (Table 3, top

middle specification) as our Table 4 baseline model. Given that our basic pattern of results is

robust to the inclusion of the median voter’s view we can rule out the prediction, based on the

median voter theorem (Downs, 1957), that the high correlation between median voter view and

high (low) income voter view in Republican (Democratic) led districts is the reason for our

pattern of representation by income.

         In Table 4 we eliminate the full legislature specification and focus only on the

specifications that isolate Democratic and Republican legislators separately. We limit the focus

to these two groups because the fact that representation by income varies by legislative party is

informative as to potential mechanisms.38 Namely, we can rule out the possibility that our

representation patterns are explained by variation in political participation across income

groups.39 Given that political participation is increasing in income in both Democratic and

Republican led districts, in both primary and general elections, participation is unlikely to

explain the fact that Democratic legislative voting is better predicted by the views of their low

income voters. Participation is a more viable explanation for our Republican findings. In

specification 2 of Table 4, we augment our equation 2 specification with controls for first and

38
   Running regressions separately by party also fully controls for average party caucus view.
39
   Greater political participation may mean that the voters have a greater opportunity to select a representative who is
like minded; it may mean that the legislator is more aware of the group’s policy desires; or it may mean that the
group is more likely to punish the politician for deviations from those desires. Griffan and Newman (2005) provide
evidence that in the US Senate the views of voters are significantly better represented than the views of non-voters.


                                                                                                                    24
third tercile turnout in the most recent general election, as well as the interaction of turnout with

the tercile’s liberal view indicator.40 Not surprisingly, we see that the difference between

Democratic representation of the top and bottom tercile grows. Holding participation constant,

the difference between Democratic representation of high and low income voters is more stark.

More notably, there is no attenuation (in fact there is a nonsignificant increase) in the difference

between the top and bottom view coefficients in the Republican specification.41 Thus the results

of the second specification in Table 4 confirm that differences in representation by income

cannot be explained away by differences in participation by income.

         The pattern of our results while suggesting against participation as an explanation for

differences in representation by income, suggest in favor of partisanship. The dual constituency

hypothesis (Fiorina, 1977) theorizes that the preferences of the legislator’s support constituency

(those who are most likely to vote for the legislator) weigh more heavily in the legislator’s

decision function than do the views of other district residents. Levitt (1996) estimates that same

party constituents receive three to four times the weight in the legislator’s decision function than

constituents who support the opposing party. More recently, Mian, Sufi and Trebbi (2010)

demonstrate that the votes of Republican House members on the American Housing Rescue and

Foreclosure Prevention Act of 2008 are better explained by the mortgage default rate in their

districts’ Republican neighborhoods than by default rates in their districts’ Democratic

neighborhoods. Given that constituent Republican (Democratic) affiliation is increasing

40
   We also control for year fixed effects in this specification to account for yearly variation in interest in the election.
Unfortunately we are unable to attain data on a third participation metric, campaign contributions, for two reasons:
1) The addresses in public contribution records do not have to be one’s home address and thus a match to tract of
residence becomes problematic and 2) Campaign contributions under $200 are not publicly available and thus
measurement error is greater for the lower income tracts than for the higher. We know from National Election
Studies data that at least on the extensive margin campaign contributions are increasing in income and thus like
other forms of participation is a more likely explanation for the Republican results.
41
   The robustness to the inclusion of participation controls is further evidence that our findings are not driven by
legislative voting influencing constituent views. Those who participate most tend to be the most knowledgeable; if
their acting on this knowledge were driving our results, results would be attenuated by participation controls.


                                                                                                                         25
(decreasing) in income, the dual constituency hypothesis provides a potential explanation for the

robust pattern that Republican legislative voting better reflects the views of higher income voters

and Democratic voting better reflects the views of lower income voters.42

         In the final specification of Table 4 we explore this potential explanation by adding an

indicator for whether neighborhoods in the top tercile of share Republican (Democratic)

registrants support the liberal side of the proposition. With the addition of this control, the

difference between the coefficients on the top and bottom income tercile falls by nearly 2/3 in the

Republican specification. Controlling for support constituent views, the views of lower and

higher income neighborhood voters are statistically equally predictive of a Republican

legislator’s voting. The difference between the marginal representation of lower and higher

income voters in the Democratic specifications shrinks by more than 2/3. This difference is also

no longer statistically significant. The pattern and significance level of these results is robust to

operationalizing support constituency based on votes for the legislator in his/her most recent

election. The pattern of results is further robust to defining top and bottom income and support

constituency percentiles using quintiles or deciles.43 The results of specification 4 indicate that

Republican legislators appear more responsive to the views of their higher income district

residents and Democrats to their lower income constituents, not because these voters are high or

low income, but because these constituents are highly partisan.

         The importance of party over income can also be seen in their impact on congruence. We

showed in Table 2 that Republican legislators vote congruently with the highest income



42
   Stadelman and Portman (2011) find that party explains gender differences in the congruence of Swiss parliament
members and the median voter nationally.
43
   Using quintiles, the difference in the top and bottom income coefficients in Democratic specifications shrinks by
68% (remaining significant at only the 10 percent level) and in Republican specifications shrinks by 85% and is no
longer statistically significant. Using deciles, the figures are 47% (remaining statistically significant at only the 10
percent level) for Democrats and by 93% (no longer statistically significant) for Republicans.


                                                                                                                      26
constituents 2.5 percentage points more often than with the lowest income tercile. That

difference falls to 0 when we control in our ttests for the congruence between income tercile

view and Republican support constituency view. Similarly, the Democratic legislature

congruence difference falls from .052 to .013, but remains statistically significant. 44 (Please see

Appendix Table 1 for these results.) Thus once we control for party view, our results rather than

providing empirical support for the underrepresentation of the financially disadvantaged, serve

instead to confirm previous findings of the underrepresentation of the politically disadvantaged,

those voters on the losing end of the legislative election, who find themselves represented by a

politician of the opposing party.

CONCLUSION

         Constituents are represented in legislative voting to the degree that the legislator votes the

will of the constituents. In order to measure the relative representation of voters by income, one

needs data on how the legislator voted, how the lower income constituents wanted the legislator

to vote and how the higher income constituents wanted the legislator to vote. Previous research

on representation by income, like most previous research on representation by constituent

categories (e.g., income, party), lacked measures of constituents’ preferred legislative outcome.

We collect a novel dataset of matched legislative and constituent votes that allows us to provide

the first evidence on the relative representation of high and low income voters.

         Contrary to popular view, we do not find that less income means less representation.

Analyzing the voting behavior of state legislators on 77 proposals on which both the legislature

and the public cast ballots, we find first that the opinions of higher and lower income voters

within a district are highly correlated on these issues and thus it is impossible to represent the

44
  Again results are robust to using quintiles and deciles. The difference in the top and bottom income group falls by
79% (Republicans) and 72% (Democrats) using quintiles. The figures are 78% (Republicans) and 69% (Democrats)
using deciles. As with terciles, the Democratic, but not the Republican, difference remains statistically significant.


                                                                                                                   27
views of one group and not also represent the views of the other. What differences there are in

representation do not result in lower income voters’ consistent disadvantage. While Republican

legislators more frequently vote congruently with the view of their highest income constituents,

Democrats are more likely to vote the view of their lowest income constituents. In fact

Democrats vote the lower income view more often than the median view. While differences in

congruent voting with high and low income voters are small (for both Democratic and

Republican legislators), differences in representation on the margin are more substantial.

Democratic legislators show a 28 percentage point greater marginal association between their

votes and the views of low income voters than between their legislative votes and the views of

higher income voters. The difference is 17 percentage points in favor of higher income voters

views for Republican legislators.

       Differences in representation by constituent income, on average and on the margin, are

however, greatly attenuated by controls for congruence between the income tercile’s view and

the party view. Republican legislators are more likely to vote the view of their highest income

constituents because the viewpoint of high-income voters is often the Republican constituent

viewpoint. Similarly, Democratic legislators are more likely to vote the view of lower income

constituents because the viewpoint of low-income voters often coincides with the viewpoint of

Democratic constituents. Thus rather than providing evidence for the underrepresentation of the

financially disadvantaged, our results confirm the underrepresentation of the politically

disadvantaged, those voters represented by a politician of the opposing party.

       We note that our results are descriptive and cannot be interpreted causally. The legislative

vote and the same party constituent vote may coincide because the legislator follows the

constituents’ lead or because the same party constituents choose a candidate whose views they




                                                                                                  28
share. 45 What is clear is that our findings on representation by income group have more to do

with party than with income.

         Finally we caution that our work focuses on just one type of representation: voting on

bills that make it to the legislative floor. The preferences of high income voters may be more

influential in determining the legislative agenda. Or the legislator may provide higher income

voters more political pork, public goods or constituent services. Whether or not constituent

income predicts performance on these legislator behaviors remains a question for future research.




45
  One explanation for the legislator’s voting being better explained by their same party constituents than by their
remaining constituents is the polarizing effect of partisan primaries (Burden, 2010). Interestingly California voters,
in a June 2010 ballot initiative, voted to end partisan primaries. Therefore it will be interesting to reexamine the
relevance of dual constituency to California legislative voting in the future.


                                                                                                                     29
References
Alesina, Alberto and Edward Glaeser (2003). Fighting Poverty in the United States and Europe: A World
of Difference. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ansolabehere, Stephen and Philip Edward Jones (2010). “Constituents’ Responses to Congressional Roll-
Call Voting.” American Journal of Political Science, 54, 3, 583-597.
Congressional Roll-Call Voting.” Legislative Studies Quarterly, 26, 4, 533-572.
Bartels, Larry (2008). Unequal Democracy: The Political Economy of the New Gilded Age. New York:
Russell Sage.
Besley, Timothy and Stephen Coate (2008). “Issue Unbundling Via Citizens Initiatives.” Quarterly
Journal of Political Science, 3, 4, 379-397.
Bhatti, Yosef and Robert Erikson (2011). “How Poorly are the Poor Represented in the US Senate?” In
Who Gets Represented? Peter Enns and Christopher Wlezien, Eds. New York: Russell Sage.
Bowler, Shaun, and Todd Donovan, Demanding Choices: Opinion, Voting, and Direct Democracy (Ann
Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1998).
Brunner, Eric, Stephen L Ross and Ebonya Washington (2011). “Economics and Policy Preferences:
Causal Evidence of the Impact of Economic Conditions on Support for Redistribution and other Ballot
Proposals. Review of Economics and Statistics, 93, 3, 888-906.
Burden, Barry (2001). “The Polarizing Effects of Congressional Primaries.” In Congressional Primaries
and the Politics of Representation Peter Galderisi, Marni Ezra and Michael Lyons, Eds. Lanham, MD:
Rownman & Littlefield Publishers Inc.
Downs, Anthony (1957). An Economic Theory of Democracy. New York: Harper and Row.
Druckman, James and Lawrence Jacobs (2011). “Segmented Representation: The Reagan White House
and Disproportionate Responsiveness.” Who Gets Represented? Peter Enns and Christopher Wlezien,
Eds. New York: Russell Sage.
Erikson, Robert, Gerald Wright and John McIver (1993). Statehouse Democracy. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.
Fiorina, Morris (1974). Representatives, Roll Calls and Constituencies. Lexington, MA: Lexington
Books.
Gerber, Elisabeth (1996). “Legislative Response to the Threat of Popular Initiatives.” American Journal
of Political Science, 40, 1, 99-128.
Gerber, Elisabeth (1999). Populist Paradox. Princeton NJ, Princeton University Press.
Gerber, Elisabeth and Jeffrey Lewis (2004). “Beyond the Median: Voter Preferences, District
Heterogeneity, and Representation.” Journal of Political Economy, 112, 6, 1364-1383.
Gilens, Martin (2005). “Inequality and Democratic Responsiveness.” Public Opinion Quarterly, 69, 5,
778-796.
Griffin, John and Brian Newman (2005). “Are Voters Better Represented?” Journal of Politics, 67, 4,
1206-1227.
Hajnal, Zoltan, Elisabeth Gerber and Hugh Louch (2002). “Minorities and Direct Legislation: Evidence
from California Ballot Proposition Elections.” Journal of Politics, 64, 1, 154-177.




                                                                                                      30
Hogan, Robert (2008). “Policy Responsiveness and Incumbent Reelection in State Legislatures.”
American Journal of Political Science,” 52, 4, 858-873.
Kalt, Joseph and Mark Zupan (1984). “Capture and Ideology in the Economic Theory of Politics.”
American Economic Review, 74, 3, 279-300.
Kau, James and Paul Rubin (1979). “Self-Interest, Ideology, and Logrolling in Congressional Voting.”
Journal of Law and Economics, 33, 1, 103-31.
Kau, James and Paul Rubin (1983). “Ideology, Voting and Shirking.” Public Choice, 76, 1-2, 151-172.
Krugman, Paul (2010). “The Angry Rich.” The New York Times, September 19.
Lee, David, Enrico Moretti and Matthew Butler (2004). “Do Voters Affect or Elect Policies? Evidence
from the US House.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119, 2, 807-859.
Leigh, Andrew (2005). “Economic Voting and Electoral Behavior: How Do Individual, Local and
National Factors Affect the Partisan Choice?” Economics and Politics, 17, 2, 265-296.
Levitt, Steven (1996). “How Do Senators Vote? Disentangling the Role of Voter Preferences, Party
Affiliation and Senator Ideology.” American Economic Review, 86, 3, 425-441.
Matsusaka, John (2010). “Popular Control of Public Policy: A Quantitative Approach.” Quarterly Journal
of Political Science, 5, 133-167.
Matsusaka, John (2005). “Direct Democracy Works.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19, 2, 185-206.
Matsusaka, John (2001). “Problems with a Methodology Used to Evaluate the Voter Initiative.” The
Journal of Politics, 63, 4, 1250-1256.
Mian, Atif, Amir Sufi and Francesco Trebbi (2010). “The Political Economy of the US Mortgage Default
Crisis.” American Economic Review, 100, 5, 1967-1998.
Peltzman, Sam (1984). “Constituent Interest and Congressional Voting.” Journal of Law and Economics,
27, 1, 181-210.
Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini (2003). The Economic Effects of Constitutions. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Rigby, Elizabeth and Gerald Wright (2011). “Whose Statehouse Democracy? Policy Responsiveness to
Poor versus Rich Constituents in Poor versus Rich States.” Who Gets Represented? Peter Enns and
Christopher Wlezien, Eds. New York: Russell Sage.
Snyder, James (1996). “Constituency Preferences: California Ballot Propositions 1974-1990.” Legislative
Studies Quarterly, 21, 4, 463-488.
Snyder, James and Tim Groseclose (2000). “Estimating Party Influence in Congressional Roll-Call
Voting.” American Journal of Political Science, 44, 2, 193-211.
Songer, Donald (1984). “Government Closest to the People: Constituent Knowledge in State & National
Politics.” Polity, 17, 2, 387-395.
Stadelman, David and Marco Portman (2011). “Do Female Representatives Vote Citizens’ Preferences
Well?” University of Fribourg Working Paper.
Stimson, James (2011). “The Issues in Representation.” Who Gets Represented? Peter Enns and
Christopher Wlezien, Eds. New York: Russell Sage.
Stratmann, Thomas (1995). “Campaign Contributions and Congressional Voting: Does the Timing of
Contributions Matter?” Review of Economics and Statistics, 77, 127-136.




                                                                                                       31
Stratmann, Thomas (1996). “How Reelection Constituencies Matter: Evidence form Political Action
Committees’ Contributions and Congressional Voting.” Journal of Law and Economics, 39. 603-635.
Ura, Joseph and Christopher Ellis (2008). “Income, Preferences, and the Dynamics of Policy
Responsiveness.” PS: Political Science and Politics, 41, 4, 785-794.
Wlezien, Christoper and Stuart N. Soroka (2011). “Inequality in Policy Responsiveness?” Who Gets
Represented? Peter Enns and Christopher Wlezien, Eds. New York: Russell Sage.




                                                                                                   32
Table 1: Summary Statistics, by Legislator Party and Income Tercile
Districts:                                                All                        All                 Democratic Legislators        Republican Legislators
Constituent Household Income Terciles (Average        Full       Low               Middle     High      Low Middle High               Low     Middle High
Ranges in Thousands of 2006 dollars):                 Sample     (32-              (63-       (82-      30-   (61-      (80-          (35-    (65-     (86-
                                                                 62)               81)        191)      61)   79)       189)          65)     85)      192)
Panel A
Proposition Turnout                                       .39      .29                .35       .41       .28       .34       .39       .30       .38        .43
                                                         (.12)    (.10)              (.12)     (.13)     (.10)     (.11)     (.13)     (.10)     (.11)      (.14)
Turnout for Highest Contests on Ballot in Most            .40      .30                .37       .43       .29       .35       .41       .31       .39        .45
Recent Last Election (of Citizens 18 and older)          (.10)    (.08)              (.09)     (.11)     (.09)     (.10)     (.11)     (.08)     (.09)      (.11)
Share Registered (of Citizens 18 and older)               .72      .70                .77       .83       .70       .76       .82       .69       .78        .84
                                                         (.09)    (.08)              (.08)     (.09)     (.08)     (.08)     (.09)     (.08)     (.07)      (.08)
Share Registered Democratic (of those Registered)         .48      .53                .48       .43       .60       .55       .49       .44       .38        .33
                                                         (.11)    (.12)              (.12)     (.11)     (.09)     (.09)     (.10)     (.08)     (.07)      (.06)
Share Registered Republican (of those Registered)         .35      .29                .34       .41       .22       .27       .34       .39       .45        .52
                                                         (.12)    (.11)              (.12)     (.12)     (.08)     (.09)     (.10)     (.06)     (.06)      (.06)
Share Voting Democratic in Most Recent State              .56      .63                .58       .52       .77       .72       .66       .43       .37        .32
Legislative Election (of two party vote)1,2              (.21)    (.21)              (.22)     (.21)     (.12)     (.14)     (.15)     (.14)     (.12)      (.11)
Share Voting Democratic in Most Recent                    .51      .58                .52       .47       .68       .62       .55       .44       .39        .35
Gubernatorial Election (of two party vote)               (.16)    (.17)              (.16)     (.15)     (.13)     (.14)     (.14)     (.10)     (.09)      (.09)
Share Voting Democratic in Most Recent                    .58      .66                .60       .54       .75       .69       .62       .52       .46        .41
Presidential Election (of two party vote)1               (.14)    (.14)              (.15)     (.14)     (.10)     (.11)     (.12)     (.09)     (.07)      (.07)
Panel B
Legislator Voting Liberally                               .60                        .60                             .74                          .39
                                                         (.49)                      (.49)                           (.44)                        (.49)
Constituent Proportion Voting Liberally                   .48      .50               .48        .47       .54       .51       .50       .45       .43        .42
                                                         (.17)    (.18)             (.17)      (.17)     (.18)     (.17)     (.17)     (.16)     (.16)      (.16)
Constituent Majority Voting Liberally Dummy               .49      .54               .50        .46       .61       .58       .54       .43       .38        .35
                                                         (.50)    (.50)             (.50)      (.50)     (.49)     (.49)     (.50)     (.50)     (.48)      (.48)
N                                                       7813      7813              7813       7813      4589      4589      4589      3172      3172       3172
Notes: The columns in order present sample means for the entire sample, subsamples by tract income terciles, and tract income tercile separately by legislators
party. Sample includes only those bill/legislators on which legislators actually voted. Standard deviation in parenthesis.
1
  1988 presidential and legislative votes missing so sample sizes are smaller for those variables.
2
 We do not have data on special elections. Thus the legislative election data is always drawn from the most recent general election. Fewer than 4 percent of the
legislative votes are cast by a member elected in a special election.




                                                                                                                                                               33
Table 2: Average Congruence by Constituent Income and Legislator Party
                            Bottom       Overall    Top          Ttest  Ttest higher                               N
                            Percentile (Median) Percentile Top v        congruence
                                                                 Bottom percentile vs.
                                                                        median
                                       Panel A:Full Sample
1   Basic Terciles           .771        .764       .750         .00    .03                                        7813
                            (.420)       (.425)     (.433)
2   State Income Terciles    .768        .760       .740         .00    .05                                        7288
                            (.423)       (.423)     (.439)
3   Quintiles                .771        .764       .744         .00    .05                                        7813
                            (.420)       (.425)     (.437)
4   Deciles                  .773        .764       .737         .00    .02                                        7813
                            (.419)       (.425)     (.440)
5   High Class              .759         .752       .718         .00    .42                                        2125
    Disagreement Votes,     (.428)       (.432)     (.450)
    Terciles
6   Party Terciles           .721        .764       .785         .00    .00                                        7761
                            (.448)       (.425)     (.411)
                                        Panel B: Democrats
1   Basic Terciles           .790        .762       .738         .00    .00                                        4589
                            (.408)       (.426)     (.440)
2   State Income Terciles    .785        .756       .720         .00    .00                                        4163
                            (.411)       (.430)     (.449)
3   Quintiles                .795        .762       .727         .00    .00                                        4589
                            (.404)       (.426)     (.445)
4   Deciles                  .803        .762       .718         .00    .00                                        4589
                            (.398)       (.426)     (.450)
5   High Class              .783         .727       .666         .00    .00                                        1224
    Disagreement Votes,     (.413)       (.446)     (.472)
    Terciles
6   Party Terciles           .714        .762       .799         .00    .00                                        4589
                            (.452)       (.426)     (.401)
                                       Panel C: Republicans
1   Basic Terciles           .743        .766       .768         .00    .75                                        3172
                            (.437)       (.423)     (.422)
2   State Income Terciles    .742        .767       .767         .00    1.0                                        3073
                            (.437)       (.423)     (.423)
3   Quintiles                .736        .766       .767         .00    .89                                        3172
                            (.441)       (.423)     (.423)
4   Deciles                  .730        .766       .765         .00    .75                                        3172
                            (.444)       (.423)     (.424)
5   High Class              .726         .790       .791         .00    .91                                        889
    Disagreement Votes,     (.446)       (.408)     (.407)
    Terciles
6   Party Terciles           .732        .766       .764         .00    .64                                        3172
                            (.443)       (.423)     (.425)
Notes: T-test standard errors clustered by legislator/body. Party tercile N smaller in full sample because party
terciles cannot be calculated for independents.




                                                                                                                       34
Table 3: Marginal Congruence by Constituent Income and Legislator Party
Outcome: Legislator Votes Liberally
                              Basic Terciles                                                   Basic Terciles                                        State Terciles
                     All            Democrat     Republican      All                           Democrat       Republican             All             Democrat       Republican
Indicator: Majority
of Group Voted
Liberally:
   Bottom Income      0.320***       0.399***     0.192***        0.251***                       0.372***          0.115***           0.267***         0.379***      0.132***
   Percentile         (0.0224)        (0.0256)    (0.0323)         (0.0264)                       (0.0294)         (0.0355)           (0.0259)          (0.0308)     (0.0321)
   Average/Median                                                 0.147***                        0.0511           0.189***           0.120***         0.00120       0.189***
                                                                   (0.0299)                      (0.0342)          (0.0426)           (0.0296)         (0.0306)      (0.0435)
   Top Income         0.256***       0.115***     0.362***        0.181***                       0.0917***         0.254***           0.199***         0.146***      0.247***
   Percentile         (0.0211)        (0.0220)    (0.0305)         (0.0251)                        (0.0283)        (0.0400)           (0.0252)          (0.0296)     (0.0402)
Test of Equality,         .13             .00        .01              .09                             .00             .03                .10               .00          .04
Top and Bottom
N                        7813            4589       3172             7813                          4589              3172                7288         4163         3073
                                      Quintiles                                                   Deciles                                 High Class Disagreement Votes
                     All            Democrat     Republican      All                            Democrat         Republican          All          Democrat      Republican
Indicator: Majority
of Group Voted
Liberally:
   Bottom Income      0.242***       0.389***     0.111***        0.258***                       0.409***          0.118***           0.222***         0.340***      0.116**
   Percentile         (0.0248)        (0.0266)    (0.0300)         (0.0233)                       (0.0240)         (0.0275)           (0.0370)          (0.0377)     (0.0453)
   Average/Median 0.171***            0.0425      0.202***        0.173***                        0.0331           0.213***           0.201***          0.0542       0.236***
                      (0.0271)       (0.0286)     (0.0404)         (0.0250)                      (0.0241)          (0.0379)           (0.0438)         (0.0400)       (0.0640)
   Top Income         0.174***       0.0927***    0.254***        0.169***                       0.100***          0.245***           0.195***         0.0854***     0.218***
   Percentile         (0.0220)         (0.0228)   (0.0372)         (0.0200)                       (0.0194)         (0.0351)           (0.0343)           (0.0288)     (0.0616)
Test of Equality,         .07             .00        .01              .01                            .00              .01                .62                .00          .22
Top and Bottom
N                        7813            4589       3172             7813                           4589             3172                  2125           1224           889
Notes:. Standard errors are clustered by legislator/body. State tercile specification includes controls for share of district population in each tercile and the
interactions of those shares with the tercile view. Coefficients in these specifications are shown for population shares of 1/3.
***denotes significance at the one percent level
**denotes significance at the five percent level
*denotes significance at the ten percent level




                                                                                                                                                                    35
Table 4: Explaining Differences in Representation
                                            (1)                  (1)                (2)               (2)              (3)              (3)
                                       Democrats             Republicans         Democrats        Republicans       Democrats       Republicans
                Indicator: Majority
                of Group Voted
                Liberally:
                   Bottom Income       0.372***               0.115***          0.458***           0.0608           0.144***         0.108***
                   Percentile           (0.0294)              (0.0355)          (0.0412)          (0.0443)           (0.0544)         (0.0366)
                   Average/Median       0.0511                0.189***          0.0788***         0.170***           0.0239          0.176***
                                       (0.0342)               (0.0426)           (0.0287)          (0.0418)         (0.0328)          (0.0429)
                   Top Income          0.0917***              0.254***          0.0974***         0.261***          0.0639**         0.164***
                   Percentile            (0.0283)             (0.0400)           (0.0251)          (0.0379)          (0.0260)         (0.0596)
                   Top Same Party                                                                                   0.295***         0.119**
                   Percentile                                                                                        (0.0525)        (0.0545)
                Additional                                                     Turnout Last      Turnout Last
                Controls:                                                        Election          Election
                Test of Equality            .00                    .03             .00               .00                .19              .46
                Top and Bottom
Notes: Sample size is 4589 for Democrats and 3172 for Republicans. Standard errors are clustered by legislator/body. Specification 3 includes controls for
turnout in last election (terciles 1 and 3) and these variables interacted with majority vote liberally (terciles 1 and 3 respectively). Coefficients in these
specifications are shown for values of turnout at the mean.
***denotes significance at the one percent level
**denotes significance at the five percent level
*denotes significance at the ten percent level




                                                                                                                                                                 36
Appendix Table1: Relative Congruence with Lower and Higher Income Constituents, Controlling for Income Tercile Congruence with Support
Constituency View
                                  No Controls for Support Constituency View                Controls for Support Constituency View
                                                     (1)                                                     (2)
                                         R                           D                            R               D
Bottom Income Tercile       -0.0233***                    0.0277***                 -0.0073                        0.00779**
Dummy                             (0.005)                    (0.004)                (0.005)                            (0.003)
Top Income Tercile           0.00126                      -0.0238***               -0.00956**                      -0.00517*
Dummy                         (0.004)                         (0.004)                      (0.004)                           (0.003)
Tercile-Party Congruence                                                           0.318***                        0.596***
                                                                                     (0.032)                         (0.026)
Test of Equality Bottom                 .00                         .00                          .61                         .00
and Top Terciles, P value
Constant                   0.766***                      0.762***                 0.470***                        0.201***
                           (0.008)                       (0.009)                  (0.030)                         (0.024)
Notes: In specification 1 we re-present the results of Table 3 row 1, using OLS. We reshape the data so that we have three observations for each legislator/issue:
one for the top income tercile, one for the bottom income tercile and one for the majority view. Using the reshaped data, we estimate linear probability models of
the form of Legislator_Group_Congruent =  + Top_Income_Tercile) + Bottom_Income_Tercile) + where an observation is a district/issue/constituent
group. Legislator_Group_Congruent is an indicator for whether the legislator voted the same way on the issue as the group (bottom income, top income or entire
district) while Top_Income_Tercile and Bottom_Income_Tercile are indicators for the third and first income terciles respectively. In the no controls specification
the constant provides mean congruence with the entire district. The coefficients on the bottom (top) income tercile dummies give the difference in congruence
between the bottom (top) terciles and the mean/median district voter, and adding these differences to the constant term in columns 1 and 2 yields the congruence
values shown in Table 3 row 1. The difference between congruence with the top and bottom terciles is found by differencing the top and bottom tercile dummy
variables. In specification 2, we control for congruence between the constituent group (high income, low income, or all constituents) and the legislator’s support
constituency operationalized as the highest tercile of voters registered for the legislator’s party. Sample size is 9,516 for Republican specifications and 13,767
for Democratic specifications. Robust standard errors clustered by legislator/body.
***denotes significance at the one percent level
**denotes significance at the five percent level
*denotes significance at the ten percent level




                                                                                                                                                              37
