NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DID SECURITIZATION AFFECT THE COST OF CORPORATE DEBT?
Taylor D. Nadauld
Michael S. Weisbach
Working Paper 16849
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16849

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2011

We would like to thank Viral Acharya, Heitor Almeida, Murillo Campello, Jennifer Dlugosz, Isil Erel,
Victoria Ivashina, René Stulz and participants in seminars at Brigham Young University, Erasmus
University, HEC Paris, Ohio State University, and the University of Amsterdam for helpful suggestions.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Taylor D. Nadauld and Michael S. Weisbach. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Did Securitization Affect the Cost of Corporate Debt?
Taylor D. Nadauld and Michael S. Weisbach
NBER Working Paper No. 16849
March 2011
JEL No. G21,G32
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates whether the securitization of corporate bank loans had an impact on the price
of corporate debt. Our results suggest that loan facilities that are subsequently securitized are associated
with a 15 basis point lower spread than that of loans that are not subsequently securitized. To identify
the particular role of securitization in loan pricing, we employ a difference in differences approach
and consider loan characteristics that are associated with the likelihood of securitization. We document
that Term Loan B facilities, facilities originated by banks that originate CLOs, and loans of B-Rated
firms are securitized more frequently than other loans. Spreads on facilities estimated to be more likely
to be subsequently securitized have lower spreads than otherwise similar facilities. The results are
consistent with the view that securitization caused a reduction in the cost of capital.

Taylor D. Nadauld
Department of Finance
Brigham Young University
Provo, Utah 84602
taylor.nadauld@byu.edu
Michael S. Weisbach
Department of Finance
Fisher College of Business
Ohio State University
2100 Neil Ave.
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
weisbach.2@osu.edu

1. Introduction.
While much attention has focused on the role of securitization in the mortgage market, relatively
little has been paid to the securitization of corporate bank loans in the form of Collateralized Loan
Obligations (CLOs).1 This lack of attention is surprising given that both the volume of non-investment
grade bank loans and the number of newly-originated CLOs spiked dramatically between the years 2002
and 2007, from over $125 billion of loans and 43 CLOs in 2002 to over $540 billion of loans and 213
CLOs in 2007.2 One potential explanation for this pattern was that the popularity of CLOs created a
demand for collateral that could be used to construct them (see for example Gennaioli, Shleifer and
Vishny (2010)). Consequently, banks active in the securitization business had incentives to adjust their
lending behavior to increase the quantity of loans that could be used for collateral, affecting the cost of
capital for firms in the primary lending market.
In this paper we estimate the extent to which the practice of securitizing bank debt influenced the
cost of such debt for borrowers in the primary corporate debt market. To do so, we rely on a sample of
over 7,000 loan facilities from the Dealscan database. We match these loans to a database of CLOs
provided by Moody’s, which contains the identity of the underlying collateral in each CLO. We first
address the question of whether a loan that was ultimately securitized had a lower spread than an
otherwise similar loan that was not securitized. Our estimates indicate that the answer to this question is a
clear “yes”; they suggest that of the most-commonly securitized facilities (a B-rated, Term Loan B), a
facility that is ultimately securitized has about a 15 basis point lower yield than an otherwise identical
loan that was not securitized.
There are a number of possible interpretations to this result. It is possible that CLOs, for some
unidentified reason, were more likely to add relatively low-yielding loans in their portfolio, or that an
omitted variable is driving both spreads and securitization demand in our specification. Alternatively,
1

See for example Mian and Sufi (2009), Demyanyk and Van Hemert (2008), Dell’Ariccia, Igan, and Laeven (2008),
Keys, Mukherjee, Seru, and Vig (2008), Loutskina and Strahan (2009), and Nadauld and Sherlund (2010).
2
The estimates on the dollar volume of non-investment grade loans originated in 2002 and 2007 are likely
understated in both years. The reported figures are calculated using our sample of U.S. originated syndicated bank
loans made to non-financial borrowers with available sales data that is described below in Section 3.

1

there could have been a reduction in the demand for capital from the firms whose loans tend to be
securitized. These interpretations imply that although CLOs have lower-yielding loans in their portfolio,
there are no distortionary real effects from their existence, since their role is to reallocate the loans that
would have been made in their absence. More consistent with the securitization-driven explanations of
the Financial Crisis is a story in which banks have a high demand for securitizable loans when they put
together CLOs and consequently lower the yields to attract more borrowers. This latter explanation
implies that demand for loans from CLOs has a real effect, as it lowers the cost of capital for the firms
obtaining the loans.
To distinguish between these explanations, we utilize a “Difference in Differences” approach
based on factors that are correlated with the demand for bank loans from participants in the securitization
market (and thus impacts credit supply in the primary market) but uncorrelated with the demand for credit
from corporate borrowers in the origination market. First, we make use of features related to the structure
of corporate loans. Corporate loans are typically made up of a number of tranches (also referred to as
facilities), usually containing an amortizing “Term Loan A” portion, a bullet “Term Loan B” portion, and
a “Revolver” that can be drawn down at the discretion of the borrower. These tranches usually have the
same seniority, but because of the amortization of Term Loan A and the options implicit in the revolver,
they have different effective maturities and yields. An important difference between the tranches,
however, is that typically only the Term Loan B (bullet) portion is securitized, while the other tranches
are typically held by the issuing bank.3 Consequently, the difference in yields between the tranches
potentially reflects differences in demands for securitizable loans, among other factors.
Second, we use the identity of the loan-arranging bank in our identification strategy. Over the sixyear period between 2002 and 2007, 79% of all CLOs were underwritten by just ten banks. Leveraged
loans arranged by banks that also underwrite CLOs are more likely to be securitized because CLO
underwriters can more accurately evaluate the value of a particular loan to CLO structures. That is, CLO
underwriting banks are more likely to arrange a given bank loan for the purpose of using it as collateral in
3

In Section 2.2 we discuss at least two reasons why Term Loan B’s are preferred as collateral by arrangers of CLOs.

2

a CLO.4 We show empirically that loan facilities arranged by these securitization-active banks were
securitized more frequently than loans issued by other banks.
Third, the credit rating of borrowers affects the likelihood of being securitized. In a sample of B
and Ba-rated bank loans, holding other factors constant, the lower credit quality B-rated firms obtained
loans that were more likely to be securitized. This pattern is consistent with Benmelech and Dlugosz
(2009), who document that cash-flow arbitrage CLOs tend to employ B-rated bank loans as collateral.
Demand from deal arrangers in the securitization market for B-rated collateral rather than Ba-rated
collateral represents an increase in demand for corporate bank loans that is unrelated to factors affecting
the demand for loans from borrowers in the primary loan market.
We exploit these three institutional features of the CLO market to identify the impact of
securitization on the cost of corporate credit. Since increased demand for securitizable assets should occur
in Term Loan B facilities originated by securitization-active banks, we estimate the difference between
spreads on these loans relative to Term Loan B facilities issued by non-securitization active banks. We
find that spreads on Term Loan B facilities originated by securitization-active banks are 11 basis points
lower than spreads on facilities issued by other banks, holding other factors constant.
If this decline occurs because of demand for securitizable loans, then we expect this decline in
spreads to be larger in B-rated debt than in Ba-rated debt because B-rated debt is securitized more
frequently. For this reason, in a sample of Term Loan B facilities only, we estimate the difference in
spreads between B-rated facilities originated by securitization-active banks and compare those estimates
to spreads on Ba-rated facilities originated by securitization-active banks. Consistent with a securitization
demand-driven hypothesis, our estimates indicate that the difference in the spread on loans issued by
securitization-active banks to B-rated borrowers was almost 23 basis points lower than the spread on
loans made by non-securitization active banks to B-rated borrowers. In contrast, there is virtually no
difference in spreads between Ba-rated loans from securitization-active banks and non-securitization
active banks.
4

We discuss more specifically why this is the case in Section 2.

3

In addition, if the demand to securitize Term Loan B facilities issued to B-rated borrowers was
highest among securitization-active banks, we would expect to find differences in the spreads of Term
Loan B facilities with these securitization-friendly attributes relative to Term Loan A facilities or
Revolving facilities. Our estimates indicate that the incremental effect of being a securitization-friendly
Term Loan B facility is 32.9 basis points relative to Term Loan A’s and is 19.5 basis points relative to
revolvers. These equations imply that the drop in spreads for securitization-friendly facilities do not
reflect a bank-specific characteristic, such as an increased risk tolerance, since this characteristic would
likely be reflected in the spreads of securitization-friendly Term Loan A facilities and revolvers as well.
Another way to do the comparison is by estimating the factors that affect the differences across
facilities within a particular loan. This approach has the advantage of having common underlying risks
within the loan, although the data is limited to loans that contain multiple types of facilities. In this case,
the differences in spreads between Term Loan B and either Term Loan A or revolvers decline with
characteristics associated with securitization, again consistent with the view that demand for collateral for
CLOs affects the pricing of the loans in the primary market.
Overall, the results are consistent with the view that CLOs’ demand for collateral affected pricing
in the corporate debt market. While the effect of the securitization-driven debt market on the housing
market during the 2002-2007 period is well-known, and Shivdasani and Wang (2011) and Axelson et al.
(2011) have documented that the debt market was an important driver of the LBO boom during that
period, our results suggest that securitization had a pricing impact on the corporate debt market more
broadly.

4

2. Institutional Background.
Collateralized loan obligations (CLOs) transform speculative-grade bank loans into highly-rated
bonds through the process of pooling and tranching.5 The incidence of securitizing corporate bank loans
exploded between 2002 and 2007 and has been well documented in the literature and popular press. Over
80% of the CLOs originated between 1996 and 2008 were originated in the years 2002-2007, with nearly
50% occurring in 2006 and the first-half of 2007 alone (see Table 4). Also noteworthy is the fact that
between 2002 and 2007, 79% of new CLOs were originated by just ten banks. In short, the creation of
CLOs was very active over a relatively short period of time and concentrated in a relatively small number
of originating banks.
Theoretically, securitization can occur for a number of reasons. First, DeMarzo (2005) suggests
that securitization reduces asymmetric information problems about the quality of individual loans by
providing the purchaser with a diversified pool of loans from different issuers, presumably having a lower
information asymmetry problem than any individual loan would have. Second, Gaur, Seshadri and
Subrahmanyam (2009) point out that securitization reduces market incompleteness, providing investors
who value that particular cash flow distribution with the ability to purchase it. Finally, Coval, Jurek, and
Stafford (2009), relying on the assumption that investors purchase bonds based solely on credit ratings,
attribute the proliferation of securitization activity to the potential for deal arrangers to deliver the
cheapest possible set of assets that can obtain a high quality credit rating, thereby engaging in ratings
arbitrage. The observation that the bank loans of B-rated borrowers get securitized more frequently than
Ba-rated loans is consistent with a “cheapest-to-deliver” view of collateral selection in securitization.
Yet, none of these theories of securitization provides a rationale for why securitization should
affect the spreads on loans that subsequently are securitized. In other words, given two loans, why should
their spreads differ depending on whether they are subsequently securitized if the risks associated with the
loans’ repayment are identical? For this to be the case, the very process of securitization likely influences
5

The term “Tranche” is used to describe different bonds arising from a CLO deal and is also used to describe
different loan facilities within a bank loan. The term tranche in this sentence refers to the tranches (bonds) that arise
from the origination of a CLO.

5

the lender’s decision about the loan at the time of origination. One way in which this influence could
occur would be if the lender itself is heavily involved in putting together the collateral of the CLO, either
through a close relationship with the collateral manager of the CLO or in warehousing the loans to be
used as collateral in the CLO. If this lender has a high demand for securities that can subsequently
become part of the CLO, it has an incentive to offer the borrower a lower interest rate than it otherwise
would given current market rates and the risk on that particular investment.6 Consequently, the
securitized loans end up having interest rates that do not fully reflect the risks associated with the cash
flow distributions generated by their collateral.7
2.1. The Structure of Loans. An important feature that we rely on to identify the demand for securitizable
loans is the structure of the bank loans themselves.8 Bank loans usually receive capital from a syndicate
of lenders, made up of up to three types of investors: institutional investors, banks, and finance
companies. To cater to the preferences of each type of investor, these loans contain multiple facilities or
tranches. Commercial banks typically invest in the revolving portion of the loan. “Revolving” credit lines
can be drawn down and repaid at the discretion of borrowers, but fees are paid based on the entire amount
committed to the lending facility regardless of whether it has been drawn down. “Term Loan A” facilities
are typically senior, amortizing loans that are generally kept by the issuing bank or purchased by other
commercial banks. In contrast, “Term Loan B” facilities, which are also senior and usually pari passu to
the Term Loan A, typically mature with bullet payments, and are usually sold to institutional investors.

6

The underwriter of a CLO (securitization-active bank) frequently warehouses loans that are to be used as collateral
in a CLO during the portfolio selection process. An underwriting bank is likely to feel more comfortable
warehousing a loan that it originated rather than a loan on which it has less information.
7
An obvious question is why this effect does not just lower interest rates for all firms, because all borrowers will
flock to the securitizing banks, so that to attract borrowers, non-securitizing banks will lower their rates to match the
securitizing banks. Presumably, to some extent, non-securitizing banks did lower their interest rates (conditional on
credit quality), but because of the relationship-specificity in banking and CLO creation, were able to keep some
customers despite charging a higher interest rate than their securitizing competitors.
8
We rely on the institutional details provided in a primer on Bank Loans published annually by Standard and Poor’s
(2009).

6

Term Loan B facilities are appealing to CLOs for a number of reasons.9 The main difference
between Term Loan A and Term Loan B concerns the payout structure, which is amortizing for Term
Loan A facilities and bullet for Term Loan B. The amortizing payout structure leads to a shorter duration
for Term Loan A than Term Loan B facilities. This shorter duration creates reinvestment risk, and even if
there are good places to reinvest the money, the CLO managers are more frequently required to search for
places to reinvest the steady stream of amortized principal as it is paid back. Collateral managers find it
easier to reinvest the bullet payments of Term Loan B’s when they mature or prepay.10 In addition, the
purchasers of AAA bonds (insurance companies, pension funds) produced by CLOs tend to prefer to
purchase bonds with longer maturity. It is easier for CLO arrangers to create bonds with a longer expected
maturity with collateral of longer duration.
CLOs are far more likely to invest in institutional tranches (Term Loan B specifically) than in the
revolving facilities or Term Loan A facilities (see Table 2, Panel B). When demand for loans from CLOs
increased dramatically in the 2002-2007 period, this demand likely affected the Term Loan B portion of
corporate loans substantially more than either the Term Loan A portion or the revolver portion.
To illustrate the nature and complexity of a multiple-facility bank loan, we provide a detailed
example of a typical loan. Table 1 documents the details of the financing involved in the 2005 leveraged
buyout of the British tire firm Kwik-Fit.11 The total transaction value of £773.5M included £582.5M of
term-loan debt, £40M in a revolving credit facility, and £50M in a Capex facility. This type of multiplefacility financing structure is not specific to LBO transactions, but also characterizes many corporate
loans. The Term Loan A facility of £140M, featuring a 7-year amortizing term and spread of 225 basis
points over LIBOR, is typically purchased by commercial banks. In contrast, the Term Loan B facility is
often securitized; in the Kwik-Fit Example it is of £135M, and has an 8-year bullet payment and pays a

9

This paragraph is based on conversations with practitioners who originate CLOs and summarizes the typical
arguments for why CLOs usually prefer to purchase the Term Loan B tranche of a loan rather than the Term Loan A
tranche.
10
Because of these differences in duration, we control econometrically for differences in term structure when
estimating differences in spreads between Term Loan B’s, revolvers and Term Loan A’s below.
11
The Kwik-Fit example documented in Table 1 is taken from Axelson et al. (2011).

7

spread of 250 basis points over LIBOR. This particular transaction also contains a Term Loan C, which is
similar in features to the Term Loan B.
2.2. The Ratings Structure of CLOs. The predominant form of corporate loan securitization is what is
known as a cash-flow arbitrage CLO.12 The idea underlying this structure is to combine a group of lowrated loans into a structure that has a higher rating. Covenants in CLO deals require that each deal
maintain a minimum weighted-average credit rating (WAR), which is calculated as the average credit
rating of the collateral, weighted by the size of each piece of collateral. Not surprisingly, CLOs are
almost always structured to use the minimum quality collateral so as to satisfy this constraint and yield a
high, usually AAA, rating for the CLO. Benmelech and Dlugosz (2009), analyzing a comprehensive
sample of cash-flow arbitrage CLOs, document that the weighted-average credit rating in 85% of the
deals in their sample was B+ (B1 in Moody’s rating classification). Furthermore, they document that the
average B1 rating of the collateral was almost uniformly met with uniformly B-rated collateral (with
collateral concentrated specifically in the B1 rating).13
Consequently, when demand for CLO collateral increased in the securitization-active period, we
expect that this demand will be reflected in demand for B-rated collateral more than for higher-rated debt.
This increase should be in the institutional (Term Loan B) tranche of the loan and not for the Term Loan
A or revolver tranches of the loans. In addition, it should be higher for loans issued by banks active in
securitization, that presumably package these loans immediately into the CLOs that they arrange
themselves. These differences in attractiveness to originators of CLOs lead to clear identification of the
effect of demand for collateral on the relative pricing of different kinds of bank loans.

12

Other forms of CLOs include balance sheet CLOs, whose primary purpose is to remove loans from bank’s balance
sheets. According to Moody’s data on CLO originations, balance-sheet CLOs represent about 1% of all CLOs.
13
The average CLO deal in their sample transformed the B-rated collateral into securities in which 70% of the
principle balance of the originated bonds were rated AAA, while 90% of the principle was rated BBB or higher. The
pattern is very similar in the Moody’s sample of CLOs we analyze below.

8

3. Data
To study the way in which securitization affects the pricing of loans, we utilize data from two
publicly available databases: Reuter’s Dealscan and Moody’s EMS data services. We restrict our sample
to Dealscan loan facilities originated between 2002 and September of 2007, which represents the
beginning of disruptions in the CLO market. Our sample requires that facilities have Moody’s credit
ratings on the borrowing firm’s senior debt at the time of loan origination.14 Our analysis focuses
specifically on firms with Moody’s senior-debt credit ratings of B (B1, B2, or B3) or Ba (Ba1, Ba2, Ba3).
We further restrict the sample to include only syndicated loans originated in the United States and remove
financial firms with SIC codes between 6000 and 6500. We also identify and remove any second-lien or
mezzanine loans from the sample.
The Moody’s EMS sample provides data on the characteristics and identity of all the securities
serving as collateral in any Moody’s-rated CLO as of the first quarter 2009. The strength of the Moody’s
data is that it allows us to identify exactly which loan facilities serve as collateral in CLOs as of the first
quarter 2009. Unfortunately, it provides only a one-time snapshot of securitized loans, and does not
contain unique identifiers that map to Dealscan.
To illustrate how our matching of the two databases occurs consider the following examples from
the Dealscan and Moody’s EMS databases. In October 2006, Armstrong World Industries raised $1,100M
through a bank loan; $300M in the form of a revolving line, $300M in a Term Loan A facility, and the
remaining $500M in a Term Loan B facility. The Moody’s EMS database reports a security with the
name “Armstrong World Ind. – Term Loan B” in the amount of $500M with expected maturity in
October 2013. It is important to note that no other facility associated with the Armstrong World Industries
bank loan appears in the Moody’s database. Consequently, we classify the Term Loan B portion of the
Armstrong debt issuance as being securitized while the Revolving and Term Loan A facilities are not.
14

We require the rating on the senior debt and not on the specific loan because it is available for a much larger
number of loans: there are 7,331 loans on Dealscan that meet our sample criteria for which there is a rating on the
senior debt and only 3,335 for which there is a rating on the specific loan. For the loans in our sample that have both
loan-specific credit ratings and senior-debt credit ratings, the ratings are either the same or within one ratings class
(i.e. B1 senior debt and Ba3, B1, or B2 loan-specific rating) over 72% of the time.

9

We emphasize, however, that there are limitations inherent in constructing the database in this
manner. Because the Moody’s data represent a snapshot of CLOs in 2009, we cannot tell whether a loan
was initially securitized and subsequently paid off prior to 2009 or if it was included and then dropped
from the CLO prior to 2009.15 In addition, the imperfect nature of matching suggests that some matches
were likely missed due to human error or uncertainty in the naming of the facilities. Consequently, it is
likely that the matching process employed here understates the number of loans in our sample that are
securitized. For these reasons, our primary empirical strategy does not rely on an exact determination of
whether a loan was securitized. Rather, we rely on the EMS database to identify attributes of loans that
are simply correlated with securitization activity.
Table 2 presents summary statistics on our sample of facility-level loan data. Panel A provides
statistics on the number and spread over LIBOR for securitized and un-securitized loan facilities of
different credit qualities. As expected, loan spreads increase monotonically as credit quality declines.
Panel B breaks down these statistics by facility type. It indicates that revolving facilities are the most
common facility, followed by Term Loan B’s and Term Loan A’s. Panel C reports the same statistics
broken down by the reported purpose of the facility. The somewhat vague description of “corporate
purposes” appears most frequently in the data, followed by debt repayments and corporate takeovers.
Facilities supporting leveraged buyouts represent 12% of the loan facilities we study, and these loans are
securitized at a higher rate than other loan facilities.
Table 3 documents the differences in the attributes of loan facilities identified as having been
securitized, compared to their non-securitized counterparts. This table indicates that securitized loans
have lower spreads, with differences in spreads increasing as credit quality declines. In addition
securitized loans have larger facility sizes, slightly longer maturities, and were arranged by smaller
syndicates. The differences between securitized and non-securitized loans highlight the importance of
15

Collateral managers of CLOs actively manage the portfolio through time selling one loan and replacing it with
another. They would do so because their compensation is in part tied to the adequacy of the collateral pool. CLOs
do contain covenants that constrain the frequency of trading within the collateral. Benmelech and Dlugosz (2009)
report that “typically 10-15% of the par value of assets may be traded per year in addition to defaulted securities or
credit-risk securities.”

10

controlling for differences in facility size, sales size, tranche maturity, and covenants, in drawing
inferences on the incremental effect of securitization.
The time-series pattern of CLO origination in our sample is illustrated in Table 4. The sample is
predominately made up of CLOs originated between 2002-2007. In addition, the CLOs are highly
concentrated among a relatively small number of originating banks, with the top 10 banks underwriting
692 of the 884 CLOs (78%) over the entire sample and 569 of the 719 deals (79%) during the 2002-2007
time period. Although Table 4 focuses on the CLO underwriting activity of 18 unique banks, at least 38
different banks were involved in the underwriting of at least one CLO between the years 1996 and 2008.
Figure 1 plots the quantity of originations of Term Loan B facilities over time. Panel A plots the
three-month moving average of the number of Term Loan B facilities originated by securitization-active
and non-securitization active banks, where a securitization-active bank is defined as one of the top ten
banks ranked by the number of securitization deals underwritten during our sample period.16 The plot
indicates that origination patterns were very similar until 2002, when securitization active banks began to
increase their origination of Term Loan B facilities aggressively. Panel B plots the origination activity of
securitization-active banks by credit rating. The plot indicates that much of the boom in Term Loan B
originations was concentrated in loans of a lower credit-quality. Finally, Panel C plots the origination
activity of non-securitization active banks by credit quality. While non-securitization active banks also
increased their origination of lower credit quality loans, the plots suggest that the difference was not as
dramatic as the difference observed in the origination activity of securitization-active banks. Overall,
these plots suggest that there was a dramatic increase in securitization activity after 2002, and that this
increase was concentrated in the securitization-active banks, and in lower credit quality issues.

16

Determining the appropriate cutoff for classifying whether a bank is “securitization active” requires some
discretion. Given that ten banks are responsible for the vast majority of CLO creation, we feel it an appropriate
cutoff. In separate analysis we check the robustness of our primary results to different securitization active cutoffs
and find similar results.

11

4. Results
4.1. Do Securitized Loans Have Lower Spreads?
4.1.1. Univariate Tests. The question we consider in this paper is whether increased demand for
CLOs shifted the demand for bank loans serving as collateral in CLOs, thus lowering the cost of corporate
credit. A clear prediction of this argument is that loans that were subsequently securitized should have
had lower spreads than loans that were not securitized. Panel A of Table 3 performs this comparison,
presenting the average difference in spreads between loans that were securitized and those that were not
securitized according to the Moody’s data. As a rough control for loan attributes, we present the
comparison by rating class for the most commonly issued rating levels: Ba1, Ba2, Ba3, B1, B2 and B3.
This Panel indicates that in each rating class except for Ba1, spreads are lower for the securitized
sample than for the non-securitized sample, with the difference ranging from 2.4 basis points for the Ba2
rating category to 32.9 basis points for the B2 category. These differences are consistent with the notion
that the ability to securitize a loan leads to a lower spread and consequently a lower cost of capital for the
firm borrowing the money. However, it is not a conclusive estimate of the incremental effect of
securitization on spreads for at least three reasons. First, we have an imperfect matching of loans to
CLOs that likely understates the fraction of loans that are securitized. Second, these differences do not
control for other factors that are known to affect loan pricing. Finally, it is possible that some other factor
could affect both spreads and securitization decisions simultaneously, leading the observed relation
between the two to occur but not to be causal.
The first issue, involving the imperfect matching of loans to CLOs results from both the fact that
we have only a snapshot of CLOs as of 2009, and also from the “by hand” nature of the matching process.
As a result, it is likely that most or all of the loans classified as securitized really were securitized, but that
a number of loans that we classified as non-securitized actually were securitized. Such a misclassification
would imply that the differences documented in Table 3 would understate the true differences in spreads
between securitized and non-securitized loans.

12

4.1.2. Multivariate Tests. The second issue, that factors in addition to whether a particular loan
is securitized are likely to affect spreads, is addressed using a multivariate regression framework. We
create a dummy variable set equal to one if the loan was part of a CLO in the Moody’s database, and
estimate a regression of the following form:

where the subscript i refers to loan facility i at time t. The list of borrower controls includes facilityspecific credit ratings along with dummy variables for secured loans, loans with covenants, and the
existence of a pricing grid. We also control for facility amount, facility type, borrowers sales, size of the
lending syndicate, and tranche maturity.
We control for macroeconomic factors such as the term structure of interest rates and changes in
the market price of risk. Our term structure control is calculated as the difference between the five-year
and 3-month treasury-bill rate in the month of deal origination. To control for changes in the price of
credit risk, within each month, we calculate the spread of a ten-year Ba and B-rated bond index over the
ten-year Treasury-bill rate. Loan facilities whose borrowers have B-rated (Ba-rated) senior debt are
assigned the value of the B-spread (Ba-spread) in the month of origination.
Table 5 reports estimates of this equation. Column (1) estimates the regression with all facility
types over the 2002 to September 2007 sample period. The results indicate that when all facility types are
pooled, the incremental effect of securitization is not statistically meaningful. Columns (2), (3), and (4)
consider Term Loan B facilities only. Column (2) suggest that the impact of securitization on spreads is
negative and significant for all Term Loan B facilities. The estimates in Column (4) document that the
impact of securitization on yield is concentrated in the lower-rated B loans, which are associated with a
statistically significant 15.7 basis point drop in spread. These results are consistent with the notion that
banks lower the spreads on loans that will be securitized.
4.2. A Difference in Differences Approach

13

The results in Table 5 suggest that securitized loans are associated with lower spreads, holding
other factors constant, at least to the extent that a loan’s risk is measured by Moody’s ratings. But what is
the appropriate interpretation of this finding? The pattern is certainly consistent with the story in which
high demand for securitizable assets from CLOs provided banks with incentives to be overly aggressive
in lending, leading to a lower cost of capital. However, the negative association between securitization
and spreads does not by itself rule out an alternative story in which lending went up not because of
anything to do with the supply of capital, but instead because of increased demand for funds. If this
demand-based story were the explanation for the increase in loans over the 2002-2007 period, and also
the explanation underlying the fact that CLOs that for some reason end up with loans in their portfolios
that have lower spreads than average for a given credit rating, then changing demand for capital could
imply that securitized loans have lower spreads than non-securitized loans.17
The usual way to address this type of endogeneity is through an instrumental variables approach.
Unfortunately, to be a valid instrument for whether a loan is securitized would require a variable to be
related to the securitization decision but unrelated to the spread charged in the loan. Since in practice,
virtually all publicly-available variables relating to the loan potentially are at least arguably related to its
spread, the use of instrumental variables is not likely to be a practical solution.
To distinguish between alternative explanations, we instead rely on the fact that the securitization
process by its very nature leads to a preference for certain types of loans over others. For example, it is
commonly believed that it is easier to construct CLOs from Term Loan B’s, which have bullet payments
that are set in advance, than Term Loan A’s, which have amortizing payments, or revolvers, whose
payments depend on the extent to which the borrower chooses to draw them down. In addition, Table 4
suggests that CLOs are highly concentrated in a small number of issuing banks, so loans initiated by those
banks are more likely to be securitized than loans by other non-issuing banks. Finally, Benmelech and

17

Of course, it is not clear why CLOs would choose to purchase loans with lower spreads than average. One
possibility would be if spreads were not priced completely by the market for some reason, leading banks to sell the
lower spread loans and keep the higher spread ones for any particular quality level.

14

Dlugosz (2009) suggest that B-rated loans are the most commonly-used type of loan facility in CLOs, a
finding confirmed in the summary statistics of our sample of securitized loans.
Our approach is to compare the relative yields on loans with securitization-friendly characteristics
to those with securitization-unfriendly characteristics during the 2002-2007 Securitization Boom. The
“securitization affecting supply of capital argument” predicts that the demand from CLOs for loans
having these attributes increased relative to other types of loans, leading to lower yields. However, there
is no particular reason why demand for capital should be reflected differentially between these types of
loan offerings. Therefore, we interpret the difference in yields for loans originated by securitization-active
banks relative to non-securitization active banks and differences between B-rated loans and Ba-rated
loans as reflecting the effect of securitization on the cost of capital.
4.3. Which Factors Affect the Likelihood that a Loan is Securitized?
A key assumption in our analysis is that the factors we posit as being related to the securitization
decision actually do affect the likelihood a particular loan is securitized. To ensure that these assumptions
hold in our sample, we estimate equations predicting whether a particular loan from the Dealscan sample
is securitized according to the Moody’s classification. We estimate the following econometric
specification:

The Facility Type variables are dummy variables indicating the type of facility. The equation also
includes the borrower controls used in Table 5, with the exception of tranche maturity, which is
essentially deterministic in tranche type.18 Because the dependent variable is dichotomous, we estimate
the equation by probit. We constrain the sample to include years 2002-2009, since loan facilities

18

Revolvers have a very short maturity while Term B and Term A facilities have longer maturities. Including
tranche maturity in the probit specification is essentially redundant to controlling for facility type when revolvers are
included in the sample.

15

originated prior to 2002 likely would have matured prior to 2009, making it impossible for such loans to
serve as collateral in CLOs as of 2009.19
Table 6 reports estimates of this equation. The results in Column (1) suggest that Term Loan B
loans are significantly more likely to be securitized than Term Loan A loans (the omitted category).
Revolvers are securitized at a significantly lower rate than either type of Term Loan. In Column (2) we
classify loans as being associated with securitization active underwriters or not. The results indicate that
loan facilities initiated by the banks designated as “Securitization Active” are more likely to be
securitized than other loans. In Column (3) we estimate whether B-rated loans are securitized at a
different rate than Ba-rated loans through the inclusion of a B-rated dummy variable. The results of this
estimation confirm those of Benmelech and Dlugosz (2009) and are consistent with the unconditional
results presented in Table 2.
In Column (4) we include tranche purpose fixed-effects and year fixed-effects, and re-estimate
the model. These controls do not materially change the inference on securitization likelihood for Term
Loan B or securitization-active facilities. However, in this specification we cannot reject the hypothesis
that Ba and B loans are securitized at the same rate at conventional significance levels since the t-statistic
drops to 1.28. The t-statistic is sensitive to the choice of clustering standard errors by borrower; when
they are clustered instead by credit rating, the t-statistic on the B-rated dummy variable rises to 2.78,
which is statistically significant at conventional levels. Overall, the results in Table 6 together with the
evidence in Benmelech and Dlugosz (2009) suggest that B-rated loans are more likely to be securitized
than Ba-rated ones, and that loans from banks designated as “Securitization Active” are more likely to be
securitized than loans from other banks.
4.4. The Impact of CLO Demand on Loan Pricing: Differences in Spreads by Type of Loan
The hypothesis that demand from CLOs affected pricing on loans predicts that when CLO
demand is high, then loans that are most attractive to CLOs should be favored by banks issuing loans.
Consequently, these loans should be priced more aggressively than loans that are less attractive to CLOs.
19

Over 90% of the loan facilities in our sample have an expected tranche maturity of less than seven years.

16

Since loan facilities originated by securitization-active banks appear to be more likely to be securitized
than facilities originated by non-securitization active banks and because CLO demand appears to be more
concentrated in B-rated debt, we hypothesize that spreads will reflect differences in this demand.
We test whether increased demand by CLOs lowered spreads by estimating the following
specification:

where the sample is constrained to Term Loan B’s only. The estimate on the interaction of the
securitization-active and B-rated dummy variables represents the difference in the spread relative to nonsecuritization active B-rated loans or securitization-active Ba-rated loans, holding other factors constant.
The other variables in the equation, represented by X i,t , are the term structure and credit spread variables
discussed above, along with the remaining set of the controls described in our discussion of Table 5. We
include tranche purpose fixed effects, year fixed effects, and credit-rating fixed effects where appropriate.
As in Table 5, we cluster standard errors by year and borrower.
Table 7 reports estimates of this equation over the 2002- September 2007 sample period.
Column (1) reports results controlling only for the impact of securitization-active banks on spreads,
Column (2) adds the B-rated dummy, and Column (3) includes both of those dummy variables plus the
interaction term. The estimate of the coefficient on the interaction term is -22.7, which implies Term Loan
B facilities from securitization-active banks had 22.7 basis point lower spreads than Term Loan B
facilities from other banks, holding other attributes of the loan constant. When the interaction term is
included in Table 7, the coefficient on the securitization active bank dummy, which measures the impact
on Ba-Rated debt (since there is a dummy interacting the B-rated dummy with the securitization active
bank dummy), is actually positive, albeit not significantly different from zero. These estimates suggest
that the pricing impact of being active in securitization is concentrated in the B-rated debt, which is the
most commonly securitized type of loan.

17

This 22.7 basis point spread for B-rated debt from securitization-active banks is a substantial
magnitude; a 22.7 basis point discount on an average-sized Term Loan B facility ($400 million U.S.
dollars) represents annual savings of close to US$ 1 Million over the life of the loan. This estimate
implies that the impact of the issuing bank’s identity is approximately the same as the impact of
covenants on spreads. To the extent that the bank’s belonging to the “Securitization Active” group reflects
the likelihood of securitization, it implies that banks are willing to discount loans substantially to be able
to have them as collateral for CLOs.
4.5. Comparisons of Term Loan B Facilities to Term Loan A Facilities and Revolvers
The results from Table 7 suggest that loans that are sold into CLOs are issued at a lower spread
than loans that are not sold into a CLO. In addition, the difference in spreads between loan facilities
originated by securitization-active banks and non-securitization banks is most pronounced in facilities of
lower credit quality, which are the loans most commonly securitized. While we have interpreted this
finding as a consequence of heightened demand for collateral from CLOs, an alternative explanation is
that the results occur because of some unmeasurable bank-specific factor, such as an increase in banks’
risk tolerance over this period for the banks we classify as securitization-active. Such an increase in risk
tolerance for the securitzation-active banks could lead to both an increase in securitization activity as well
as an increase in lending to lower credit-quality borrowers, consistent with the empirical evidence
presented thus far.
To distinguish between the demand for collateral and increased risk tolerance explanations for the
lower spreads on Term Loan B facilities from securitization-active banks, we consider how other facilities
issued by these same banks are priced. We do so because the other facilities are not as attractive as
collateral for CLOs as Term Loan B facilities but have similar seniority as Term Loan B facilities and
consequently similar risk. In particular, we estimate whether the pricing of Term Loan B facilities
originated by securitization-active banks, especially for lower-rated loans, is different from the pricing of
Term Loan A facilities with similar securitization-friendly attributes. To perform this test, we use a
sample made up of both Term Loan A facilities and Term Loan B facilities, and estimate whether the

18

relation between securitization activity, ratings, and pricing documented above for Term Loan B facilities
also holds for Term Loan A facilities.
In doing so, it is important to control for other differences between Term Loan A and Term Loan
B facilities. Both are typically senior bank debt with equal priority, but have a different payoff structure
because Term Loan A facilities are normally amortizing and Term Loan B bullet. Given that these loans
have no prepayment penalties, Term Loan B facilities will always be issued at a higher spread than Term
Loan A. However, if the demand for collateral is largest at securitization-active banks and for B-rated
loans, we expect the differences to be largest for these types of loans. To evaluate this hypothesis, we
include interaction terms into the equation that allow for separate effects based on type of loan (Term
Loan A or Term Loan B), the securitization activity of the bank, and the rating of the borrowing firm’s
senior debt. In addition, our estimates include the same controls as in earlier tests, as well as year and
tranche-purpose fixed effects.
Column (1) of Table 8 reports estimates of this equation. The effect of demand for collateral can
be seen in the coefficient on the “Term Loan B * Securitization Active Bank * B-Rated Senior Debt”,
which picks up the incremental effect on pricing of a loan having these attributes, which are those most
associated with being desirable as collateral for a CLO. The results in this column indicate that
securitization-friendly Term Loan B spreads are 32.9 basis points lower than spreads on Term Loan A
facilities with securitization-friendly attributes. This substantial coefficient suggests that the incremental
effect of having characteristics that make a loan particularly attractive as collateral for CLOs imply that
these loans are sold at a substantial discount to otherwise similar loans.
In addition to Term Loan A facilities, most loans also contain revolvers, which are lines of credit
that can be drawn down at the borrower’s discretion. These facilities also have the same seniority as Term
Loan B facilities but also have a shorter expected maturity. Because the options implicit in these
revolvers make them less attractive as collateral for CLOs, we expect to observe the spread between
revolvers and Term Loan B’s to decline for those facilities for which the Term Loan B’s are most
attractive as collateral for CLOs.

19

Column (2) of Table 8 presents estimates of an equation comparing the spreads of Term Loan B’s
and revolvers, again using interaction terms to allow for separate effects of type of loan, the rating of the
loan and the securitization activity of the issuing bank. The results from this equation are similar to the
results for Term Loan A’s in the first column. In particular, the incremental effect of having a
securitization-active originating bank and a B rating is to lower the loan’s spread by about 20 basis points,
and this drop is statistically significantly different from zero. This finding is consistent with the view that
demand for collateral for CLOs leads to a lower spread on facilities most attractive to CLO issuers.
Overall, the results in Table 8 favor the demand for collateral explanation rather than the increased-risk
tolerance explanation for the decline in spreads, since the latter explanation should apply equally for Term
Loan A facilities and revolvers, while the results suggest that they are specific to Term Loan B facilities.
4.6. Within-Loan Comparisons of Facility Spreads
Thus far our analysis has been conducted at the loan-facility level. In doing so, our goal was to
measure the incremental effect that demand for collateral from CLOs has on the pricing of deals, so we
have controlled for factors that affect spreads but are unrelated to demand for collateral. The results
suggest that, holding these other factors constant, the effect of characteristics associated with the
likelihood of securitization, in particular being issued by a securitization-active bank and having a B
rating, lowers the spread difference for a Term Loan B facility relative to an otherwise similar Term Loan
A or revolving facility. We interpret this finding as consistent with the demand for collateral explanation.
However, the econometric controls we use are imperfect and it is possible that unobservable differences
across types of loans and not demand for collateral from CLOs could explain this result.
Because of this issue, we use an approach introduced by Ivashina and Sun (2011) and compare
the spreads across facilities in the same loan. Since the facilities are from the same loan, they necessarily
have the same risk. Using this specification, the number of loans in the sample declines, since not all
loans containing Term Loan B facilities also contain a Term Loan A or Revolver. To perform this
comparison, we estimate equations that predict the difference in spreads between Term Loan B facilities
and either Term Loan A facilities or revolvers within the same loan as a function of factors likely to affect

20

the demand for collateral from CLOs.20 In doing so, we also include into the equation other factors that
potentially affect the differences in spreads.
We present estimates of the within-loan spread differences in Table 9 for differences between
Term Loan B and Term Loan A facilities, and in Table 10 for differences between Term Loan B and
revolvers. In each case, the coefficient on the securitization-active bank dummy variable interacted with
the B-rated dummy variable is negative and significant (albeit at the 10% level for the revolver
comparison in Table 10). This finding suggests that even comparing within loans, facilities that are most
likely to be securitized are priced at a discount relative to other facilities. It does not appear that the
measured pricing discount of facilities likely to be securitized occurs because of unobserved
heterogeneity; rather the evidence is consistent with the view that issuing banks price these loans more
aggressively because they can be easily sold to CLOs.

5. Discussion and Relation to the Literature
Perhaps the most closely related work to ours is Ivashina and Sun (2011), whose study provides
evidence that demand for loans from institutional investors in the secondary market, measured by the time
a loan remains in syndication, is negatively related to spreads on these loans. The authors present
evidence that some but not all of their effect is due to demand from CLOs. Our analysis extends their
work in a number of directions. First, we focus exclusively on the role of securitization in loan pricing.
Second, we provide direct evidence on the types of loans most associated with securitization, in
particular, Term Loan B facilities, loans issued by banks that also issue CLOs, and loans that are made to
B-rated borrowers. Third, we use these characteristics as a way to identify the causal nature of the
relation between pricing and securitization. To the extent that Ivashina and Sun (2011)’s and our
identification strategies are different from one another and our results are nonetheless similar, each

20

In the event where a bank loan includes multiple facilities of the same type, we use the facility with the lowest
spread, so as to be conservative in our estimate of differences in spread. Of the 4,658 deals in our sample, 70 deals
have multiple Term Loan A or Term Loan B facilities.

21

paper’s analysis complements the other’s and strengthens the conclusion that securitization affects the
demand for collateralizable loans, and ultimately the cost of capital in the primary market.
In addition, this work is closely related to work on buyouts by Shivdisani and Wang (2011), who
provide evidence suggesting that structured finance fueled the 2004-2007 LBO boom by increasing the
availability and pricing of leverage. Shivdasani and Wang (2011) present some evidence of a pricing
effect in aggregate (pricing is aggregated to the quarterly level) and in a smaller loan-level sample of
Term Loan B facilities supporting public targets of LBO transactions. To the extent that some of the
loans in our sample are used to finance LBOs, these findings are also consistent with those of Shivdasani
and Wang (2011).
However, only 12% of the facilities in our sample are used to provide financing to LBOs; the vast
majority of them are used for general corporate purposes. To evaluate whether our results are driven by
the LBO loans in our sample, or whether the demand for collateral affected the cost of capital more
generally in this period, we exclude from our sample of loans those used to finance LBOs and reestimate
the equations reported above.21 The results are similar to those for the full sample. Term Loan B facilities
with securitization-friendly attributes exhibit lower spreads than Term Loan B’s without securitizationfriendly attributes, and Term Loan B’s exhibit lower spreads than Term Loan A’s and Revolvers with
securitization-friendly attributes. Within deal results are also quantitatively similar, although differences
between Term Loan B’s and revolvers within the same deal are not statistically significant at the
conventional levels when LBO’s are excluded. Overall, it appears that the pattern of securitization
affecting the cost of debt finance affected corporate borrowing more generally than just for buyouts
during the 2002-2007 period.
Other related work includes Benmelech, Dlugosz, and Ivashina (2010), who test whether the CLO
market is a lemons market by investigating whether loans originated by the bank that acts as the CLO
underwriter underperform the rest of the CLO portfolio. Nini (2008) examines the investment behavior of
firms more likely to benefit from securitization-driven increases in credit supply. Finally, there is a
21

Estimates of the main specifications from Tables 7-10 on the non-LBO subsample are reported in the Appendix.

22

literature discussing numerous other factors outside of securitization which influence the spread charged
to corporate borrowers in the bank loan market (See Guner (2006), Sufi (2007), and Ivashina (2009)).

6. Conclusion
Understanding the debt buildup from 2002 through 2007 followed by the Financial Crisis of 2008
is an important area of research for financial economists. A key element of both the debt buildup and the
Crisis is often thought to be the increase in securitization of loans over this period. By packaging loans
together in CLOs the market created a highly-rated security as a combination of low-rated (usually Brated) ones. While the volumes of both loans and CLOs both increased substantially during the
securitization-active period, the link between these phenomena is unclear. It is possible that this high
volume of debt issuances could reflect a high demand for capital by firms. Alternatively, as has been
alleged by theories of the Financial Crisis (see Gennaioli, Shleifer and Vishny (2010)), the demand from
CLOs for securitizable loans could have led banks to lend too much. This paper evaluates the pricing
implications of this hypothesis, and finds support for the view that demand for securitizable loans lowers
the cost of capital for firms.
Controlling for other factors, including the risk of the loan, loans that are securitized are issued at
about a 15 basis point lower spread than an otherwise identical loan that was not securitized. This finding
is consistent with the notion that the demand for securitizable loans led banks wishing to securitize their
loans to discount them to attract more borrowers. However, there are other interpretations to this finding;
it is possible that firms’ demand for capital is such that firms’ borrowing patterns lead loans that get
securitized to have lower spreads.
As a way of evaluating explanations based on demand for capital, we consider how the relative
spreads between loans with characteristics that are considered to be “securitization-friendly” and loans
with characteristics considered to be “securitization-unfriendly” are different during the “Securitization
Boom”. In particular, we consider the payoff structure of the debt, with “Term Loan B” loans whose
bullet payoff structures are considered more securitization-friendly than amortizing “Term Loan A” loans

23

or revolvers, whose payoff and amount borrowed is at the discretion of the borrower. Second, we
consider the issuer of the loan, with banks who are top arrangers of CLOs to be more likely to securitize
their own loans than loans from other banks. Finally, we consider the rating of the loan, with evidence
that loans made to B-rated borrowers are more likely to be securitized than loans with other ratings.
Our findings suggest that spreads on loans with characteristics making the loan desirable to a
CLO decline relative to other loans with less securitization-friendly characteristics during the
Securitization Boom. The spread on Term Loan B facilities issued by securitization active banks to
borrowers with B-rated senior debt dropped 22 basis points relative to Term Loan B facilities with less
securitization-friendly attributes from 2002 through the fall of 2007. Consistent with the CLO demand
hypothesis, we provide evidence that the decline in spreads is concentrated in Term Loan B facilities with
securitization-friendly characteristics rather than Term Loan A or revolving facilities with otherwise
similar securitization-friendly characteristics. This result suggests that the decline in spreads cannot be
attributed to a factor associated with the particular banks originating the CLOs, such as an increase in
their risk tolerance. This general pattern of a decline in securitization-friendly facilities relative to nonsecuritization-friendly facilities over the 2002-2007 period is true even for facilities that are part of the
same loan package, and is true for a sample excluding LBO loans.
Taken together, we interpret the evidence as being consistent with the hypothesis that
securitization had a causal impact on the cost of corporate capital. Were an omitted variable to be driving
our results, it would have to be uniquely correlated with Term Loan B’s originated only by securitization
active banks to borrowers with B-rated senior debt but uncorrelated with Term Loan A’s and revolving
facilities with the same characteristics. Such a variable, other than securitization, is difficult to identify.
These results raise a number of questions as well. For example, what was the cause of increased
demand for securitized debt? In this paper, we take increased CLO activity as given, yet we know little
about the ultimate drivers of final demand for bonds collateralized by corporate debt. Second, does the
securitization process, with its complicated cash flow rules and multiple market participants, lead to
information destruction resulting in lenders not charging spreads commensurate with risks?

24

Fundamentally, the question posed by the theoretical literature on securitization remains, namely, how
does the restructuring of cash flows from a pool of assets into a securitization structure create real value?

25

References
Axelson, Ulf, Tim Jenkinson, Per Stromberg and Michael S. Weisbach (2011) “Borrow Cheap, Buy
High? The Determinants of Leverage and Pricing in Buyouts,” Dice Working Paper, Ohio State
University.”
Benmelech, Efraim and Jennifer Dlugosz (2009) “The Alchemy of CDO Credit Ratings”, Journal of
Monetary Economics, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Volume (2009), 56(5) 617-634.
Benmelech, Efraim, Jennifer Dlugosz and Victoria Ivashina (2010) “What Lies Beneath: Is there Adverse
Selection in CLO Collateral?” Working Paper, Harvard University.
Coval, Joshua, Jakub Jurek and Erik Stafford (2009) “The Economics of Structured Finance,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 23, 3-25.
Dell’Ariccia, G., Igan, D., Laeven, L., 2008. “Credit Booms and Lending Standards: Evidence from the
Subprime Mortgage Market,” IMF Working Paper.
Demyanyk, Y.,Van Hemert, O., 2009. “Understanding the Subprime Mortgage Crisis,” Review of
Financial Studies, Forthcoming.
DeMarzo, Peter (2005) “The Pooling and Tranching of Securities: A Model of Informed Intermediation,”
Review of Financial Studies, 18, 1-35.
Gaur, Vishal, Sridhar Seshadri and Marti Subrahmanyam (2009) “Securitization and Real Investment in
Incomplete Markets,” Management Science, forthcoming.
Gennaioli, Nicola, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny (2010) “Financial Innovation and Financial
Fragility,” NBER Working Paper 16068.
Guner, Burak (2006) “Loan Sales and the Cost of Corporate Borrowing”, Review of Financial Studies 19,
687-715.
Ivashina, Victoria (2009) "Asymmetric Information Effects on Loan Spreads." Journal of Financial
Economics 92, 300-319.
Ivashina, Victoria and Zheng Sun (2011) “Institutional Demand Pressure and the Cost of Corporate
Loans” Journal of Financial Economics, 99, 500-522.
Keys, B., Mukherjee, T., Seru, A., Vig, V., 2010. “Securitization and Screening: Evidence From
Subprime Loans,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(1).
Loutskina, E., and Strahan P. 2009. “Securitization and the Declining Impact of Bank Financial Condition
on Loan Supply: Evidence from Mortgage Originations. Journal of Finance, 64(2), 861-922.
Mian, A., and Sufi, A., 2009. “The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence from the U.S.
Mortgage Default Crisis,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 2009, 124(4), 1449-1496.
Nadauld, T., and Sherlund, S. 2009. “The Impact of Securitization on the Expansion of Subprime Credit.”
Unpublished Working Paper.

26

Nini, Greg (2008) “How Non-Banks Increased the Supply of Bank Loans: Evidence from Institutional
Term Loans”, Wharton Business School working paper.
Shivdasani, Anil and Yihui Wang (2011) “Did Structured Credit Fuel the LBO Boom?” Journal of
Finance, forthcoming.
Sufi, Amir (2007), “Information Asymmetry and Financing Arrangements: Evidence from Syndicated
Loans”, Journal of Finance 62, 629-668.
Sufi, Amir (2009), “The Real Effects of Debt Certification: Evidence from the Introduction of Bank Loan
Ratings”, Review of Financial Studies 22, 1659-1691.

27

Figure 1. Plots of Term Loan B Origination Volume.
Figure 1 plots the quantity of originations of Term Loan B facilities over time. Panel A plots the three-month
moving average of the number of Term Loan B facilities originated by securitization-active and non-securitization
active banks, where a securitization-active bank is defined as one of the top-ten banks ranked by the number of
securitization deals underwritten during our sample period. Panel B splits the sample into loans with B-rated senior
debt and Ba-rated senior debt and plots the origination activity of each ratings class by securitization-active banks.
Panel C plots differences in securitization activity by ratings class for non-securitization active banks. Section 3 of
the paper describes the data screens employed in arriving at our final sample.

Full Sample
Securitization-Active

Not Securitization-Active

2006 Q1

2006 Q3

2007 Q1

2007 Q3

2006 Q1

2006 Q3

2007 Q1

2007 Q3

2005 Q3

2005 Q1

2004 Q3

2004 Q1

2003 Q3

2003 Q1

2002 Q3

2002 Q1

2001 Q3

2001 Q1

2000 Q3

2000 Q1

1999 Q3

1999 Q1

1998 Q3

35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

1998 Q1

# of Term B loans (3-mth moving avg)

Panel A.

Panel B.

B-Rated

Ba-Rated

25
20
15
10
5

28

2005 Q3

2005 Q1

2004 Q3

2004 Q1

2003 Q3

2003 Q1

2002 Q3

2002 Q1

2001 Q3

2001 Q1

2000 Q3

2000 Q1

1999 Q3

1999 Q1

1998 Q3

0

1998 Q1

# of Term B Loans (3-mth moving avg)

Securitization-Active Sample

29

2007 Q3

2007 Q1

2006 Q3

2006 Q1

2005 Q3

2005 Q1

2004 Q3

2004 Q1

B-Rated

2003 Q3

2003 Q1

2002 Q3

2002 Q1

2001 Q3

2001 Q1

2000 Q3

2000 Q1

1999 Q3

1999 Q1

1998 Q3

1998 Q1

# of Term B Loans (3-mth moving avg)

Panel C.

Non-Securitization Active Sample
Ba-Rated

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

Table 1. The Structure of a Typical Bank Loan.

Kwik-Fit is a leading tyre and exhaust fitting company, operating in the UK, Netherlands, France and Germany.
Private equity funds were both the buyer and the seller: PAI bought KwiK-Fit from CVC. In private equity
transactions the purchase price and level of debt are typically expressed in terms of multiples of earnings before
interest, tax, depreciation and amortization (EBITDA), as shown in the last column. In this example, the estimated
EBITDA for 2005 of £95.9m is the reference point. Pricing of the debt is expressed relative to the London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR). For the mezzanine debt, the return is split between cash interest payments and
“payments in kind” (PIK). This table is taken from Axelson et al. (2011).

Amount
(£m)
Enterprise Value
Equity
Debt
Term Loan A
Term Loan B
Term Loan C
Total Senior Debt
2nd Lien
Mezzanine
Total Debt
Revolving credit facility
Capex facility

Terms

Pricing
(spread over
LIBOR)

140
135
135
410.0
75
97.5
582.5
(75%)

7 year amortizing
8 year bullet
9 year bullet

2.25%
2.50%
3.00%

9.5 year
10 year

5.00%
4.5% + 5% PIK

40
50

7 year
7 year

2.25%
2.25%

773.5
191.0
(25%)

30

Table 2. Facility Summary Statistics by Credit Rating, Facility Purpose and Facility Type.
In this table we report summary statistics on the number of loan facilities and spreads by credit rating, tranche type, and facility purpose. Our Dealscan sample
consists of senior secured and unsecured loan facilities originated between 2002- September 2007 which have Moody’s credit ratings on the senior debt of the
issuing firm available at the time of loan origination. We restrict our sample to include syndicated loans originated in the United States, and exclude firms with
SIC codes between 6000 and 6500. We also identify and remove any second-lien or mezzanine loans from the sample.
Panel A.
Full Sample
Moody Sr. Debt Credit Rating

Securitized Sample
Count

25th %tile

Median

Mean

75th %tile

Count

25th %tile

Median

Mean

75th %tile

Ba1

642

95.0

150.0

168.6

225.0

15

150.0

175.0

180.8

225.0

Ba2

1010

125.0

200.0

209.7

250.0

37

150.0

200.0

207.4

250.0

Ba3

1676

175.0

225.0

242.2

300.0

71

200.0

225.0

226.2

250.0

B1

2135

200.0

250.0

269.5

325.0

124

200.0

250.0

247.8

287.5

B2

1591

225.0

275.0

293.8

350.0

85

225.0

250.0

262.6

275.0

B3

894

225.0

275.0

298.6

350.0

38

225.0

250.0

275.0

300.0

Count

25th %tile

Median

Mean

75th %tile

Count

25th %tile

Median

Mean

75th %tile

Revolver/Line >=

4310

162.5

225.0

234.4

300.0

35

200

250

237.1429

250

Term Loan A

674

200.0

250.0

249.1

300.0

29

150

200

203.0172

250

Term Loan B

2347

225.0

275.0

288.8

325.0

300

200

225

248.125

275

Facility Purpose

Count

25th %tile

Median

Mean

75th %tile

Count

25th %tile

Median

Mean

75th %tile

Corp. purposes

2017

175.0

225.0

248.3

300.0

110

200.0

225.0

241.6

250.0

Debt Repay.

1022

175.0

227.6

238.7

300.0

35

175.0

200.0

215.7

250.0

Takeover

1096

200.0

250.0

251.4

300.0

53

200.0

225.0

242.7

275.0

Work. cap.

1120

150.0

225.0

230.1

300.0

28

175.0

225.0

225.9

275.0

LBO

906

225.0

275.0

285.3

325.0

81

225.0

250.0

263.0

300.0

Acquis. line

453

200.0

250.0

260.4

325.0

17

175.0

250.0

258.8

325.0

Other

717

202.8

250.0

272.7

314.2

40

217.2

237.5

246.5

253.1

Panel B.
Facility Type

Panel C.

31

Table 3. Differences in Attributes of Non-Securitized Facilities and Securitized Facilities.
In this table we report summary statistics on loan facilities identified as having been securitized and compare them against the attributes of un-securitized loans.
The Moody’s EMS data provide a “snapshot” of the characteristics and identity of all the securities serving as collateral in any Moody’s-rated CLO as of the first
quarter of 2009. We rely on the Moody’s EMS data services data to identify loan facilities from Dealscan that are serving as collateral in CLOs specifically. We
outline the matching process in the text. The Dealscan sample runs from 2002- September 2007. Our Dealscan sample consists of senior secured and unsecured
loan facilities originated between 2002- September 2007 which have Moody’s credit ratings on the senior debt of the issuing firm available at the time of loan
origination. We restrict our sample to include syndicated loans originated in the United States, and exclude firms with SIC codes between 6000 and 6500. We
also identify and remove any second-lien or mezzanine loans from the sample. T-statistics test the significance in difference between the means.
Panel A.
Moody's Sr. Debt Rating

Non-Securitized Sample

Securitized

Diff.

t-stat

Count

Mean

Std. Dev.

Count

Mean

Std. Dev.

Ba1

627

168.3

95.8

15

180.8

49.1

12.5

0.95

Ba2

973

209.8

110.6

37

207.4

64.8

-2.4

-0.21

Ba3

1605

242.9

96.4

71

226.2

51.2

-16.6

-2.54

B1

2011

270.8

93.8

124

247.8

63.6

-23.0

-3.78

B2

1506

295.5

121.4

85

262.6

85.2

-32.9

-3.37

B3

856

299.6

131.3

38

275.0

91.2

-24.6

-1.59

Diff.

t-stat

Panel B.
Loan Attribute

Securitized

Non-Securitized Sample
Count

Mean

Std. Dev.

Count

Mean

Std. Dev.

Facility Amount

7833

287.2

483.7

373

525.2

725.0

238.0

6.27

Sales Size

7833

2090.6

5686.3

373

3117.5

11962.9

1026.9

1.65

Tranche Maturity*

1971

72.8

16.9

300

76.0

13.0

3.2

3.81

Syndicate Size

7811

9.0

10.1

372

7.8

8.0

-1.2

-2.78

% with Covenants

7833

63.96%

-

373

66.22%

-

*T erm Loan B's only

32

Table 4. The Creation of CLOs through Time and by Originator.
This table reports the frequency and timing of CLO originations by CLO underwriter. Data is taken from Moody’s EMS database. Of the 884 reported CLOs,
less than 1% are reported as balance sheet CLOs. The remaining are primarily “cash-flow arbitrage” CLOs. Over 80% of all deals were created between the
2002-2007 period, with almost 50% of the deals being created in 2006 and 2007. Over 78% of the deals were originated by the top-10 originating banks. The
top-10 underwriting banks over our 2002-September 2007 sample period are classified as “securitization-active.”

CLO Originating Bank
JPMorgan
Citigroup
Bear, Stearns & Co. Inc.
Credit Suisse
Lehman Brothers
Deutsche Bank
Goldman Sachs & Co.
Morgan Stanley
Wachovia Securities Inc.
Merrill Lynch & Co.
Bank of America Securities LLC
UBS Securities LLC
IXIS Securities North America Inc.
Barclays Capital
CIBC World Markets Inc.
Royal Bank of Scotland plc
Salomon Smith Barney
BNP Paribas
Others (28 Other Banks)
Total

1996
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

1997
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
2
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
0

1998
0
0
0
1
2
1
1
2
1
4
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
2

1999
3
1
4
2
2
1
2
3
2
1
1
0
0
0
3
0
0
0
4

2000
2
0
2
2
1
0
5
3
2
3
1
0
0
0
1
0
2
0
7

2001
6
0
3
2
1
4
5
3
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
1

2002
6
0
2
7
3
3
4
3
3
2
1
0
0
1
2
0
3
0
3

2003
7
2
3
10
3
8
5
2
3
2
2
1
2
1
0
0
2
1
2

2004
7
1
12
5
6
5
3
3
5
4
2
3
3
0
0
0
0
0
5

2005
13
17
13
12
11
2
6
7
9
10
5
5
2
0
0
0
0
1
10

2006
26
28
21
13
10
16
12
16
18
7
14
5
9
2
0
1
0
2
20

2007
18
24
17
14
19
18
17
18
18
10
7
5
1
4
0
7
0
3
13

2008
5
11
1
1
5
5
3
2
2
3
3
1
0
4
0
0
0
0
5

Total
94
85
78
69
64
63
63
63
63
50
37
21
17
12
10
8
8
7
72

3

6

16

29

31

29

43

56

64

123

220

213

51

884

33

Table 5. Do Securitized Loans Have Lower Spreads?
In this table we estimate differences in spreads between securitized and non-securitized loans in a simple regression
framework. We create an indicator variable for loans identified as having been securitized and estimate a regression
of the following form:
,
where the subscript i refers to loan facility i at time t. The variables term structure, credit spread, and tranche
maturity are discussed in the text. The covenants and pricing grid indicators take the value one for loan facilities
with covenants and the existence of a pricing grid. The list of borrower controls includes facility-specific credit
ratings, a dummy variable for secured loans, log facility amount, and the log of borrowers’ sales. Where appropriate,
relevant controls include year fixed-effects, tranche purpose fixed-effects, tranche-type fixed effects, credit rating
fixed-effects and fixed effects for the bank working as the lead arranger in organizing the syndicate of lenders. We
cluster standard errors by year and borrower.
Dependent Var.: All in Drawn Spread

Securitized Indicator
Term Structure

All Loan Types,
Ba and B-rated
Sr. Debt
(1)

Term B Only,
Ba and B-Rated
Sr. Debt
(2)

Term B Only,
Ba-Rated
Senior Debt
(3)

Term B Only,
B-Rated
Senior Debt
(4)

-3.902

-6.864**

10.464

-15.752**

(0.74)

(2.05)

(1.11)

(2.41)

6.462

3.410

-1.191

6.680

(0.79)

(0.25)

(0.07)

(0.77)

25.145***

32.520***

40.792***

19.973*

(3.94)

(2.81)

(2.91)

(1.87)

Covenants Indicator

-9.338

-14.734*

-24.487***

-13.204

(1.16)

(1.82)

(2.99)

(1.51)

Pricing Grid Indicator

-16.053***

-6.121

-2.462

-9.182

(2.76)

(0.87)

(0.34)

(1.18)

Size of Syndicate

-0.329***

-0.376**

-0.223

-0.670***

(3.61)

(2.21)

(1.11)

(3.92)

Tranche Maturity

-0.852***

-1.085**

-1.063***

-1.140*

(4.47)

(2.56)

(5.66)

(1.86)

Log Facility Amount

-17.864***

-7.248***

0.490

-12.560***

Credit Spread

Log Sales Size

(8.28)

(3.00)

(0.20)

(3.70)

-0.573

-2.763

-6.397***

-0.549

(0.29)

(1.41)

(2.84)

(0.18)

Secured Indicator

11.985***

5.168

-4.656

13.054

(3.53)

(0.85)

(0.50)

(1.03)

Constant

616.152***

415.755***

343.976***

589.509***

(14.57)

(8.51)

(5.81)

(5.70)
No

Tranche Type Fixed Effects

Yes

No

No

Moody Sr. Debt Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

No

No

Tranche Purpose Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Year Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Lead Arranger Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Borrower

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Year

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Adjusted R2

0.475

0.365

0.438

0.288

Observations

4449

1624

541

1083

Standard Errors Clustered by:

34

Table 6. Probit Analysis: What Type of Loans Get Securitized?
The probit specification employs a sample of loan facilities originated between 2002-2009. Our sample includes
loan facilities of three types: Revolving, Term Loan B, and Term Loan A, which serves as the omitted group in the
estimation. The sample is also constrained to include facilities with senior debt rated Ba1, Ba2, Ba3, B1, B2, and B3
at the time of loan origination. The primary specification is as follows:
,
Depending on the specification, the list of borrower controls includes credit ratings, log facility amount, log of
borrowers’ sales, and syndicate size. We include dummy variables for secured facilities and facilities with covenants
and pricing grids. Results in the fourth column include year and tranche-purpose fixed effects. Standard errors are
clustered by year.
Dependent Var. = 1 if Loan is Identified
as Having Been Securitized

Term Loan B

Term B, Term A,
and Revolvers
(1)

Term B, Term A,
and Revolvers
(2)

Term B, Term A,
and Revolvers
(3)

Term B, Term A,
and Revolvers
(4)

0.359***
(3.283)

0.369***
(3.396)

0.341***
(3.128)

0.436***
(3.672)

0.219***
(2.689)

0.218***
(2.691)

0.237***
(2.794)

0.156**
(1.987)

0.107
(1.288)

Securitization Active Arranger
Senior Debt B-rated
Revolver

-0.871***
(-7.301)
0.065
(0.744)
0.170***
(4.420)
0.007
(0.249)
0.539***
(5.341)
0.083
(0.980)
-0.013***
(-2.789)
-5.188***
(-7.341)

-0.853***
(-7.149)
0.055
(0.630)
0.151***
(3.919)
0.002
(0.0560)
0.534***
(5.292)
0.077
(0.910)
-0.012***
(-2.732)
-4.883***
(-6.855)

-0.874***
(-7.327)
0.069
(0.796)
0.158***
(4.096)
0.008
(0.256)
0.522***
(5.139)
0.076
(0.910)
-0.011***
(-2.636)
-5.222***
(-7.229)

-0.888***
(-6.941)
0.311***
(3.361)
0.058
(1.515)
0.015
(0.453)
0.477***
(4.634)
0.074
(0.849)
-0.006
(-1.545)
-4.653***
(-5.299)

Tranche Purpose Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects

No
No

No
No

No
No

Yes
Yes

Standard Errors Clustered by:
Borrower

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Psuedo R2
Observations

0.197
5101

0.200
5101

0.201
5101

0.268
5021

Covenants Indicator
Log Facility Amount
Log Sales Size
Secured Indicator
Pricing Grid Indicator
Syndicate Size
Constant

35

Table 7. Do “Securitization-Friendly” Term Loan B Facilities Have Lower Spreads?
This table estimates the relationship between facility-level spreads and facility characteristics, specified as,

.

The estimation sample includes only Term Loan B facilities and runs from 2002-September 2007. The sample is
also constrained to include facilities with senior debt rated Ba1, Ba2, Ba3, B1, B2, and B3 at the time of loan
origination. Securitization-active banks are defined as the top-10 most active CLO-underwriting banks over the
sample period (see Table 4). B-rated senior debt is an indicator variable for facilities whose borrower has B-rated
senior debt. The variables term structure, credit spread, and tranche maturity are discussed in the text. The
covenants and pricing grid indicators take the value one for loan facilities with covenants and the existence of a
pricing grid. Other borrower controls include log facility amount, log borrower’s sales, syndicate size, and an
indicator variable for secured loans. Relevant macroeconomic controls include year fixed-effects and tranchepurpose fixed effects. Results presented in Column (1) control for credit-rating fixed effects. Standard errors are
clustered by year and by borrower.
Term Loan B
Sample
(2)

Term Loan B
Sample
(3)

-11.387**
(2.14)

-11.195*
(1.88)
23.317***
(2.58)

-22.688***
(2.72)
4.255
(0.48)
40.035***
(5.05)

3.861
(0.28)
32.361***
(2.75)
-15.838*
(1.84)
-7.161
(0.94)
-0.411**
(2.33)
-1.124***
(2.69)
-8.370***
(3.47)
-3.886*
(1.68)
4.641
(0.67)
549.2***
(7.71)

4.284
(0.34)
31.799***
(2.81)
-20.126**
(2.24)
-7.122
(0.82)
-0.474***
(2.76)
-1.219***
(2.80)
-9.408***
(3.28)
-2.736
(1.01)
7.251
(0.86)
535.1***
(6.21)

4.298
(0.35)
32.079***
(2.86)
-20.041**
(2.26)
-7.020
(0.80)
-0.474***
(2.84)
-1.203***
(2.77)
-9.446***
(3.31)
-2.790
(1.04)
7.166
(0.85)
525.1***
(5.89)

Moody Sr. Debt Fixed Effects
Tranche Purpose Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects
Lead Arranger Fixed Effects
Standard Errors Clustered by:
Borrower
Year

Yes
Yes
Yes
No

No
Yes
Yes
No

No
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Adjusted R2
Observations

0.352
1624

0.322
1624

0.324
1624

Dependent Var.: All in Drawn Spread

Term Loan B
Sample
(1)

Securitization Active Bank*B-Rated Senior Debt
Securitization Active Bank
B-rated Sr. Debt

Term Structure
Credit Spread
Covenants Indicator
Pricing Grid Indicator
Size of Syndicate
Tranche Maturity
Log Facility Amount
Log Sales Size
Secured Indicator
Constant

36

Table 8. Is the “Securitization-Friendly” Decline in Spreads Specific to Term B’s Only?
This table estimates the relationship between facility-level spreads and facility characteristics. The estimation
sample in Column (1) includes Term Loan B and Term Loan A facilities and runs from 2002-September 2007,
which represents a period of heightened securitization activity. The sample is also constrained to include facilities
with senior debt rated Ba1, Ba2, Ba3, B1, B2, and B3 at the time of loan origination. The estimation sample in
Column (2) includes Term Loan B facilities and Revolving facilities. Securitization-active banks are defined as the
top-10 most active CLO-underwriting banks over the sample period (see Table 4). B-rated senior debt is an indicator
variable for facilities whose borrower has B-rated senior debt. The variables term structure, credit spread, and
tranche maturity are discussed in the text. The covenants and pricing grid indicators take the value one for loan
facilities with covenants and the existence of a pricing grid. Other borrower controls include log facility amount, log
borrower’s sales, syndicate size, and an indicator variable for secured loans. Relevant macroeconomic controls
include year fixed-effects and tranche-purpose fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by year and by borrower.
Term Loan B and
Term Loan A Sample
(1)

Dependent Var.: All in Drawn Spread

Term Loan B and
Revolver Sample
(2)

Term Loan B*Sec. Active Bank*B-Rated Senior Debt

-32.886**
(2.41)

-19.536**
(2.07)

Term Loan B*Sec. Active Bank

21.855**
(2.04)
13.064
(0.92)
10.149
(0.55)
38.229***
(2.93)
-17.416
(1.16)
27.036
(1.63)

-9.175
(1.33)
8.581
(0.93)
-8.047*
(1.81)
54.549***
(9.30)
17.218***
(2.87)
34.064***
(4.16)

2.960
(0.23)
31.899**
(2.46)
-19.169**
(2.16)
-8.557
(1.16)
-0.478***
(3.08)
-1.233***
(2.97)
-9.020***
(3.34)
-3.345
(1.33)
7.089
(0.96)
562.187***
(4.67)

7.822
(1.12)
27.900***
(4.43)
-12.546
(1.63)
-19.110***
(2.89)
-0.564***
(3.95)

-20.568***
(7.88)
0.409
(0.20)
16.546***
(3.56)
538.217***
(12.37)

Tranche Purpose Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Standard Errors Clustered by:
Borrower
Year

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

0.387
1915

0.416
4262

Term Loan B*B-Rated Senior Debt
Sec. Active Bank*B-Rated Senior Debt
Term Loan B
Securitization Active Bank
B-rated Sr. Debt

Term Structure
Credit Spread
Covenants Indicator
Pricing Grid Indicator
Size of Syndicate
Tranche Maturity
Log Facility Amount
Log Sales Size
Secured Indicator
Constant

Adjusted R2
Observations

37

Table 9. Within-Deal Differences in Loan Spreads: Term B’s vs. Term A’s.
This table estimates the relationship between facility-level spreads within the same deal. For each deal in the sample
with adequate data, we compute the within-deal difference in spreads on Term Loan B facilities compared to Term
Loan A facilities. The estimation sample runs from 2002-September 2007, which represents a period of heightened
securitization activity. The sample is also constrained to include facilities with senior debt rated Ba1, Ba2, Ba3, B1,
B2, and B3 at the time of loan origination. Securitization-active banks are defined as the top-10 most active CLOunderwriting banks over the sample period (see Table 4). B-rated senior debt is an indicator variable for facilities
whose borrower has B-rated senior debt. The variables term structure, credit spread, and tranche maturity are
discussed in the text. The covenants and pricing grid indicators take the value one for loan facilities with covenants
and the existence of a pricing grid. Other borrower controls include senior-debt credit ratings, log facility amount,
log borrower’s sales, and an indicator variable for secured loans. Relevant macroeconomic controls include year
fixed-effects and tranche-purpose fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by year and by borrower.

Dependent Var.: Within Deal Spread

Term Loan B
Spread vs. Term
Loan A Spread in
the Same Deal
(1)

Term Loan B
Spread vs. Term
Loan A Spread in
the Same Deal
(2)

Securitization Active Bank*B-Rated Senior Debt

Term Loan B
Spread vs. Term
Loan A Spread in
the Same Deal
(3)

-22.651
(1.58)

-16.832
(0.94)
5.004
(0.25)

-44.804***
(3.73)
10.188
(0.42)
41.883
(1.40)

9.259
(1.50)
8.532
(0.98)
25.356
(1.27)
-4.666
(0.52)
-29.657**
(2.30)
0.052
(0.34)
-0.816*
(1.77)
0.877*
(1.79)
0.562
(0.09)
-9.556
(1.62)
4.975
(1.05)
13.888
(0.85)
54.339
(0.49)

12.254
(1.48)
6.319
(0.44)
23.231
(1.04)
-3.564
(0.48)
-31.442***
(2.79)
-0.021
(0.16)
-1.187***
(2.97)
0.996**
(2.53)
-5.717
(0.94)
-8.444*
(1.90)
8.189*
(1.76)
10.949
(0.62)
223.597*
(1.83)

11.495
(1.17)
2.855
(0.18)
20.236
(0.95)
-3.636
(0.47)
-29.441**
(2.56)
-0.021
(0.12)
-1.098***
(2.71)
0.914**
(2.45)
-4.527
(0.71)
-8.799*
(1.89)
7.645*
(1.82)
15.018
(0.82)
189.847
(1.55)

Moody Sr. Debt Fixed Effects
Tranche Purpose Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects

Yes
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
Yes

Standard Errors Clustered by:
Borrower
Year

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

0.296
186

0.220
186

0.232
186

Securitization Active Bank
B-rated Sr. Debt

Term Structure
Credit Spread
Covenants Indicator
Pricing Grid Indicator
Term A Pricing Grid Indicator
Size of Syndicate
Tranche Maturity
Term A Maturity
Log Facility Amount
Term A Facility Amount
Log Sales Size
Secured Indicator
Constant

Adjusted R2
Observations

38

Table 10. Within-Deal Differences in Loan Spreads: Term B’s vs. Revolver’s.
This table estimates the relationship between facility-level spreads within the same deal. For each deal in the sample,
we compute the within-deal difference in spreads on Term Loan B facilities compared to Revolving facilities. The
estimation sample runs from 2002-September 2007, which represents a period of heightened securitization activity.
The sample is also constrained to include facilities with senior debt rated Ba1, Ba2, Ba3, B1, B2, and B3 at the time
of loan origination. Securitization-active banks are defined as the top-10 most active CLO-underwriting banks over
the sample period (see Table 4). B-rated senior debt is an indicator variable for facilities whose borrower has B-rated
senior debt. The variables term structure, credit spread, and tranche maturity are discussed in the text. The
covenants and pricing grid indicators take the value one for loan facilities with covenants and the existence of a
pricing grid. Other borrower controls include senior-debt credit ratings, log facility amount, log borrower’s sales,
and an indicator variable for secured loans. Relevant macroeconomic controls include year fixed-effects and
tranche-purpose fixed-effects. Standard errors are clustered by year and by borrower.
Term Loan B
Spread vs.
Revolver Spread in
the Same Deal
(2)

Term Loan B
Spread vs.
Revolver Spread in
the Same Deal
(3)

-9.017**
(2.47)

-8.979**
(2.47)
-4.455
(0.60)

-12.357*
(1.63)
-0.435
(0.07)
4.558
(0.59)

-0.437
(0.07)
3.572
(0.71)
1.082
(0.17)
-4.393**
(2.33)
-2.481
(0.42)
-0.041
(0.17)
-0.094
(0.86)
0.157
(1.06)
-11.361**
(2.42)
7.689**
(2.31)
0.339
(0.26)
1.774
(0.23)
110.503**
(2.33)

0.721
(0.13)
7.134
(0.92)
1.156
(0.18)
-4.214**
(2.08)
-2.628
(0.46)
-0.048
(0.20)
-0.091
(0.83)
0.159
(1.09)
-11.427**
(2.39)
7.608**
(2.36)
0.319
(0.24)
1.744
(0.23)
80.339*
(1.72)

0.744
(0.14)
7.157
(0.91)
0.719
(0.12)
-4.144**
(2.03)
-2.102
(0.38)
-0.053
(0.21)
-0.075
(0.74)
0.152
(1.06)
-11.435**
(2.42)
7.570**
(2.35)
0.290
(0.22)
1.936
(0.25)
93.098**
(1.99)

Moody Sr. Debt Fixed Effects
Tranche Purpose Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects

Yes
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
Yes

Standard Errors Clustered by:
Borrower
Year
Adjusted R2
Observations

Yes
Yes
0.073
1160

Yes
Yes
0.072
1160

Yes
Yes
0.073
1160

Dependent Var.: Within Deal Spread

Term Loan B
Spread vs.
Revolver Spread in
the Same Deal
(1)

Securitization Active Bank*B-Rated Senior Debt
Securitization Active Bank
B-rated Sr. Debt

Term Structure
Credit Spread
Covenants Indicator
Pricing Grid Indicator
Revolver Pricing Grid Indicator
Size of Syndicate
Tranche Maturity
Revolver Maturity
Log Facility Amount
Revolver Facility Amount
Log Sales Size
Secured Indicator
Constant

39

Appendix Table 1: Differences in Securitization-Friendly Spreads: Excluding LBO Loans.
This table estimates the relationship between facility-level spreads and facility characteristics. Each estimation
sample in this table excludes any bank loan affiliated with LBO transactions. The estimation sample runs from
2002-September 2007, which represents a period of heightened securitization activity. The sample is also
constrained to include facilities with senior debt rated Ba1, Ba2, Ba3, B1, B2, and B3 at the time of loan origination.
Column (1) includes Term Loan B facilities only. Column (2) includes Term Loan B and Term Loan A facilities and
Column (3) includes Term Loan B facilities and Revolving facilities. Securitization-active banks are defined as the
top-10 most active CLO-underwriting banks over the sample period (see Table 4). B-rated senior debt is an indicator
variable for facilities whose borrower has B-rated senior debt. The variables term structure, credit spread, and
tranche maturity are discussed in the text. The covenants and pricing grid indicators take the value one for loan
facilities with covenants and the existence of a pricing grid. Other borrower controls include senior-debt credit
ratings, log facility amount, log borrower’s sales, and an indicator variable for secured loans. Relevant
macroeconomic controls include year fixed-effects and tranche-purpose fixed-effects. Standard errors are clustered
by year and by borrower.
Dependent Var.: All in Drawn Spread

Term Loan B
Sample,
Excluding LBO's
(1)

Term Loan B and
Term Loan A Sample,
Excluding LBO's
(2)

Term Loan B and
Revolving Sample,
Excluding LBO's
(3)

Term Loan B*Sec. Active Bank*B-Rated Senior Debt

-40.025***
(2.84)

-19.769**
(2.01)

Term Loan B*Sec. Active Bank

3.224
(0.34)
45.922***
(6.17)

22.430**
(2.15)
24.371*
(1.77)
18.345
(0.96)
33.805***
(2.63)
-18.970
(1.35)
21.789
(1.33)

-9.613
(1.46)
12.611
(1.21)
-6.208
(1.30)
51.477***
(8.89)
17.603***
(2.87)
36.451***
(4.12)

-0.453
(0.04)
30.044**
(2.56)
-23.478**
(2.24)
-8.457
(0.94)
-0.498***
(2.80)
-1.138***
(2.66)
-10.399***
(3.21)
-3.571
(1.12)
11.218
(1.21)
439.602***
(6.39)

-1.265
(0.10)
29.893**
(2.16)
-21.991**
(2.19)
-10.480
(1.37)
-0.509***
(2.92)
-1.182***
(2.92)
-10.019***
(3.61)
-4.125
(1.42)
10.829
(1.47)
410.796***
(4.41)

5.575
(0.83)
25.699***
(3.83)
-12.081
(1.28)
-21.389***
(3.09)
-0.588***
(4.65)

-21.288***
(7.22)
0.065
(0.03)
18.887***
(3.98)
599.422***
(13.09)

No
Yes
Yes
No

No
Yes
Yes
No

No
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

0.334
1353

0.399
1626

0.422
3699

Term Loan B*B-Rated Senior Debt
Sec. Active Bank*B-Rated Senior Debt
Term Loan B
Securitization Active Bank
B-rated Sr. Debt

Term Structure
Credit Spread
Covenants Indicator
Pricing Grid Indicator
Size of Syndicate
Tranche Maturity
Log Facility Amount
Log Sales Size
Secured Indicator
Constant

Moody Sr. Debt Fixed Effects
Tranche Purpose Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects
Lead Arranger Fixed Effects
Standard Errors Clustered by:
Borrower
Year
Adjusted R2
Observations

-21.780**
(2.48)

40

Appendix Table 2: Within-Deal Differences in Loan Spreads: Excluding LBO Loans.

This table estimates the relationship between facility-level spreads within the same deal. Each estimation sample in
this table excludes any bank loan affiliated with LBO transactions. For each deal in the sample, we compute the
within-deal difference in spreads on Term Loan B facilities compared to Term Loan A or Revolving facilities.
Column (1) estimates differences in within deal spreads between Term Loan B facilities and Term Loan A facilities.
Column (2) compares Term Loan B’s against Revolvers. The estimation sample runs from 2002-September 2007,
which represents a period of heightened securitization activity. The sample is also constrained to include facilities
with senior debt rated Ba1, Ba2, Ba3, B1, B2, and B3 at the time of loan origination. Securitization-active banks
are defined as the top-10 most active CLO-underwriting banks over the sample period (see Table 4). B-rated senior
debt is an indicator variable for facilities whose borrower has B-rated senior debt. The variables term structure,
credit spread, and tranche maturity are discussed in the text. The covenants and pricing grid indicators take the
value one for loan facilities with covenants and the existence of a pricing grid. Other borrower controls include
senior-debt credit ratings, log facility amount, log borrower’s sales, and an indicator variable for secured loans.
Relevant macroeconomic controls include year fixed-effects and tranche-purpose fixed-effects. Standard errors are
clustered by year and by borrower.
Term Loan B Spread vs.
Term Loan A Spread in the
Same Deal, Excluding LBO's
(1)

Term Loan B Spread vs.
Revolving Spread in the
Same Deal, Excluding LBO's
(2)

-38.616***
(3.31)
9.532
(0.44)
26.543
(1.53)

-13.028
(1.35)
0.828
(0.11)
1.494
(0.24)

21.297***
(2.82)
13.068
(1.61)
19.705
(1.03)
-6.706
(0.93)
-31.070**
(2.13)
0.022
(0.13)
-1.157***
(2.64)
1.032**
(2.19)
-0.867
(0.25)
-13.076***
(2.62)
7.910**
(2.02)
19.776
(1.17)
103.646
(0.95)

2.990
(0.53)
11.027*
(1.68)
3.117
(0.40)
-7.308***
(4.17)
-1.408
(0.22)
-0.140
(0.42)
-0.109
(1.14)
0.181
(1.32)
-13.266**
(2.53)
8.943***
(2.67)
-0.759
(0.49)
6.054
(0.76)
107.834**
(2.16)

Moody Sr. Debt Fixed Effects
Tranche Purpose Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects

No
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
Yes

Standard Errors Clustered by:
Borrower
Year
Adjusted R2
Observations

Yes
Yes
0.294
171

Yes
Yes
0.083
939

Dependent Var.: Within Deal Spread

Securitization Active Bank*B-Rated Senior Debt
Securitization Active Bank
B-rated Sr. Debt

Term Structure
Credit Spread
Covenants Indicator
Pricing Grid Indicator
Term A Pricing Grid Indicator (Revolver in Column 3)
Size of Syndicate
Tranche Maturity
Term A Maturity (Revolver in Column 3)
Log Facility Amount
Term A Facility Amount (Revolver in Column 3)
Log Sales Size
Secured Indicator
Constant

41

