                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                        PEGS AND PAIN

                                     Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé
                                          Martin Uríbe

                                       Working Paper 16847
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w16847


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2011




We thank Ester Faia, Robert Kollmann, Anna Kormilitsina, Jos´e L. Maia, Juan Pablo Nicolini, and
seminar participants at various institutions for comments, Ozge Akinci, Ryan Chahrour, Stephane
Dupraz, and Pablo Ottonello for research assistance, and the National Science Foundation for research
support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé and Martin Uríbe. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Pegs and Pain
Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé and Martin Uríbe
NBER Working Paper No. 16847
March 2011, Revised November 2012
JEL No. E3,F33,F41

                                               ABSTRACT

We identify a disconnect between historical and model-based assessments of the costs of currency
pegs due to nominal rigidities. While the former attribute major contractions and massive unemployment
to currency pegs, the latter find miniscule welfare losses. The goal of this paper is to reconcile these
two assessments. We refocus attention to downward wage inflexibility as the central source of nominal
rigidity. More importantly, our model departs from existing sticky wage models in the Calvo-Rotemberg
tradition in that employment is not always demand determined. This departure creates an endogenous
connection between macroeconomic volatility and the average level of unemployment and in this way
opens the door to large welfare gains from stabilization policy. In a calibrated version of the model,
an external crisis, defined as a two-standard-deviation decline in tradable output and a two-standard-deviation
increase in the country interest rate premium, causes the unemployment rate to rise by more than 20
percentage points under a peg. Currency pegs are shown to be highly costly also during regular business-cycle
fluctuations. The median welfare cost of a currency peg is 4 and 10 percent of consumption per period.


Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé
Department of Economics
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
stephanie.schmittgrohe@columbia.edu

Martin Uríbe
Department of Economics
Columbia University
International Affairs Building
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
martin.uribe@columbia.edu
1    Introduction
Fixed exchange rate arrangements are easy to adopt but difficult to maintain. Countries can
find themselves confined to a currency peg in a number of ways. For instance, a country
could have adopted a currency peg as a way to stop high or hyperinflation in a swift and
nontraumatic way. A classical example is the Argentine Convertibility Law of April 1991,
which, by mandating a one-to-one exchange rate between the Argentine peso and the U.S.
dollar, painlessly eliminated hyperinflation in less than a year. Another route by which
countries arrive at a currency peg is the joining of a monetary union. Recent examples
include emerging countries in the periphery of the European Union, such as Ireland, Portugal,
Greece, and a number of small eastern European countries that joined the Eurozone. Most of
these countries experienced an initial transition into the Euro characterized by low inflation,
low interest rates, and economic expansion.
    The Achilles’ heel of currency pegs is, however, that they hinder the efficient adjustment
of the economy to negative external shocks, such as drops in the terms of trade or hikes in
the country interest-rate premium. The reason is that such shocks produce a contraction
in aggregate demand that requires a decrease in the relative price of nontradables, that is,
a real depreciation of the domestic currency, in order to bring about an expenditure switch
away from tradables and toward nontradables. In turn, the required real depreciation may
come about via a nominal devaluation of the domestic currency or via a fall in nominal prices
or both. The currency peg rules out a devaluation. Thus, the only way the necessary real
depreciation can occur is through a decline in the nominal price of nontradables. However,
if nominal prices, especially factor prices, are downwardly rigid, the real depreciation will
take place only slowly, causing recession and unemployment along the way. This narrative is
well known. It goes back at least to Keynes (1925) who argued that Britain’s 1925 decision
to return to the gold standard at the 1913 parity despite the significant increase in the
aggregate price level that took place during World War I, would cause deflation in nominal
wages with deleterious consequences for unemployment and economic activity. Similarly,
Friedman’s (1953) seminal essay points at downward nominal wage rigidity as the central
argument against fixed exchange rates.
   This paper is motivated by the apparent disconnect between historical and model-based
assessments of the welfare costs of currency pegs. Economic history studies tend to attribute
devastating economic outcomes to currency pegs. For example, in his authoritative treat-
ment, Eichengreen (1992) argues that the Gold Standard is the key to understanding the
Great Depression. Eichengreen and Sachs (1985) go further and point to the combination of
downward wage rigidity and the Gold Standard as essential for understanding the duration


                                              1
of the Great Depression across countries. Specifically, they argue that countries that went off
gold earlier had lower real wages and a more speedy recovery than countries that insisted on
defending the gold standard. Bernanke and Carey (1996) make a similar point, namely, that
a fixed exchange rate regime cum nominal wage rigidity was the key propagating factor of
the Great Depression. More recently, this thesis has been put forth by Krugman to explain
the roots of the Great Recession in peripheral Europe.1 In light of these historical accounts
that attribute major economic contractions and massive unemployment to the combination
of currency pegs and nominal rigidities, one might expect that existing model-based quan-
titative studies would predict large welfare losses of currency pegs. However, this is not the
case. For example, Kollmann (2002) and Galı́ and Monacelli (2005) perform welfare-cost
calculations in the context of small, open economy models with Calvo-type sticky product
prices. They find that the welfare cost of currency pegs is less than one tenth of one percent
of consumption per period. The historical and model based assessments of the welfare costs
of currency pegs are, therefore, miles apart. According to the former, currency pegs are
extremely painful, whereas according to the latter they are a minor inconvenience.
   The goal of this paper is to reconcile the historical and model-based assessments of the
pains of pegs. In doing so, we refocus attention on downward wage rigidity as the central
nominal friction and propose a different model of the labor market. An important fea-
ture that distinguishes our theoretical framework from standard new Keynesian models of
nominal wage rigidity is that our formulation implies an endogenous connection between
macroeconomic volatility and the secular level of unemployment. This connection is due to
the nature of the labor contract implicit in our model, according to which employment is de-
mand determined during contractions but supply and demand determined during booms. As
a result, involuntary unemployment emerges during downturns and full employment during
booms. Consequently, aggregate fluctuations cause unemployment on average. More im-
portantly, the average level of unemployment is increasing in the amplitude of the business
cycle, opening the door to large welfare gains from macroeconomic stabilization policy. This
connection between aggregate volatility and the average level of unemployment is absent
in more standard sticky-wage models, such as those following in the Calvo or Rotemberg
tradition. In this class of models, employment is always demand determined. As a result in-
creases in unemployment during recessions are roughly offset by reductions in unemployment
(or increases in involuntary overtime) during booms, annihilating any sizable link between
the amplitude of the cycle and the average level of unemployment and output. As a result,
typically, this class of models delivers miniscule welfare gains from optimal stabilization
  1
     See, for instance, his New York Times column of April 29, 2010 and his New York Times Magazine
article of January 12, 2011.



                                                2
policy.
   The paper embeds downward nominal wage rigidity into a dynamic, stochastic model of
a small open economy with traded and nontraded goods. The model is driven by stochastic
disturbances to the traded endowment (which can be interpreted as variations in the terms of
trade) and by disturbances to the country interest-rate premium. We estimate the joint law
of motion of these two exogenous variables using Argentine data and feed it into a calibrated
version of the model, which is then solved using global methods.
   We show that in our model during an external crisis, defined as a two-standard-error
increase in the country interest-rate premium and an equally large drop in the terms of
trade, unemployment rises by more than twenty percentage points under a peg. The model
predicts that currency pegs are costly not only during crises but also over regular business-
cycle fluctuations. We find that in our baseline model the unconditional mean of involuntary
unemployment is 14 percent in the fixed exchange-rate regime. In turn, large levels of
unemployment translate into large welfare losses. We measure the welfare cost of a currency
peg as the difference between the level of welfare enjoyed by households under a currency peg
and the level of welfare associated with the optimal exchange rate policy. We find that the
median welfare cost of living under a currency peg is enormous, between 4 and 10 percent
of lifetime consumption.
   This paper is related to the extensive literature on optimum currency areas initiated by
Mundell (1961). More recently, substantial research activity has been devoted to studying
the extent to which Europe forms an optimum currency area (see, for instance, Baldwin and
Wyplosz; 2009; and Mongelli, 2005). Of the many criteria for an optimum currency area that
have been identified in the literature, the four most problematic ones for Europe appear to be:
lack of labor mobility in spite of regulation that allows for the physical movement of people
across the eurozone; asymmetric shocks across states; nominal rigidities; and lack of fiscal
federalism. Our theoretical framework incorporates these departures from the conditions for
an optimum currency area and quantifies the cost for an individual country of being part of
the resulting suboptimal currency union. We wish to stress, however, that we do not consider
our analysis a full assessment of the desirability of currency unions or currency pegs. For,
by construction, currency pegs are suboptimal in our setup, as they are in the model-based
welfare evaluations cited above. Rather, our goal is to overcome the disconnect between
historical and model-based assessments of the costs of pegs stemming from the presence of
nominal rigidities.
   The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 develops a dynamic sto-
chastic model of a small open economy with involuntary unemployment due to downward
nominal wage rigidity. This section also characterizes aggregate macroeconomic dynamics


                                              3
under a currency peg and under the optimal exchange rate policy. Section 3 presents em-
pirical evidence on downward nominal wage rigidity and uses it to calibrate the model’s
structural parameter governing this source of nominal friction. Section 4 presents a quanti-
tative analysis of external crises under currency pegs and under the optimal exchange rate
policy. Section 5 calculates the welfare benefits of switching from a currency peg to the
optimal exchange rate policy. Section 6 analyzes how exchange rate policy affects the long-
run distribution of external debt. Section 7 augments the model to allow for a demand for
money as a second source of nominal friction. Section 8 extends the model to allow for an
endogenous labor supply decision. Section 9 allows for production in the traded sector. Sec-
tion 10 studies the robustness of our findings to alternative parameterizations of the baseline
model. Section 11 presents a fiscal policy that implements the efficient allocation when the
exchange rate is fixed. Finally, section 12 concludes.


2     Downward Wage Rigidity in a Small Open Economy
In this section, we develop a model of a small open economy in which nominal wages are
downwardly rigid. In the model, the labor market is perfectly competitive. As a result,
even though all participants understand that wages are nominally rigid, they do not act
strategically in their pricing behavior. Instead, workers and firms take factor prices as given.
The model features a traded and a nontraded sector and aggregate fluctuations are driven
by stochastic movements in the value of tradable output and in the country-specific interest
rate.


2.1    Households
The economy is populated by a large number of infinitely-lived households with preferences
described by the utility function
                                        X
                                        ∞
                                     E0   β t U (ct ),                                 (1)
                                           t=0

where ct denotes consumption, U is a utility index assumed to be increasing and strictly
concave, β ∈ (0, 1) is a subjective discount factor, and Et is the expectations operator
conditional on information available in period t. Consumption is assumed to be a composite
good made of tradable and nontradable goods via the aggregation technology

                                        ct = A(cTt , cN
                                                      t ),                                  (2)




                                                 4
where cTt denotes consumption of tradables, cN  t denotes consumption of nontradables, and A,
defined over positive values of both of its arguments, denotes an aggregator function assumed
to be homogeneous of degree one, increasing, concave, and to satisfy the Inada conditions.
These assumptions imply that tradables and nontradables are normal goods.
   One source of business-cycle fluctuations in our model are variations in the value of trad-
able output. Specifically, we assume that households are endowed with an exogenous and
stochastic amount of tradable goods, ytT . Movements in ytT can be interpreted either as
caused by innovations in the terms of trade or by productivity shocks in the traded sec-
tor. The rationale for introducing this type of shock is based on existing studies suggesting
that they are an important source of fluctuations in emerging economies (see, for instance,
Mendoza, 1995). In section 9, we relax the assumption that ytT is exogenous by assuming
that tradables are produced with a technology that uses labor as an endogenous input and
is buffeted by productivity (or terms-of-trade) shocks. Households are also assumed to be
endowed with a constant number of hours, h̄, which they supply inelastically to the labor
market. The assumption of an inelastic labor supply is motivated in part by microecono-
metric evidence (e.g., Blundell and MaCurdy, 1999) and macroeconometric evidence from
models with nominal rigidities (e.g., Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti, 2010; and Smets
and Wouters, 2007) suggesting that the labor supply elasticity is near zero. A second reason
for assuming an inelastic labor supply is that it makes the workings of our two-sector model
more transparent. In section 10, we relax this assumption by endogenizing the labor-supply
decision.
    Because of the presence of nominal wage rigidities in the labor market, households will
in general only be able to work ht ≤ h̄ hours each period. Households take ht as exogenously
determined. Households also receive profits from the ownership of firms, denoted Φt , and
expressed in terms of domestic currency. Households have access to an internationally traded
risk-free pure discount bond that pays the country-specific interest rate, rt , in terms of
foreign currency when held between periods t and t + 1. We assume that rt is exogenous
and stochastic. It represents one of the two sources of aggregate uncertainty in the model.
Allowing for country interest-rate shocks is motivated by existing studies that find that this
type of disturbance represents a significant source of business-cycle fluctuations in emerging
countries (see Neumeyer and Perri, 2005; and Uribe and Yue, 2006).2 The household’s
sequential budget constraint in period t is then given by

                                                                        dt+1
                      PtT cTt + PtN cN             T T
                                     t + dt Et ≤ Pt yt + Wt ht +              Et + Φt ,                    (3)
                                                                       1 + rt
   2
     A potentially fruitful extension of the present study could be to endogenize the country interest rate by,
for example, allowing for limited commitment to repay debt.


                                                      5
where PtT denotes the nominal price of tradables, PtN denotes the nominal price of non-
tradables, Wt denotes the nominal wage rate, and Et denotes the nominal exchange rate,
defined as the domestic-currency price of one unit of foreign currency. The variable dt+1
denotes the amount of debt assumed in period t and maturing in period t + 1. We assume
that all of the external liabilities of the household are denominated in foreign currency. This
assumption is motivated by the empirical literature on the ‘original sin,’ which documents
that virtually all of the debt issued by emerging countries is denominated in foreign currency
(see, for example, Eichengreen, Hausmann, and Panizza, 2005). Households are subject to
a no-Ponzi game constraint of the form

                                           ¯
                                    dt+1 ≤ d,        for t ≥ 0,                            (4)

where d¯ > 0 is the natural debt limit. We assume that the law of one price holds for traded
goods and that the foreign-currency price of traded goods is constant and normalized to
unity. This assumption implies that
                                            PtT = Et .

The optimization problem of the household consists in choosing contingent plans ct , cTt , cN
                                                                                            t ,
and dt+1 to maximize (1) subject to the aggregation technology (2), the sequential budget
constraint (3), and the borrowing limit (4). Letting λt /Et and µt denote the Lagrange
multipliers associated with (3) and (4), respectively, the optimality conditions associated
with this dynamic maximization problem are (2), (3) holding with equality, (4), and

                                       A2 (cTt , cN
                                                  t )
                                                      = pt ,                               (5)
                                       A1 (ct , cN
                                             T
                                                  t )


                                    λt = U 0 (ct )A1 (cTt , cN
                                                             t ),                          (6)
                                      λt
                                           = βEt λt+1 + µt ,                               (7)
                                    1 + rt
                                             µt ≥ 0,                                       (8)
                                                  ¯ = 0,
                                       µt (dt+1 − d)                                       (9)

where Ai denotes the partial derivative of A with respect to its i-th argument, and

                                                     PtN
                                            pt ≡
                                                     Et

denotes the relative price of nontradables in terms of tradables.
   Optimality condition (5) can be interpreted as a demand function for nontradables. In-

                                                 6
                         Figure 1: Currency Pegs and Unemployment



                  p        A2 (cT
                                0 , F (h))
                           A1 (cT
                                0 , F (h))




                          A2 (cT
                               1 , F (h))
                                                                          W0 /E0
                          A1 (cT
                               1 , F (h))
                                                            A             F 0 (h)
                 p0
                                      B
            pPEG
                                                                          W0 /E1
                                                            C             F 0 (h)
           pOPT


                                       hPEG             h̄ = hOPT                   h

tuitively, it states that an increase in the relative price of nontradables induces households to
engage in expenditure switching by consuming relatively less nontradables. Our maintained
assumptions regarding the form of the aggregator function A guarantee that, for a given level
of cTt , the left-hand side of (5) is a decreasing function of cN
                                                                t . Figure 1 displays this downward
sloping relationship with a solid line. The figure is drawn in the space (ht , pt ) by taking into
account market clearing in the nontraded sector, cN      t = F (ht ), which will be introduced later
on. The level of cTt acts as a shifter of the demand schedule for nontradables. A decline in
cTt (from cT0 to cT1 < cT0 in the figure) causes the demand schedule to shift downward and to
the left (see the broken downward sloping line in figure 1).
   Optimality condition (7) equates the marginal benefits and the marginal costs of borrow-
ing 1/(1 + rt ) units of tradables in period t. The left-hand side of this expression indicates
the marginal utility of 1/(1 + rt ) units of tradables consumed in period t. The right-hand
side presents the marginal cost of borrowing 1/(1 + rt ) units of tradables in period t. This
cost is the sum of two components. One is βEt λt+1 , which indicates the decline in utility
caused by the reduction in tradable consumption in period t + 1 necessary to repay the extra
debt assumed in period t. The second component of the marginal cost is µt , which measures
the shadow cost of tightening the borrowing limit. This second component is nil in periods


                                                 7
                ¯ that is, in periods in which the natural borrowing limit does not bind.
in which dt+1 < d,


2.2    Firms
The nontraded good is produced using labor as the sole factor input by means of an increasing
and concave production function, F (ht ). The firm operates in competitive product and labor
markets. Profits, Φt , are given by

                                     Φt = PtN F (ht ) − Wt ht .

The firm chooses ht to maximize profits taking the nominal price, PtN , and the nominal wage
rate, Wt , as given. The optimality condition associated with this problem is

                                         PtN F 0 (ht ) = Wt .                                   (10)

This first-order condition implicitly defines the firm’s demand for labor. Alternatively, writ-
ing this expression as pt = W t /Et
                            F 0 (ht )
                                      , it can be interpreted as the supply schedule of nontradables.
Given the wage rate, an increase in pt induces firms to hire more hours and hence supply
more nontradable goods. This supply schedule is shown with a solid upward sloping line in
figure 1. Given the nominal wage rate, Wt , a devaluation of the domestic currency (an in-
crease in Et from E0 to E1 in the figure) acts as a shifter of the supply schedule. Specifically,
given Wt , an increase in Et lowers the real labor cost, inducing firms to expand employment.
This shift in the supply schedule is shown with an upward sloping dashed line in figure 1.
    In the present model, firms are always on their labor demand curve. Put differently,
firms never display unfilled vacancies nor are forced to employ more workers than desired.
As we will see shortly, this will not be the case for workers, who will at times be off their
labor supply schedule and will experience involuntary unemployment. We note that the fact
that firms are always on their labor demand schedule does not mean that employment is
solely demand determined. As we will see, in this model, employment is sometimes demand
determined (typically during downturns), and sometimes supply and demand determined
(typically during expansions). This feature of the present model distinguishes it from sticky-
wage models in the Calvo-Rotemberg tradition, in which employment is always demand
determined.
    An assumption that distinguishes the present setup from the existing related literature
is that nominal wages are assumed to be downwardly rigid. Specifically, we impose that

                                      Wt ≥ γWt−1 ,      γ > 0.                                  (11)


                                                  8
This setup nests the cases of absolute downward rigidity, when γ ≥ 1, and full wage flexibility,
when γ = 0.
   The presence of downwardly rigid nominal wages implies that the labor market will in
general not clear. Instead, involuntary unemployment, given by h̄ − ht , will be a regular
feature of this economy. Actual employment must satisfy

                                              ht ≤ h̄                                      (12)

at all times. Finally, we assume that at any point in time, wages and employment must
satisfy the slackness condition

                                  (h̄ − ht ) (Wt − γWt−1 ) = 0.                            (13)

This condition states that periods of unemployment must be accompanied by a binding wage
constraint. It also states that when the wage constraint is not binding, the economy must
be in full employment.


2.3    General Equilibrium
Market clearing in the nontraded sector requires that

                                          cN
                                           t = F (ht ).                                    (14)

Combining this market clearing condition, the definition of firm profits, and the household’s
sequential budget constraint, equation (3), yields

                                                          dt+1
                                     cTt + dt = ytT +           .                          (15)
                                                         1 + rt

   Letting wt ≡ Wt /Et denote the real wage in terms of tradables and t ≡ Et /Et−1 denote
the gross devaluation rate, we can rewrite equations (10), (11), and (13), respectively, as

                                         pt F 0 (ht ) = wt ,                               (16)

                                                     wt−1
                                          wt ≥ γ          ,                                (17)
                                                      t
and                                                           
                                                    wt−1
                                  (h̄ − ht ) wt − γ                = 0.                    (18)
                                                     t
We can then define the general equilibrium of the economy as follows:

                                                 9
Definition 1 (General Equilibrium Dynamics) The general equilibrium dynamics are
given by stochastic processes ct , cTt , cN
                                          t , ht , pt , wt , dt+1 , λt , and µt satisfying (2) and (4)-(9),
(12), (14)-(18) given the exogenous stochastic processes ytT and rt , an exchange rate policy,
and initial conditions w−1 and d0 .

   We consider two polar cases for the yet unspecified exchange rate policy: the optimal
exchange rate policy and a currency peg.


2.4      Currency Pegs
Under a currency peg the government commits to keeping the nominal exchange rate constant
over time, Et = Et−1 for t ≥ 0. As a result, the gross rate of devaluation equals unity at all
times:
                                                 t = 1,                                              (19)

for t ≥ 0. Aggregate equilibrium dynamics under a currency peg are then given by the
exchange rate policy (19) and the conditions listed in Definition 1.
   An important assumption implicit in equation (19) is that currency pegs are fully credible
and that the government has a commitment technology at its disposal to ensure the peg
permanently. This is a conservative assumption. For the existing empirical literature has
cast serious doubts on the hypothesis that pegs are a successful tool for making low-inflation
regimes credible and long lasting. In their authoritative survey, Calvo and Végh (1999,
page 1553) write “A notable aspect of exchange-rate-based stabilization programs is that,
as noted in table 1, a vast majority has ended in balance of payment crises. In fact, of
all the major programs listed in table 1, the Argentine 1991 Convertibility Plan is so far
the only successful plan, which has maintained the exchange rate at the level chosen at
the inception of the program. Eight of the twelve plans ended in full-blown crisis.” With
the benefit of hindsight, we should also include the Convertibility plan among the failed
fixed-exchange-rate experiments. We conjecture that, were we to embrace the empirically
more compelling assumption that pegs suffer from temporariness and lack of credibility, as
modeled, for instance in Calvo (1986), their associated welfare costs could be even larger
than the numbers reported in the present study.
    According to the present model, under a currency peg, the economy is subject to two
nominal rigidities. One is policy induced: The nominal exchange rate, Et , is kept fixed by
the monetary authority. The second is structural and is given by the downward rigidity
of the nominal wage Wt . The combination of these two nominal rigidities results in a real
rigidity. Specifically, under a currency peg, the real wage expressed in terms of tradables,
wt , is downwardly rigid, and adjusts only sluggishly, at the rate (1 − γ), to negative demand

                                                    10
shocks. The labor market is, therefore, in general, in disequilibrium and features involuntary
unemployment. The magnitude of the labor market disequilibrium is a function of the
amount by which the past real wage exceeds the current full-employment real wage. It follows
that under a currency peg, the past real wage, wt−1 , becomes a relevant state variable for
the economy.
   Figure 1 depicts qualitatively the general disequilibrium for a given value of the aggregate
domestic absorption of tradable goods, cT . Assume that the initial desired level of tradable
absorption is cT0 . Market clearing in the nontraded sector occurs at point A, where the de-
mand function, A2 (cT0 , F (h))/A1 (cT0 , F (h)), intersects the supply schedule, (W0 /E0 )/F 0 (h).
At point A, the economy enjoys full employment (h = h̄) and the relative price of nontrad-
ables is equal to p0 . At point A, firms are on their labor demand schedule and households
are on their labor supply schedule.
   Suppose now that a negative demand shock, such as a deterioration in the terms of trade
or a rise in the country premium, causes a decline in the desired aggregate absorption of
tradables from cT0 to cT1 < cT0 . This adverse shock causes the demand function to shift down
and to the left. This is because, at each level of nontraded consumption, households are
willing to consume less traded goods only if nontraded goods become relatively cheaper.
At the same time the supply schedule does not shift.3 This is because the combination
of a currency peg and downward rigidity of nominal wages prevents the real wage from
adjusting downward. The new intersection of the demand and supply schedules occurs at
point B. At this point, firms are on their labor demand schedule, but households are off
their labor supply schedule. Employment is equal to hP EG < h̄ and the economy suffers
from involuntary unemployment at the rate h̄ − hP EG , where hP EG denotes the level of
employment that obtains under the currency peg.
   Alternatively, consider an exchange rate policy that preserves full employment when the
economy is hit by the negative external shock. Specifically, suppose that in response to the
negative external shock, the central bank were to devalue the domestic currency so as to
deflate the purchasing power of nominal wages to a point consistent with full employment.
That is, suppose that the central bank sets the exchange rate at the optimal level E1 > E0
satisfying (W0 /E1 )/F 0 (h̄) = A2 (cT1 , F (h̄))/A1 (cT1 , F (h̄)). In this case the supply schedule
would shift down and to the right intersecting the new demand schedule at point C, where
unemployment is nil (h = h̄). So, unlike the currency peg, the optimal exchange rate
policy deflates the real value of wages, and in this way avoids involuntary unemployment. A
further difference in the macroeconomic adjustment under a currency peg and the optimal
   3
   For expositional convenience, we are assuming here that γ = 1. A value of γ close to but less than unity
would imply a small displacement of the supply schedule down and to the right.



                                                    11
exchange rate policy is that under a currency peg the relative price of non-tradables falls by
less than under the optimal exchange rate policy. Specifically, in figure 1 the relative price
of nontradables falls to pP EG , whereas under the optimal policy, the relative price falls to
pOP T < pP EG . This insufficient decline in the relative price of nontradables stands in the way
of households switching expenditures away from tradables and toward nontradables, which
is the root of the unemployment problem associated with currency pegs.
    We now use the graphical apparatus developed here to show that under a currency peg
the present model implies an endogenous connection between the amplitude of the cycle
and the average levels of involuntary unemployment and output. This connection opens the
door to large welfare gains from optimal stabilization policy. To visualize this connection,
note that the currency-peg economy adjusts asymmetrically to negative and positive external
shocks. As explained above, in response to a negative external shock, employment is demand
determined, households are forced off their labor supply schedule, involuntary unemployment
emerges, and production of nontradables is inefficiently low. Consider now the adjustment
to a positive external shock, which can be represented as moving from point C to point A
in figure 1. In sharp contrast to what happens in response to a negative shock, in response
to a positive shock, households are not forced off their labor supply schedule. That is,
employment is no longer solely demand determined, but demand and supply determined.
Thus, the adjustment of the economy to a positive external shock results in full employment
and in an efficient level of production of nontradables. It follows that over the business
cycle, the model economy fluctuates between periods of full employment and an efficient
level of production and periods of involuntary unemployment and inefficiently low levels
of production. Therefore, the average levels of involuntary unemployment and nontraded
output depend on the amplitude of the cycle. This feature of our model is an important
difference with existing sticky-wage models in the Calvo-Rotemberg tradition. In this class
of models, employment is always demand determined. As a result increases in involuntary
unemployment during recessions are roughly offset by reductions in unemployment during
booms. It follows that in the standard new Keynesian framework the average levels of
unemployment and output do not depend in a quantitatively relevant way on the amplitude of
the business cycle. This is the root cause of the small welfare gains from optimal stabilization
policy predicted by this class of models.




                                               12
2.5    Optimal Exchange Rate Policy
Consider an exchange rate arrangement in which the central bank always sets the devaluation
rate to ensure full employment in the labor market, that is, to ensure that

                                               ht = h̄,

for all t ≥ 0. We refer to this monetary arrangement as the full-employment exchange rate
policy. This policy amounts to setting the devaluation rate to ensure that the real wage
equals the full-employment real wage rate at all times. Formally, the optimal policy ensures
that
                                       wt = ω(cTt ),

where ω(cTt ) denotes the full-employment real wage rate and is given by

                                             A2 (cTt , F (h̄)) 0
                                 ω(cTt ) ≡                     F (h̄).                    (20)
                                             A1 (cTt , F (h̄))

The assumed properties of the aggregator function A ensure that the function ω(·) is strictly
increasing in the domestic absorption of tradables, cTt ,

                                             ω 0 (cTt ) > 0.

   The optimal exchange rate policy stipulates that should the nominal value of the full-
employment real wage evaluated at last period’s nominal exchange rate, ω(cTt )Et−1 , fall below
the lower bound γWt−1 , then the central bank devalues the domestic currency to ensure that
ω(cTt )Et ≥ γWt−1 . That is, the devaluation rate makes the nominal wage, Wt , greater than
or equal to its lower bound, γWt−1 , and at the same time guarantees that the real wage, wt ,
equal the full-employment real wage ω(cTt ). If, in this case, the central bank chose not to
devalue, the economy would experience unemployment, because downward wage rigidities
would prevent the real wage from falling to the full-employment level ω(cTt ).
   In general, any exchange rate policy satisfying

                                                    wt−1
                                         t ≥ γ                                           (21)
                                                    ω(cTt )

ensures full employment at all times. All exchange rate policies pertaining to this family
deliver the same real allocation and are therefore equivalent from a welfare point of view.
    From this class of full-employment policies, the one that minimizes movements in the



                                                  13
nominal exchange rate is given by
                                                           
                                                  wt−1
                                    t = max 1, γ               .                           (22)
                                                  ω(cTt )

This policy is of interest because it will inform us about the minimum devaluation required
to maintain full employment during an external crisis. Another full-employment exchange
rate policy of interest is
                                            wt−1
                                     t = γ         .                              (23)
                                            ω(cTt )
This full-employment policy targets nominal wage growth, for it implies that in equilibrium
Wt /Wt−1 equals γ at all times.
   The complete set of equilibrium conditions under the optimal exchange rate regime is
then given by Definition 1 and the exchange rate policy given in equation (21).
   Because under the optimal exchange rate policy the real wage rate is always equal to
the full-employment real wage, equation (21) implies that for all t > 0 the devaluation rate
satisfies
                                           ω(cTt−1 )
                                    t ≥ γ           ;   t > 0.
                                            ω(cTt )
Recalling that ω(·) is a strictly increasing function of tradable absorption, this expression
states that the central bank must devalue the domestic currency when tradable expenditure
falls. Data stemming from our model may lead non-microfounded econometric analysis to
erroneously conclude that devaluations are contractionary. See, for instance, the empirical
literature surveyed in section 3.4 of Frankel (2011). However, the role of devaluations under
the full-employment exchange rate policy is precisely the opposite, namely, to prevent the
contraction in the tradable sector to spill over into the nontraded sector. It follows that under
the full-employment exchange rate policy, devaluations are indeed expansionary in the sense
that should they not take place, aggregate contractions would be even larger. Thus, under
the full-employment exchange rate regime, our model with downward nominal-wage rigidities
turns the view that ‘devaluations are contractionary’ on its head and instead predicts that
‘contractions are devaluatory.’
    The full-employment exchange rate policy completely eliminates all real effects stemming
from nominal wage rigidities. Indeed, one can show that the equilibrium under the full-
employment exchange rate policy is identical to the equilibrium of an economy with full
wage flexibility. Since wage rigidity is the only source of distortion in the present model,
it follows that the equilibrium under the full-employment exchange rate policy is Pareto
optimal. The equilibrium dynamics under the optimal exchange rate policy can therefore be



                                                14
characterized as the solution to the following value function problem:
                                              
           v OP T (ytT , rt , dt ) = max          U (A(cTt , F (h̄))) + βEt v OP T (yt+1
                                                                                     T
                                                                                         , rt+1 , dt+1 )   (24)
                                {dt+1 ,cT
                                        t }



subject to (4) and (15), where the function v OP T (ytT , rt , dt ) represents the welfare level of the
representative agent under the full-employment exchange rate policy in state (ytT , rt , dt ). The
equilibrium processes of all other endogenous variables of the model can be readily obtained
from (21) and the conditions listed in Definition 1. The following proposition provides a
formal statement of these results:

Proposition 1 Any exchange rate policy satisfying condition (21) delivers a real allocation
that exhibits full employment (ht = h̄) at all dates and states and, furthermore, is Pareto
optimal.

Proof: See appendix A.
    The fact that the aggregate dynamics under optimal exchange rate policy can be described
as the solution to a Bellman equation greatly facilitates the quantitative characterization of
the model’s predictions. As we will see shortly, this is not the case under a fixed-exchange-
rate policy.


3     Evidence On Downward Nominal Wage Rigidity
A central assumption in our theoretical framework is that nominal wages are downwardly
rigid. This assumption is embodied in the parameter γ, defining an upper bound on the
rate of nominal wage decreases. In this section, we present and review empirical evidence
in support of this assumption. To stress the ubiquitousness of downward wage frictions, we
consider evidence based on data from developed, emerging, and poor regions of the world,
as well as from formal and informal labor markets.
   One way in which the real effects of wage rigidity can be identified is by exploiting the
seasonal dimension of wage adjustments. Olivei and Tenreyro (2007) document that in the
United States nominal wage adjustments tend to be decided in the second half of the year
and take effect at the very beginning of each year. This means that nominal wages are more
rigid in the first than in the second half of the year. Olivei and Tenreyro exploit this seasonal
pattern in wage adjustment and show, using VAR techniques, that monetary shocks that
take place in the first half of the year have larger effects on aggregate activity than monetary
shocks that occur in the second half of the year. Olivei and Tenreyro (2010) extend this
result by observing that the seasonal component of nominal wage adjustments varies widely

                                                           15
from country to country. They find that in countries in which wage setting is seasonal
(e.g., the United States and Japan), the real effects of monetary policy also depend on the
season in which they occur. By contrast, in countries in which wage setting does not display
a pronounced seasonal pattern (e.g., France, Germany, and the United Kingdom), the real
effect of monetary policy innovations do not significantly depend on the season in which they
are implemented. The findings of Olivei and Tenreyro (2007, 2010) provide evidence in favor
of the hypothesis that nominal wage rigidity has significant economic effect on economic
activity.
    A further question is whether nominal wage rigidity is asymmetric as assumed in our theo-
retical model. The existing empirical evidence strongly supports this assumption. Gottschalk
(2005), for example, uses SIPP panel data to estimate the probability of wage declines, in-
creases, and no changes for male and female hourly workers working for the same employer
over the period 1986-1993 in the United States. He finds that for males the probabilities
of wage increases, wage constancy, and wage declines are, respectively, 41.2, 53.7, and 5.1
percent per year. The corresponding probabilities for females are 46.5, 49.2, and 4.3 percent.
These findings suggest that over the course of one year a very small fraction of workers
experiences a decline in nominal wages, while about half of workers experience no change.
For the purpose of our argument, it is important to note that the sample period used by
Gottschalk comprises the 1991 U.S. recession, for it implies that the observed scarcity of
nominal wage cuts took place in the context of elevated unemployment. Barattieri, Basu,
and Gottschalk (2010) report similar findings using data from the 1996-2000 SIPP panel.
Interestingly, this study is not restricted to workers working for the same employer. A similar
pattern of downward nominal wage rigidity is documented by Holden and Wulfsberg (2008)
using industry-level wage data in 19 OECD countries over the period 1973-1999.
    The evidence referenced above is based on data from formal labor markets in developed
economies. However, a similar pattern of asymmetry in nominal wage adjustments emerges in
informal labor markets located in poor areas of the world. Kaur (2012), for example, studies
the behavior of nominal wages in casual daily agricultural labor markets in rural India.
Specifically, she examines market-level wage and employment responses to local rainfall
shocks in 500 Indian districts from 1956 to 2008. She finds that nominal wage adjustment
is asymmetric. In particular, nominal wages rise in response to positive rain shocks but
fail to fall during droughts. In addition, negative rain shocks cause labor rationing and
unemployment. More importantly, inflation, which is uncorrelated with local rainfall shocks,
moderates these effects. During periods of relatively high inflation, local droughts are more
likely to result in lower real wages and less labor rationing.
    The empirical literature surveyed thus far establishes that nominal wage rigidity is asym-


                                              16
metric and has significant economic effects. However, because it does not provide information
on the speed of nominal downward wage adjustments, it does not lend itself to calibrating
the wage-rigidity parameter γ. For this reason, we now propose an empirical strategy for
identifying this parameter. It consists in observing the behavior of nominal wages during
periods of rising unemployment. We focus on episodes in which an economy undergoing a
severe recession keeps the nominal exchange rate fixed. Two prominent examples are Ar-
gentina during the second half of the Convertibility Plan (1996-2001) and the periphery of
Europe during the great recession of 2008.
   Figure 2 displays nominal (peso) wages, real (dollar) wages, the nominal exchange rate,
and subemployment (defined as the sum of unemployment and underemployment) for Ar-
gentina during the period 1996-2006. The subperiod 1998-2001 is of particular interest
because the Argentine central bank was holding on to the currency peg in spite of the fact
that the economy was undergoing a severe contraction and both unemployment and un-
deremployment were in a steep ascent. In the context of a flexible-wage model, one would
expect that the rise in unemployment would be associated with falling real wages. However,
during this period, the average nominal wage never fell. Indeed, because the Argentine peso
was pegged to the dollar, the dollar wage rose throughout the 1998-2001 contraction. We
interpret this behavior of nominal wages as suggesting a value of γ greater than or equal
to unity. Additionally, the fact that real wages fell significantly and persistently with the
devaluation of 2002 suggests that the 1998-2001 period was one of censored wage deflation,
which further strengthens the view that nominal wages suffer from downward inflexibility.
    We note that during the 1998-2001 Argentine contraction, consumer prices, unlike nom-
inal wages, did fall significantly. The CPI rate of inflation was on average -0.86 percent per
year over the period 1998-2001. It follows that real wages rose not only in dollar terms but
also in terms of CPI units.4
    The second episode that we use to infer the value of γ is the great recession of 2008
in the periphery of Europe. Table 1 presents a rough estimate of γ for eleven European
economies that are either on the euro or pegging to the euro. Our model predicts that
nominal wages should fall at the rate γ whenever the unemployment rate is above trend.
The table shows the unemployment rate in 2008:Q1 and 2011:Q2. The starting point of
this period corresponds to the beginning of the great recession in Europe according to the
CEPR Euro Area Business Cycle Dating Committee, and the end point corresponds to the
most recent data available at the time of the writing of this paper. The 2008 crisis caused
unemployment rates to rise sharply across all eleven countries. The table also displays
  4
    In addition, this evidence provides some support for our assumption that downward nominal rigidities
are less stringent for product prices than for factor prices.



                                                  17
                                        Figure 2: Nominal Wages and Unemployment in Argentina, 1996-2006

                                          Nominal Exchange Rate (Et)                                   Unemployment Rate + Underemployment Rate
                                4                                                                     40
        Pesos per U.S. Dollar




                                3                                                                     35




                                                                                          Percent
                                2                                                                     30


                                1                                                                     25


                                0                                                                     20
                                1996    1998     2000    2002   2004   2006                            1996   1998     2000   2002       2004   2006
                                                        Year                                                               Year

                                                Nominal Wage (W )                                                    Real Wage (Wt/Et)
                                                                t
                                                                                                      1.4

                                                                                                      1.2
Pesos per Hour




                                                                                       Index 1996=1




                           12
                                                                                                       1

                                                                                                      0.8

                                6                                                                     0.6

                                                                                                      0.4
                                1996     1998     2000   2002       2004   2006                        1996   1998   2000    2002    2004   2006
                                                      Year                                                                  Year


                                    Source. Nominal exchange rate and nominal wage, BLS. Subemployment, INDEC.




                                                                                  18
         Table 1: Unemployment, Nominal Wages, and γ: Evidence from the Eurozone
                            Unemployment Rate Wage Growth Implied
                                                       W2011Q2
                            2008Q1       2011Q2        W2008Q1
                                                                   Value of
                  Country   (in percent) (in percent) (in percent)     γ
                  Bulgaria      6.1         11.3         43.3        1.028
                  Cyprus        3.8          6.9         10.7        1.008
                  Estonia       4.1         12.8          2.5        1.002
                  Greece        7.8         16.7         -2.3       0.9982
                  Ireland       4.9         14.3          0.5       1.0004
                  Lithuania     4.1         15.6         -5.1        0.996
                  Latvia        6.1         16.2         -0.6       0.9995
                  Portugal      8.3         12.5         1.91        1.001
                  Spain         9.2         20.8          8.0        1.006
                  Slovenia      4.7          7.9         12.5        1.009
                  Slovakia     10.2         13.3         13.4        1.010

        Note. W is an index of nominal average hourly labor cost in manufacturing,
        construction, and services. Unemployment is the economy-wide unemployment
        rate. Source: EuroStat.


the total growth of nominal hourly labor cost in manufacturing, construction and services
(including the public sector) over the thirteen-quarter period 2008:Q1-2011:Q2.5 Despite the
large surge in unemployment, nominal wages grew in most countries and in those in which
it fell, the decline was modest. The implied value of γ, shown in the last column of table 1,
is given by the average growth rate of nominal wages over the period considered (that is,
γ = (W2011:Q2 /W2008:Q1 )1/13 ). The estimated values of γ range from 0.996 for Lithuania to
1.028 for Bulgaria. Again, this evidence suggests a value of γ close to or even larger than
unity.
   In light of the above empirical evidence, we choose as the baseline value of γ 0.99. This
value means that nominal wages can fall frictionlessly by up to 4 percent per year. We regard
this choice as conservative in the sense that it allows for more downward wage flexibility than
what is suggested by the evidence presented above. Consider, for instance, the evidence
presented in table 1. The largest fall in wages over the 13-quarter period since the start of
the 2008 crisis is 5.1 percent and corresponds to Lithuania. Under our calibration, however,
wages would have been allowed to fall by more than twice this amount, namely 13 percent.
This conservative value allows for effects not explicitly captured by our model, such as foreign
inflation and long-run growth.6 We also consider even more conservative values of γ in the
  5
      The public sector is not included for Spain due to data limitations.
  6
      For example, over the thirteen-quarter sample period considered in table 1 inflation in Germany was 3.6

                                                      19
interval 0.96 to 0.99. The lower end of this range allows for a 52 percent decline in nominal
wages over a 13-quarter period, a figure that vastly exceeds the observed declines in nominal
wages in the eurozone since the onset of the great recession.


4     A Quantitative Analysis of External Crises
We wish to quantitatively characterize the response of our model to a large negative external
shock. We have in mind extraordinary contractions like the 1989 or 2001 crises in Argentina,
or the 2008 great recession in peripheral Europe. To this end, we estimate the joint stochastic
process of our assumed exogenous driving forces (traded output and the country interest
rate) using Argentine data. We calibrate the remaining structural parameters of the model
to match salient aspects of the Argentine economy. Finally, we compute the economy’s
response to a large negative shock to traded output under a currency peg and under the
optimal exchange rate policy (22).


4.1     Exogenous Driving Process and Definition of Crisis
The law of motion of tradable output and the country-specific interest rate is assumed to be
given by the following autoregressive process:
                                  "               #        "                #
                                       ln ytT                        T
                                                                 ln yt−1
                                                      =A                        + t ,                  (25)
                                      ln 1+r
                                         1+r
                                              t
                                                                ln 1+rt−1
                                                                    1+r


where t is a white noise of order 2 by 1 distributed N(∅, Σ ). The parameter r denotes the
deterministic steady-state value of rt . We estimate this system using Argentine data over
the period 1983:Q1 to 2001:Q4. We exclude the period post 2001 because Argentina was in
default between 2002 and 2005 and excluded from international capital markets. The default
was reflected in excessively high country premia (see figure 3(b)). Excluding this period is
in order because interest rates were not allocative, which is at odds with our maintained
assumption that the country never loses access to international financial markets. This is a
conservative choice, for inclusion of the default period would imply a more volatile driving
force accentuating the real effects of currency pegs on unemployment.
    Our empirical measure of ytT is the cyclical component of Argentine GDP in agriculture,
forestry, fishing, mining, and manufacturing.7 We obtain the cyclical component by removing
percent, or about 0.3 percent per quarter. At the same time, long-run growth in per capita income in Europe
is about 1.2 percent per year, or 0.3 percent per quarter. Allowing for these effects would entail lowering γ
by 0.006. For this reason, we use a value of γ of 0.99 rather than 0.996 as suggested in table 1.
    7
      The data were downloaded from www.indec.mecon.ar.


                                                           20
  Figure 3: Traded Output and Interest Rate in Argentina, 1983:Q1-2008:Q3
                            (a) Traded Output
                                   0.2


                               0.15


                                   0.1


                               0.05


                                    0
      ln ytT




                              −0.05


                               −0.1


                              −0.15


                               −0.2


                              −0.25
                                  1980     1985    1990       1995        2000   2005   2010

                                                     (b) Interest Rate
                              70




                              60




                              50
     rt in percent per year




                              40




                              30




                              20




                              10




                              0
                              1980       1985     1990      1995         2000    2005   2010


Note. Traded output is expressed in log-deviations from trend. Source: See the main
text.


                                                            21
a log-quadratic time trend. Figure 3(a) displays the resulting time series. We measure the
country-specific real interest rate as the sum of the EMBI+ spread for Argentina and the
90-day Treasury-Bill rate, deflated using a measure of expected dollar inflation.8
       Our OLS estimates of the matrices A and Σ and of the scalar r are
               "                    #               "                            #
                   0.79    −1.36                        0.00123      −0.00008
          A=                            ;    Σ =                                    ;     r = 0.0316.
                   −0.01    0.86                        −0.00008      0.00004

According to these estimates, both ln ytT and rt are highly volatile, with unconditional stan-
dard deviations of 12.2 percent and 1.7 percent per quarter (6.8 percent per year), respec-
tively. Also, the unconditional contemporaneous correlation between ln ytT and rt is high and
negative at -0.86. This means that periods of relatively low traded output are associated
with high interest rates and vice versa. The estimated joint autoregressive process implies
that both traded output and the real interest rate are highly persistent, with first-order au-
tocorrelations of 0.95 and 0.93, respectively. Finally, we estimate a steady-state real interest
rate of 3.16 percent per quarter, or 12.6 percent per year. This high average value reflects the
fact that our sample covers a period in which Argentina underwent a great deal of economic
turbulence.
    We discretize the AR(1) process given in equation (25) using 21 equally spaced points
for ln ytT and 11 equally spaced points for ln(1 + rt )/(1 + r). We construct the transition
probability matrix of the state (ln ytT , ln((1+rt )/(1+r))) by simulating a time series of length
1,000,000 drawn from the system (25). We associate each observation in the time series with
one of the 231 possible discrete states by distance minimization. The resulting discrete-
valued time series is used to compute the probability of transitioning from a particular
discrete state in one period to a particular discrete state in the next period. The resulting
transition probability matrix captures well the covariance matrices of order 0 and 1.
   During the great Argentine crises of 1989 and 2001 traded output fell by about two
standard deviations within a period of two and a half years. Accordingly, we define an
external crisis in our theoretical model as a situation in which tradable output is at or above
trend in period t and at least two standard deviations below trend in period t + 10. To
   8
     Specifically, we construct the time series for the quarterly real Argentine interest rate, rt , as 1+rt = (1+
it )Et 1+π1t+1 , where it denotes the dollar interest rate charged to Argentina in international financial markets
and πt is U.S. CPI inflation. For the period 1983:Q1 to 1997:Q4, we take it to be the Argentine interest rate
series constructed by Neumeyer and Perri (2005) and posted at www.fperri.net/data/neuperri.xls. For the
period 1998:Q1 to 2001:Q4, we measure it as the sum of the EMBI+ spread and the 90-day Treasury bill
rate, which is in line with the definition used in Neumeyer and Perri. We measure Et 1+π1t+1 by the fitted
component of a regression of 1+π1t+1 onto a constant and two lags. This regression uses quarterly data on
the growth rate of the U.S. CPI index from 1947:Q1 to 2010:Q2.



                                                        22
                                                                              Figure 4: The Source of a Crisis
                                                                                            Traded Output, yT
                                                                                                              t
                                                                    5

            percent deviation from mean                             0

                                                                   −5

                                                            −10

                                                            −15

                                                            −20

                                                            −25
                                                             −10         −5     0       5           10            15    20   25   30
                                                                                       quarters since onset of crisis

                                                                                        Annualized Interest Rate, r
                            percentage point deviation from mean




                                                                                                                   t
                                                                   15


                                                                   10


                                                                    5


                                                                    0


                                                                   −5
                                                                   −10   −5     0       5           10            15    20   25   30
                                                                                       quarters since onset of crisis




characterize the economy’s behavior during such episodes, we simulate the model for 20
million quarters and identify episodes in which movements in traded output conform to our
definition of an external crisis. We then average the responses of all variables of interest
across the crisis episodes and subtract their respective means taken over the entire sample
of 20 million quarters. The beginning of a crisis is normalized at t = 0.
    Figure 4 displays the predicted average behavior of the two exogenous variables, traded
output and the country interest rate, during a crisis. The downturn in traded output can be
interpreted either as a drastic fall in the quantity of tradables produced by the economy or as
an exogenous collapse in the country’s terms of trade. The figure shows that at the trough of
the crisis (period 10), tradable output is 23 percent below trend. The contraction in tradable
output is accompanied by a sharp increase in the interest rate that international financial
markets charge to the emerging economy. The country interest rate peaks in quarter 10 at
about 12 percentage points per annum above its average value. This behavior of the interest
rate is dictated by the estimated negative correlation between tradable output and country
interest rates.




                                                                                                23
                                       Table 2: Calibration
 Parameter      Value       Description
     γ        0.99-0.95     Degree of downward nominal wage rigidity
     σ             5        Inverse of intertemporal elasticity of consumption
    yT             1        Steady-state tradable output
     h̄            1        Labor endowment
     a           0.26       Share of tradables
     ξ           0.44       Elasticity of substitution between tradables and nontradables
     α           0.75       Labor share in nontraded sector
     β         0.9375       Quarterly subjective discount factor


4.2    Calibration
We adopt a CRRA form for the period utility function, a CES form for the aggregator
function, and an isoelastic form for the production function of nontradables:

                                                   c1−σ − 1
                                         U (c) =            ,
                                                     1−σ
                                       h         1
                                                                      i ξ
                                                                    1 ξ−1
                          A(cT , cN ) = a(cT )1− ξ + (1 − a)(cN )1− ξ     ,

and
                                            F (h) = hα .

    We calibrate the model at a quarterly frequency using data from Argentina as shown
in table 2. Reinhart and Végh (1995) estimate the intertemporal elasticity of substitution
to be 0.21 using Argentine quarterly data. We therefore set σ equal to 5. We normalize
the steady-state levels of output of tradables and hours at unity. Then, if the steady-state
trade-balance-to-output ratio is small, the parameter a is approximately equal to the share
of traded output in total output. We set this parameter at 0.26, which is the share of traded
output (as defined above) observed in Argentine data over the period 1980:Q1-2010:Q1.
Using time series data for Argentina over the period 1993Q1-2001Q3, González Rozada et
al. (2004) estimate the elasticity of substitution between traded and nontraded consumption,
ξ, to be 0.44. This estimate is consistent with the cross-country estimates of Stockman and
Tesar (1995). These authors include in their estimation both developed and developing
countries. Restricting the sample to include only developing countries yields a value of ξ of
0.43 (see Akinci, 2011). Following Uribe’s (1997) evidence on the size of the labor share in
the nontraded sector in Argentina, we set α equal to 0.75.
   We set d¯ at the natural debt limit, which we define as the level of external debt that


                                                   24
can be supported with zero tradable consumption when the household perpetually receives
                                                            min
the lowest possible realization of tradable endowment, y T      , and faces the highest possible
                                    max                      min
realization of the interest rate, r     . Formally, d¯ ≡ y T
                                                                 (1 + r max )/r max . Given our
discretized estimate of the exogenous driving process, d¯ equals 8.34. In the numerical simu-
lations presented below, we fix the upper bound of the debt grid at 8. The reason why we
set this upper bound slightly below the natural debt limit is that our numerical algorithm
requires evaluating the aggregator function for consumption at all points in the discretized
                                                            min max ¯
state space. If we allowed the state to take the value (y T    ,r  , d), traded consumption
would take zero or negative values for all possible choices of next-period debt in the grid.
As a result, the aggregate level of consumption would not be defined at this particular state.
Experimenting with values for the upper bound of the debt grid closer to the natural debt
limit did not affect our results.
   The final parameter we calibrate is the subjective discount factor β. We set this parameter
so as to match a foreign-debt-to-output ratio of 26 percent per year, a value in line with
that reported for Argentina over our calibration period by Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007).
In the context of our model, the task of calibrating β is complicated by the fact that the
debt-to-output ratio is highly sensitive to the assumed monetary regime. This is problematic
because in emerging countries in general and in Argentina in particular, monetary regimes
tend to change frequently and widely. A compromise is therefore in order. In calibrating
β, we assume that the underlying monetary regime takes the form of a currency peg. This
strategy results in a value of β of 0.9375. In section 10 we explore the sensitivity of our
results to changes in β as well as all other calibrated parameters.


4.3    Crisis Dynamics Under A Currency Peg
At center stage in our analysis is the characterization of the costs of maintaining a currency
peg. A currency peg is meant to capture, for example, the monetary policy in place in
Argentina between April 1991 and December 2001 or the monetary restrictions faced by the
small emerging economies that are members of the Eurozone, such as Greece, Portugal, and
Ireland.
    Approximating the dynamics of the model under a currency peg is computationally more
demanding than doing so under optimal exchange rate policy due to the emergence of a fourth
state variable, wt−1 . In addition, because of the distortions created by nominal rigidities,
aggregate dynamics cannot be cast in terms of a Bellman equation without introducing
additional state variables (such as the individual level of debt, which households perceive as
distinct from its aggregate counterpart). We therefore approximate the solution by Euler


                                              25
equation iteration over a discretized version of the state space (ytT , rt , dt , wt−1 ). Appendix B
describes our numerical algorithm in more detail. The discretization of the exogenous states
ytT and rt is as described in section 4.1. For the discretization of the endogenous states, we
use 501 equally spaced points for external debt, dt , and 500 equally spaced points for the
logarithm of wt−1 .
   Figure 5 depicts with solid lines the dynamics induced by a large external crisis when
the monetary policy takes the form of an exchange rate peg. Recall from section 4.1 that an
external crisis is defined as a situation in which in period 0 tradable output is at or above
trend and in period 10 it is at least two standard deviations below trend.
    The central characteristic of the response of the currency-peg economy to an external
crisis is that the contraction in the traded sector spills over to the nontraded sector. This is
because the monetary authority fails to devalue the domestic currency preventing real wages
and thus also marginal costs in the nontraded sector from adjusting downward. With real
wages too high, the labor market is in disequilibrium and unemployment emerges. At the
same time, because marginal costs are high, firms are unwilling to cut the relative price of
nontradables. Consequently, there is insufficient expenditure switching away from tradables
toward nontradables. Put differently, the combination of downward nominal wage rigidity
and a currency peg hinders the ability of the price system to signal to firms and consumers
the relative aggregate scarcity of tradable goods and the relative aggregate abundance of
nontradable goods.
   The collapse in the demand for nontradables pushes the unemployment rate up by more
than 20 percentage points. Moreover, unemployment is highly persistent. Even five years
after the trough of the crisis, the unemployment rate remains more than 7 percentage points
above average. This sluggishness in unemployment is due to the fact that real wages adjust
slowly downward at the gross rate γ. The predicted unemployment is involuntary, in the
sense that every unemployed individual would be willing to work at the going wage rate.
   The predictions of our model suggest that a hands-off policy approach whereby the neces-
sary real depreciation is let to occur via deflation, while maintaining a currency peg, is highly
costly in terms of unemployment and forgone consumption of nontradables. Although the
currency-peg economy displays a mild deflation during the crisis, the fall in nominal product
prices is too small and too slow to bring about the efficient real depreciation required to avoid
unemployment. It is interesting to point out that nominal product prices fail to decline to
the level consistent with full employment in spite of the fact that they are fully flexible. The
reason for the seemingly sticky behavior of product price inflation is that, because nominal
wages are downwardly rigid, marginal costs remain high and therefore firms are unable to
cut prices without making losses. Next, we show that this is a key difference between price


                                                26
  Figure 5: The Dynamics of a Crisis: Response to a Two-Standard-Deviation Fall in ytT
           Unemployment Rate, 1 − ht                              Real (CPI) Wage, Wt /Pt
  0.3                                                  0.1

                                                         0
  0.2
                                                      −0.1
  0.1
                                                      −0.2
   0
                                                      −0.3

−0.1                                                  −0.4
  −10        0          10         20       30          −10        0         10         20      30

         Annualized Devaluation Rate, ²t                        Real Exchange Rate (PtN /Et )
  0.6                                                  0.2

                                                         0
  0.4
                                                      −0.2
  0.2
                                                      −0.4
   0
                                                      −0.6

−0.2                                                  −0.8
  −10        0          10         20       30          −10        0         10         20      30

            Annual Inflation Rate, πt                             Traded Consumption, cTt
  0.3                                                  0.2

  0.2                                                    0

  0.1                                                 −0.2

   0                                                  −0.4

−0.1                                                  −0.6
  −10        0          10         20       30          −10        0         10         20      30

             Trade Balance, ytT − cTt                              Net External Debt, dt
 0.15                                                    1

  0.1
                                                       0.5
 0.05
                                                         0
   0

−0.05                                                 −0.5
   −10       0          10         20       30          −10        0         10         20      30
                             Currency Peg             Optimal exchange rate Policy
                                                 27
dynamics under a currency peg and the optimal exchange-rate regime.


4.4       Crisis Dynamics Under the Optimal Exchange Rate Policy
We numerically approximate the equilibrium dynamics under the optimal exchange rate
policy by applying the method of value function iteration over a discretized state space.
Under optimal exchange rate policy, the state of the economy in period t ≥ 0 is the triplet
{ytT , rt , dt }. In subsection 4.1, we explain the method employed for discretizing the exogenous
state space {ytT , rt }. In the discretization of the endogenous state dt , we use 1001 equally
spaced points.
    Figure 5 displays with broken lines the average response of the economy to a large external
crisis under the optimal exchange rate policy. By construction, the behavior of the exogenous
variables, traded output and the country interest rate, is identical to that used to simulate
the crisis in the currency-peg economy (see figure 4).
   The central difference in the response to an external crisis between the optimal exchange-
rate-economy and the currency-peg economy is that in the optimal-exchange-rate economy
the monetary authority prevents the external crisis from spilling over to the nontraded sector.
Indeed, as shown in proposition 1 the unemployment rate is nil under the optimal exchange-
rate policy. To maintain full employment in the nontraded sector, the government engineers a
significant expenditure switch away from tradables and toward nontradables. The instrument
the government uses to accomplish this expenditure switch is a series of large devaluations
of the domestic currency of about 40 percent per year during the contractionary phase of the
crisis. The main purpose of these devaluations is to lower labor costs in the nontraded sector.
In turn, the decline in labor costs allows firms to lower the relative price of nontradable goods
in terms of tradable goods, which results in a depreciation of the real exchange rate. The
purchasing power of wages in terms of the composite consumption good, Wt /Pt , falls by
about 40 percent and the real exchange rate, pt ≡ PtN /Et , depreciates by about 70 percent,
where Pt denotes the nominal price of one unit of the composite consumption good in period
t, and PtN denotes the nominal price of one unit of nontradable consumption in period t.9
    During the crisis, the constraint on nominal wage cuts is typically binding. Therefore,
the median quarterly proportional decline in nominal wages is 1−γ, or 1 percent per quarter,
implying a cumulative decline of about 10 percent over the course of the crisis. The nominal
price of nontradables mimics the behavior of nominal wages. To see this, note that under the
optimal exchange rate policy PtN must satisfy PtN F 0 (h̄) = Wt , which implies that the nominal
price of nontradables falls at the same rate as nominal wages. It follows that the nominal
                    h                           i 1
                                             1−ξ 1−ξ
  9
      Formally, Pt ≡ aξ Et1−ξ + (1 − a)ξ PtN         .


                                                         28
price of nontradables remains relatively flat as the large nominal devaluations occur. This
prediction of our model is remarkable because nominal prices of nontradables are assumed
to be fully flexible. The predicted sluggish adjustment of the nominal price of nontradables
is in line with the empirical findings of Burstein, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2005) who report
that the primary force behind the observed large drop in the real exchange rate that occurred
after the large devaluations in Argentina (2002), Brazil (1999), Korea (1997), Mexico (1994),
and Thailand (1997) was the slow adjustment in the nominal prices of nontradable goods.
    In the tradable sector, the expenditure switch is reflected in a drastic fall in tradable
consumption of about 40 percent. In fact the fall in the domestic absorption of tradable
goods is larger than the contraction in the supply of tradables. This results in a significant
improvement in the trade balance from slightly below trend to about 10 percent of tradable
GDP above trend. However, because of the elevated debt-service cost stemming from the
interest-rate hike, the large improvement in the trade balance is not sufficient to prevent
external debt from growing during the crisis.
   The large optimal devaluations that take place during the crises are prima facie an indi-
cation that rigidly adhering to a currency peg during times of duress might carry nontrivial
real effects in terms of unemployment, output, and welfare. We turn to this issue next.


5    The Welfare Costs of Currency Pegs
In the present model, currency pegs are costly not only during crises but also over regular
business-cycle fluctuations. For currency pegs make the economy vulnerable to persistent
unemployment spells. Under our calibration the average unemployment rate under a cur-
rency peg is 14 percent. As a consequence the average supply of nontraded goods is lower
than in the optimal exchange rate economy, in which unemployment is zero at all times.
   We quantify the welfare cost of living in an economy in which the central bank pegs the
currency by computing the percent increase in the consumption stream of the representative
household living in the currency-peg economy that would make him as happy as living in
the optimal exchange rate economy. This computation must take explicitly into account the
transitional dynamics induced by the switch from a peg to the optimal policy. Specifically,
one can express the value function associated with the currency-peg economy as
                                                                            
                                                                          EG 1−σ
                                                                 X
                                                                 ∞
                                                                      cPt+s      −1
                          P EG
                      v          (ytT , rt , dt , wt−1 )   = Et     βs
                                                                                    ,
                                                                s=0
                                                                           1−σ

where cPt EG denotes the stochastic process of consumption of the composite good in the


                                                            29
currency-peg economy. Then, define the proportional compensation rate λ(ytT , rt , dt , wt−1 )
implicitly as
                                                               1−σ
                    X
                    ∞       P EG        T
                         s ct+s (1 + λ(yt , rt , dt , wt−1 ))          −1
                Et     β                                                    = v OP T (ytT , rt , dt ),
                   s=0
                                          1−σ

where v OP T (ytT , rt , dt ) denotes the value function associated with the optimal exchange-rate
policy, defined in equation (24). Solving for the welfare cost λ(ytT , rt , dt , wt−1 ), we obtain
                                                                                          1/(1−σ)
                                         v OP T (y T , rt , dt )(1 − σ) + (1 − β)−1
          λ(ytT , rt , dt , wt−1 )   = P EG T t                                                          − 1.
                                       v    (yt , rt , dt , wt−1 )(1 − σ) + (1 − β)−1

This expression makes it clear that the compensation λ(ytT , rt , dt , wt−1 ) is state dependent.
Specifically, the distribution of λ(ytT , rt , dt , wt−1 ) depends upon the distribution of the state
(ytT , rt , dt , wt−1 ).
     The ergodic distributions of debt under the currency peg and under the optimal policy
do not have the same support (see figure 8 to be discussed below). Therefore, in order to
compute λ(ytT , rt , dt , wt−1 ) one must evaluate the welfare function v OP T (ytT , rt , dt ) at levels
of debt outside of the support of its ergodic distribution under the optimal policy. Having
computed λ(ytT , rt , dt , wt−1 ) for all values of the state in its ergodic distribution under the
currency peg, we proceed to compute the probability density function of λ(ytT , rt , dt , wt−1 )
by sampling from the ergodic distribution of the state under the currency peg.
    Figure 6 displays with a solid line the unconditional probability density function of
λ(ytT , rt , dt , wt−1 ) expressed in percentage points. The probability density is highly skewed to
the right, implying that the probability of very high welfare costs is non-negligible. Table 3
reports the median and the mean of λ(ytT , rt , dt , wt−1 ). The median welfare cost of a currency
peg is 10.4 percent of the consumption stream. That is, households living in a currency peg
economy require 10.4 percent more consumption in every date and state in order to be in-
different between staying in the currency-peg regime and switching to the optimal exchange
rate regime. This is an enormous number as welfare costs go in monetary business-cycle
theory. Even under the most favorable initial conditions, the welfare cost of a currency peg
is large, 5.6 percent of consumption each period. (This figure corresponds to the lower bound
of the support of the probability density of λ(ytT , rt , dt , wt−1 ).)
     The welfare consequences of unemployment under a currency peg are reflected in the
implied average levels of consumption. Eventhough the currency-peg economy enjoys 8.5
percent higher average consumption of tradables, due to lower average debt holdings (see
figure 8), aggregate consumption under the currency peg is 5 percent lower than under the


                                                        30
 Figure 6: Probability Density Function of the Welfare Cost of Currency Pegs
                                                                                Median = 10.4 percent
                0.18                                                            Mean = 12.3 percent


                0.16


                0.14


                0.12
      Density




                 0.1


                0.08


                0.06


                0.04


                0.02


                  0
                       0   5      10      15           20                  25   30        35            40
                                            100 × λ(ytT , rt , dt , wt−1 )




                          Table 3: The Welfare Costs of Currency Pegs
                                                                 Welfare Cost
                   Parameterization                             Median Mean
                   Baseline                                       10.4    12.3
                   Endogenous labor supply: θ = 1                  4.5     6.2
                   Endogenous labor supply: θ = 6                  6.8     8.6
                   Production in Traded Sector: αT = 0.5           9.0    10.6
                   Less downward wage rigidity: γ = 0.98           6.7     8.1
                   Less downward wage rigidity: γ = 0.97           5.1     6.2
                   Less downward wage rigidity: γ = 0.96           4.3     5.2
                   Higher patience: β = 0.945                      8.0     9.2
                   Higher intratemp. elast. of subst.: ξ = 0.88    8.6    10.8
                   Higher share of tradables: a = 0.4              9.1    10.4
                   Higher intertemp. elast. of subst.: σ = 2       9.9    10.8

Note. The welfare cost of a currency peg is given by the percent increase in consumption
that would make an individual living in the currency-peg economy as well off as an
individual living in the optimal-exchange-rate economy for a given state of the economy
(ytT , rt , dt , wt−1 ).



                                                    31
optimal exchange rate policy. This is because, due to unemployment in the nontraded sector,
consumption of nontradables under the currency peg is on average 11 percent lower than
under the optimal exchange rate regime. As mentioned earlier, this is the main reason why
the welfare costs of currency pegs are so high in our model.
   Our finding of large welfare costs of currency pegs stands in stark contrast to a large
body of work, pioneered by Lucas (1987), suggesting that the costs of business cycles (not
just of suboptimal monetary policy) are minor. Lucas’ approach to computing the welfare
costs of business cycles consists in first removing a trend from a consumption time series
and then evaluating a second-order approximation of welfare using observed deviations of
consumption from trend. Implicit in this methodology is the assumption that the trend
is unaffected by policy. In our model, however, suboptimal monetary policy, creates an
endogenous connection between the amplitude of the business cycle and the average rate of
unemployment. In turn, through its effect on the average level of unemployment, suboptimal
exchange-rate policy has a significant effect on the average level of consumption. And indeed
lower average consumption is the main reason currency pegs are so costly in our model. It
follows that applying Lucas’ methodology to data stemming from our model would overlook
the effects of policy on trend consumption and therefore would result in spuriously low
welfare costs.
    The marked skewness of the unconditional distribution of the welfare cost of currency
pegs suggests that there are initial states at which an economy undergoing a currency peg
is particularly vulnerable. Figure 7 sheds light on what these states are. It displays the
welfare cost of currency pegs as a function of the four state variables. In each panel only one
state variable is allowed to vary (along the horizontal axis) and the remaining three state
variables are fixed at their respective unconditional means (under a currency peg, in the
case of endogenous states). The figure shows that currency pegs are more painful when the
country is initially more indebted, when it inherits higher past real wages, when the tradable
sector is undergoing a contraction (due, for example, to unfavorable terms of trade), or when
the country interest-rate premium is high. Viewing the recent debt crisis among eurozone
emerging countries through the lens of our model, it is not difficult to understand why doubts
about the optimality of European monetary union are the strongest for member countries
like Greece, Portugal, and Spain: These are countries with highly inflexible labor markets
that before the 2008 crisis experienced large increases in wages and sizable current account
deficits.




                                              32
       Figure 7: Welfare Cost of Currency Pegs as a Function of the State Variables
                    25                                                          20

                                                                                18
                    20
                                                                                16
           100× λ




                                                                       100× λ
                    15                                                          14

                                                                                12
                    10
                                                                                10

                     5                                                           8
                         1          2             3         4                        2   3          4           5    6
                                         wt−1                                                       d


                    16                                                          16

                    15                                                          15

                    14                                                          14
           100× λ




                                                                       100× λ




                    13                                                          13

                    12                                                          12

                    11                                                          11

                    10                                                          10

                     9                                                           9
                    −0.2     −0.1         0           0.1   0.2                      5   10          15         20   25
                                              T                                               r in % per year
                                        log(y )



Note. In each plot, all states except the one shown on the horizontal axis are fixed at their
unconditional mean values. The dashed vertical lines indicate the unconditional mean of the state
displayed on the horizontal axis (under a currency peg if the state is endogenous).




                                                                  33
                               Figure 8: The Distribution of External Debt
                     1.4




                     1.2
                                                                          Optimal Policy


                      1




                     0.8
                                             Currency Peg
           Density




                     0.6




                     0.4




                     0.2




                      0
                           0   1      2       3           4           5           6        7   8
                                                  Net External Debt




6     Debt Dynamics
One consequence of the combination of downward wage rigidity and a currency peg is an
excessive absorption of tradable goods during the crisis (see the right panel in the third row of
figure 5). The excess consumption of tradables (relative to what is optimal) is driven by the
fact that the exchange rate does not depreciate sufficiently in real terms. Under a currency
peg the improvement in the trade balance during the crisis is more modest than under the
optimal exchange rate policy, spurring a more rapid rise in external debt driven by the higher
interest rates (see the two panels at the bottom of figure 5). Indeed, the suboptimal behavior
of the external debt affects the country’s long-run ability to accumulate external financial
obligations. In this section, we explore the relationship between the exchange rate regime
and the level and volatility of external debt.
    Figure 8 displays the unconditional distribution of the external debt in the stochastic
steady state of the currency-peg and optimal exchange rate economies. The debt distribution
associated with the optimal exchange rate economy features a higher mean and is more
concentrated about the mean than the debt distribution associated with the currency-peg
economy. Specifically, the mean debt under the optimal exchange rate policy is 5.8 (or 146


                                                     34
percent of the annual steady-state endowment of traded goods) and the standard deviation is
0.4 (or 10 percent of annual traded endowment). By contrast, in the currency-peg economy
the mean external debt is 3.4 (or 84 percent of annual steady-state tradable output) with a
standard deviation of 0.8 (or 20 percent of annual tradable output).
   These differences in the distribution of the level of external debt are due to the fact that
in the currency-peg economy the price mechanism that induces households to drastically cut
their absorption of tradable goods during periods in which the traded endowment is low and
the interest rate is high malfunctions due to the real rigidity imposed by the combination
of downward nominal wage rigidity and a currency peg. During crises, the currency-peg
economy takes on too much external debt. The resulting path of debt is excessively volatile.
The only way such debt dynamics can be supported in the long-run is by lowering the
average level of external debt. In summary, inefficient short-run volatility acts as a borrowing
constraint and has long-run effects on the debt distribution.
   The prediction that the average level of external debt is higher under the optimal exchange
rate policy than under a currency peg depends, however, on the relative magnitudes of the
intra- and intertemporal elasticities of substitution, ξ and 1/σ, respectively. Our baseline
calibration assumes that the intratemporal elasticity exceeds the intertemporal elasticity,
0.44 versus 0.2. If the intertemporal elasticity of substitution is set at a higher value than
the intratemporal elasticity, it becomes possible that the average level of external debt is
higher in the currency-peg economy than in the optimal exchange rate economy. Figure 9
illustrates this point. It displays the distribution of external debt under the optimal exchange
rate policy and under the currency peg for the case that the intratemporal elasticity of
substitution is smaller than the intertemporal elasticity of substitution, ξ < 1/σ. Specifically,
in producing the figure we set ξ at 0.15 and maintain all other parameters at their baseline
values, including 1/σ = 0.2. Under this calibration, the mean external debt is larger under
a peg than under the optimal exchange rate policy.
   The reason why the difference in mean debt under the peg and the optimal policy depends
on the difference between the intertemporal and intratemporal elasticities of substitution is
that this difference governs the relative response of tradable consumption to disturbances
in the marginal utility of wealth. In appendix C, we show that the elasticity of traded
consumption with respect to the marginal utility of wealth satisfies the following expression:
             
             
                                                       Under the optimal exchange rate policy
             
             
                     −1
             
                 ησ+(1−η) 1ξ
                                                        or when wage rigidity does not bind in a peg
 d ln(cTt )
            =                                                                                          ,
 d ln(λt )   
              
                               −1
              
                 ησ+(1−η) 1ξ +(σ− 1ξ )      1−η        when wage rigidity does bind in a peg
                                          1+ξ 1−α
                                            (  α    )

                                                           35
                                                                                     1
                Figure 9: The Distribution of External Debt when ξ <                 σ
          0.7




          0.6
                                                        Currency Peg, ξ = 0.15


          0.5




          0.4
Density




          0.3

                         Optimal Policy, ξ = 0.15

          0.2




          0.1




           0
           −2       −1         0          1           2           3        4     5   6   7
                                                    Net External Debt




                                                       36
where η ∈ (0, 1) is a measure of the share of tradable consumption in total consumption.
This expression shows that in the special case in which the intratemporal and intertemporal
elasticities of substitution are equal to each other (ξ = 1/σ), the wealth elasticity of traded
consumption is the same under both exchange rate regimes. That is, a given rise in the
marginal utility of wealth, due, for instance to a fall in tradable endowment or a rise in the
world interest rate when households are net external debtors, causes the same proportional
decline in the consumption of tradable goods under a peg and under the optimal exchange
rate policy. However, when the intratemporal elasticity of substitution exceeds the intertem-
poral elasticity (ξ > 1/σ), as is the case in our baseline calibration, then the contraction in
tradable consumption triggered by a given proportional increase in the marginal utility of
wealth is smaller under a peg than under the optimal exchange rate policy. It follows that
in this case, during a crisis, the economy experiences a smaller improvement in the trade
balance and larger accumulation of external debt under the currency peg than it does under
the optimal exchange rate policy. The reverse is true when the intratemporal elasticity is
smaller than the intertemporal one.
    The intuition behind this finding is as follows. One can show that tradable and nontrad-
able goods are gross substitutes in consumption if the intratemporal elasticity of substitution,
ξ, is larger than the intertemporal elasticity of substitution, 1/σ. That is, if ξ > 1/σ, then
traded consumption falls when the relative price of nontradables declines. During a crisis,
the relative price of nontradables falls by much more under the optimal exchange rate regime
than under a currency peg. Therefore, under gross substitutability, traded consumption falls
by more under the optimal exchange rate regime than under the currency peg. This implies,
in turn, that the economy displays a smaller improvement in the trade balance and a larger
deterioration in the external debt position during a crisis under a currency peg than it does
under the optimal exchange rate policy. The reverse is the case if tradables and nontradables
are gross complements (ξ < 1/σ).
    In the special case in which the intra- and intertemporal elasticities of substitution are
equal to each other (ξ = 1/σ), one can show analytically that the stochastic processes of
external debt, dt and consumption of tradables, cTt , are independent of the exchange rate
regime and, in particular, identical under a currency peg and the optimal exchange-rate
policy. In other words, in this special case, the dynamics of dt and cTt are independent of the
presence of downward wage rigidity. We collect this result in the following proposition.

Proposition 2 Suppose ξ = 1/σ. Then the dynamics of dt and cTt are independent of the
exchange-rate regime.

   Proof:    Note that when ξ = 1/σ, we have that condition (6) becomes λt = a(cTt )−1/ξ .


                                              37
Now, consider the following subset of conditions describing aggregate dynamics (4), (6)-
(9), and (15). These conditions can be solved for cTt , dt , λt , and µt independently of the
exchange-rate regime.
    It is worth noting that this proposition does not imply the absence of welfare costs asso-
ciated with currency pegs. For downward wage rigidity in combination with a fixed exchange
rate will continue to cause unemployment and hence lower production and consumption of
nontradable goods when the economy is hit by negative external shocks. The proposition
does say, however, that unemployment in the nontraded sector will not disrupt the allocation
of expenditures in tradable goods.


7    A Demand For Money
We now introduce money in the model. The motivation for allowing for real balances is that
doing so creates a channel through which devaluations may become costly.
   We modify the period utility function as follows:

                                           c1−σ
                                            t   −1      (Mt /Pt )1−δ1 − 1
                       u(ct , Mt /Pt ) =           + δ0                   ,
                                             1−σ             1 − δ1

where Mt denotes domestic nominal money balances held in period t, and Pt denotes the
domestic-currency price of consumption. The household’s sequential budget constraint is
now given by

                                    Mt                  dt+1    Mt−1
               cTt + pt cN
                         t + dt +      ≤ ytT + wt ht +        +      + φt + τt ,
                                    Et                 1 + rt    Et

where τt denotes a transfer received from the government. The optimality condition of the
household with respect to money implies the liquidity preference function
                                                          −1/δ1
                                Mt               it                  σ/δ1
                                   =                                ct      ,
                                Pt          δ0 (1 + it )

where it denotes the nominal interest rate on one-period, domestic-currency-denominated
bonds. In turn, the nominal interest rate must satisfy

                                       λt         λt+1
                                            = βEt      + µt .
                                     1 + it       t+1

All variables in this expression are as defined earlier. The remaining building blocks of the
model are the same as in the baseline formulation developed in section 2. We assume that


                                                  38
the opportunity cost of holding money faced by the household is bounded below by a positive
parameter i close to zero. We cannot impose a strict zero bound on the opportunity cost
of holding money because the above liquidity preference function does not display satiation.
This lower bound could be implemented through Gesell-like taxes. We set i to 0.000625,
which corresponds to 25 basis points per year. Guided by the empirical regularity that the
expenditure elasticity of money demand is close to unity, we set δ1 = σ. Finally, we calibrate
δ0 so that the average money-to-output ratio implied by our currency-peg economy matches
the 7.3 percent value observed in Argentina during the Convertibility plan (1991-2001). This
calibration strategy yields δ0 = 0.000053.
    As before, we compare two exchange-rate regimes. One is a peg and the other is a
full-employment exchange-rate policy. Note that, because of the presence of money, the
full-employment policy is no longer Pareto optimal, since the central bank now has only one
instrument, the rate of devaluation, and two targets, unemployment and the opportunity
cost of holding money. This means that the welfare costs of pegs reported here are lower
bounds, in the sense that the welfare costs of pegs relative to the Pareto optimal policy must
necessarily be at least as large. Finally, we must pick one among the infinite exchange-rate
policies that belong to the family of full-employment exchange-rate regimes. This choice
is inconsequential in the baseline model, because of the absence of money. However, it
does matter in the present monetary economy, because each full-employment regime will in
general be associated with different paths for the opportunity cost of holding money. We
pick the following regime:
                                              wt−1
                                       t = γ         .
                                              Ω(cTt )
Under this full-employment exchange-rate regime gross nominal-wage growth is constant over
time and equal to γ. In this regime, the unconditional median of gross inflation is also given
by γ. This exchange-rate regime exemplifies that the presence of nominal downward wage
rigidity does not imply that a full-employment exchange-rate policy must be inflationary on
average. This point is important for understanding that in general full-employment policies
need not entail a loss of welfare due to higher average levels of inflation. The way the
central bank manages to bring about full employment in a low-inflation environment is by
aggressively devaluing the domestic currency during recessions (see figure 5), and at the same
time revaluing the currency during booms. These revaluations entail no employment costs
because they occur during periods in which the full employment real wage is increasing. So
these revaluations accommodate the efficient increase in real wages while preventing nominal
wage inflation.
   Table 4 displays the welfare cost of a currency peg relative to the full-employment


                                             39
         Table 4: Welfare Costs of Currency        Pegs In A Money-Demand Economy
                  Average Money-to-Output
                  Ratio During Pegs                                Welfare   Cost
                  %                                    δ0         Median     Mean
                  0                                    0          10.4       12.3
                  7.4                                  0.000053   10.5       12.5
                  16.1                                 0.0026     10.6       12.6

     Note. The welfare cost of a currency peg is calculated as the percent increase in
     consumption that would make an individual living in the currency-peg economy as
     well off as an individual living in the economy with a full-employment exchange-rate
     policy for a given state of the economy (ytT , rt , dt , wt−1 ).



exchange-rate policy. The main insight from this table is that introducing a demand for
money does not alter the size of the welfare cost of currency pegs in a significant way. The
median welfare cost of a currency peg is 10.5 percent of consumption per period, which is
essentially the same cost as the one obtained in the economy without a demand for money.
The reason for this result is that the full-employment policy need not be associated with
higher average inflation than a currency peg. Indeed, under the full-employment exchange-
rate policy studied here, the average rate of inflation is lower than under the currency peg
(-3.1 versus 0.1 percent per year). As a result, average money holdings are not significantly
different in the two exchange-rate regimes. The last row of the table presents welfare cal-
culations for an economy with a money-to-output ratio that is more than twice as large
as the one observed in the calibration sample (7.4 versus 16.1 percent). We find that the
welfare costs of a currency peg are robust to increasing households preference for liquidity.
The reason for this result is again that the full-employment exchange-rate regime need not
increase the average rate of inflation.


8    Endogenous Labor Supply
We now relax the assumption of an inelastic labor supply schedule. Specifically, we consider
a period-utility specification of the form

                                           c1−σ
                                            t   −1    (h̄ − ht )1−θ − 1
                          U (ct , ht ) =           +ϕ                   ,
                                             1−σ            1−θ

where ϕ, θ, and h̄, are positive parameters, and ct and ht denote, respectively, consumption of
the composite good and hours worked. Under this specification, the household’s optimization


                                                  40
problem features a new efficiency condition of the form

                                        ϕ(h̄ − hst )−θ = wt λt ,

where hst denotes the number of hours supplied to the market, which may exceed the number
of hours actually worked, ht . In addition, conditions (12) and (18) of the baseline economy
are replaced, respectively, by
                                               hst ≥ ht ,

and                                                         
                                                      wt−1
                                 (hst   − ht ) wt − γ              = 0.
                                                       t
All other conditions describing aggregate dynamics are as before. In the present economy,
the variable hst − ht measures the level of involuntary unemployment. We set ϕ = 4.4,
h̄ = 3, and θ = 1.001 or 6. The values of ϕ and h̄ are chosen so that the average level of
employment is about unity, which is the level of full-employment in the baseline economy
with inelastic labor supply. (It is somewhat above unity for θ = 6 and somewhat below
unity for θ = 1.001.) The two values of θ are meant to capture an environment with a
relatively large labor supply elasticity (θ = 1.001, or near logarithmic specification) and
one with relatively low labor supply elasticity (θ = 6). Specifically, business-cycle studies
measure the Frisch labor supply elasticity for preference specifications of the type used here
as (h̄ − ht )/ht /θ evaluated at some average level of employment. In our model, under a peg
this measure of the labor supply elasticity equals 0.3 on average when θ equals 6 and 4 when
θ equals 1.001. (The corresponding values under the optimal policy are 0.2 and 3.)
    Table 3 shows the welfare cost of a currency peg implied by this model specification. The
median welfare cost is 4.5 percent of consumption per period when θ equals 1.001 and 6.8
percent when θ equals 6. These welfare costs continue to be large compared to results in the
related literature. The intuition behind this result is that with a higher labor supply elasticity
wages rise by less during booms, which reduces the required fall during contractions, making
the lower bound constraint on nominal wages less stringent.
   It is worth noting that the welfare costs of currency pegs obtained under endogenous la-
bor supply are likely to be biased downward. The reason is that the preference specification
considered in this section treats voluntary leisure and involuntary leisure (i.e., involuntary
unemployment) as perfect substitutes. There exists an extensive empirical literature on sub-
jective well being when unemployed suggesting that the nonpecuniary costs of unemployment
are substantial (see, Winkelmann and Winkelmann, 1998, and the references cited therein).




                                                  41
9    Production in the Traded Sector
Our baseline model specification assumes that the supply of tradables, ytT , is exogenous.
We now relax this assumption and assume instead that tradables are produced with labor.
Specifically, we assume that
                                                 α
                                    ytT = ezt hTt T ,

where ytT denotes output of tradable goods, hTt denotes labor employed in the traded sector,
and αT ∈ (0, 1) is a parameter. The variable zt is assumed to be exogenous and stochastic.
We interpret zt either as a productivity shock in the traded sector or as a disturbance in
the country’s terms of trade. We assume that, as in the nontraded sector, firms in the
traded sector are perfectly competitive in product and labor markets. Firms choose labor
                                                   α
to maximize profits, which are given by PtT ezt hTt T − Wt hTt . The first-order condition
associated with the firm’s profit maximization problem is
                                                    αT −1
                                   αT PtT ezt hTt            = Wt .                        (26)

Letting hN t denote hours employed in the nontraded sector, total hours worked, denoted by
ht , are given by
                                       ht = hTt + hN
                                                   t .

All other conditions of the model are as in the baseline formulation.
    We assume that zt and rt follow the joint stochastic process given in equation (25), with
zt taking the place of ln ytT . This strategy for calibrating the law of motion of zt results in
a standard deviation of ln ytT of 0.14 under a peg which is slightly above the value in the
baseline model. A more satisfactory approach to calibrating the parameters defining the
process zt would be to construct a time series for total factor productivity in the traded
sector. We do not pursue this avenue here. Following Uribe (1997), we set αT = 0.5. All
other parameters take the values indicated in table 2.
    Table 3 shows that the welfare cost of currency pegs in the present economy is 10.6 percent
of consumption per period on average. It follows that our main finding is robust to allowing
for production in the traded sector. The intuition for why the welfare costs of currency pegs
continue to be large even when the supply of tradables is endogenous, can be illustrated
by considering the adjustment of the economy to negative shocks when the lower bound on
wages is binding. Consider first a negative interest-rate shock (i.e., an increase in rt ). If
the wage rigidity is binding, then, as in the baseline economy, employment in the nontraded
sector falls because of a weaker demand for this type of goods. At the same time, optimality
condition (26) indicates that employment in the traded sector is unchanged, since wages are

                                               42
downwardly rigid and the exchange rate is pegged. This means that the unemployment that
emerges in the nontraded sector will not be absorbed by the traded sector. Consider now
the effect of a deterioration in the terms-of-trade or a negative productivity shock in the
traded sector (i.e., a decline in zt ). Suppose again that the lower bound on nominal wages
is binding. In this case, optimality condition (26) implies that employment in the traded
sector will fall. This is because the product wage is unchanged but the marginal product
of labor falls at any given level of employment. In the nontraded sector, demand declines
because the negative productivity shocks produces a negative income effect. It follows that
the nontraded sector does not absorb the hours lost in the traded sector. On the contrary,
employment in the nontraded sector will also decline due to a weaker demand. It follows that
the introduction of production in the traded sector does not ameliorate the unemployment
problem induced by the combination of nominal downward wage rigidity and a currency peg.
Our results show that this is the case not only qualitatively but also quantitatively.


10       Sensitivity Analysis
In this section, we study how the welfare costs of currency pegs are affected by alternative
parameterizations of the model. In particular, we study the sensitivity of the implied welfare
costs of currency pegs to lower degrees of downward wage rigidity, a higher intertemporal
elasticity of substitution, a higher intratemporal elasticity of substitution, a higher share of
tradables in consumption, and preferences featuring more patient households.


10.1     Lower Downward Nominal Wage Rigidity
The fact that unemployment is the main source of welfare losses associated with currency
pegs suggests that a key parameter determining the magnitude of these welfare losses should
be γ, which governs the degree of downward nominal wage rigidity. Our baseline calibration
(γ = 0.99) implies that nominal wages can fall frictionlessly up to four percent per year. As
argued in section 3, this is a conservative value in the sense that it allows for falls in nominal
wages during crises that are much larger than those observed either in the 2001 Argentine
crisis or the ongoing crisis in peripheral Europe. We now consider alternative values that
allow for nominal wage declines of up to 16 percent per year. Taking into account that the
largest wage decline observed in Argentina in 2001 or in the periphery of Europe since the
onset of the great recession was 1.6 percent per year (Lithuania, see table 1), it follows that
we are considering degrees of wage rigidity substantially lower than those implied by observed
wage movements during recent large contractions. Table 3 shows that the median welfare


                                               43
cost of a currency peg is 4.3 percent for the lowest value of γ considered, 0.96. This welfare
cost, although smaller than the one obtained under our baseline calibration of γ, is still a
large figure compared to existing results in monetary economics. The intuition why currency
pegs are less painful when wages are more downwardly flexible is straightforward. A negative
aggregate demand shock reduces the demand for nontradables which requires a fall in the
real wage rate to avoid unemployment. Under a currency peg this downward adjustment
must be brought about exclusively by a fall in nominal wages. The less downwardly rigid
are nominal wages, the faster is the downward adjustment in both the nominal and the real
wage and therefore the smaller is the resulting level of unemployment.


10.2     Patience
We now consider the case that households are more patient. A reason for considering this
case is that in principle there exist two equivalent strategies to calibrate the subjective
discount factor β. One strategy is to match the mean net external debt to output ratio.
The other is to match the mean trade-balance-to-output ratio. When working with actual
data, however, these two strategies are not equivalent because of the necessity to use finite
samples and because of the presence of measurement error. In our baseline calibration we
adopt the strategy of matching the average debt-to-output ratio in Argentina, which as
mentioned earlier is 26 percent over the calibration period. This approach delivers a trade-
balance-to-output ratio of 3.7 percent which is higher than the value of 2.2 percent observed
over our calibration period. We now calibrate β so as to match this value of the trade-
balance-to-output ratio. This requires raising β from its baseline value of 0.9375 to 0.945.
The raising of the discount factor results in a decline in the average debt-to-output ratio
in the currency peg economy from 26 to 15 percent of annual output. Table 3 shows that
under this alternative calibration the welfare costs of a currency peg relative to the optimal
exchange rate policy has a median of 8 percent and a mean of 9.2 percent of the consumption
stream. These figures are smaller than those corresponding to the baseline calibration but
still extremely large as costs of business cycles go. As discussed earlier, in our economy with
downwardly rigid wages a currency peg acts like a borrowing constraint. This is because a
currency peg induces a more dispersed debt distribution, which requires a lower mean debt
(or higher precautionary savings) to ensure long-run solvency. More patient agents are in
general less negatively affected by a given borrowing limit than are less patient agents. This
explains why the welfare cost of a currency peg under the current calibration is smaller than
under the baseline calibration.




                                              44
10.3     Intratemporal Elasticity of Substitution
An important parameter in our model is ξ measuring the intratemporal elasticity of substitu-
tion between traded and non-traded goods. A reason why this parameter is important in our
model is that the higher is the elasticity of substitution between tradables and nontradables,
the smaller is the real depreciation required to bring about the necessary expenditure switch
away from tradables and towards nontradables in response to negative aggregate demand
shocks. It follows that the higher is ξ the less disruptive is the presence of nominal downward
rigidities in wages for macroeconomic adjustment. We therefore consider a value of ξ that is
twice as large as our baseline value. This value is in line with the one obtained by restricting
the cross-country sample of Stockman and Tesar (1995) to include only developed countries,
(see Akinci 2011). This higher value of ξ is also consistent with the estimates reported in
Ostry and Reinhart (1992) for a panel of Latin American countries. Consistent with our in-
tuition, we find that the average unemployment rate falls from 14 to 11 percent as ξ increases
from its baseline value of 0.44 to 0.88. And the median welfare cost of a currency peg relative
to the optimal exchange rate policy falls from 10.4 to 8.6 percent of the consumption stream.
These figures show that even in an environment in which consumers can substantially more
easily substitute tradables for nontradables, currency pegs continue to be extremely painful.


10.4     Share of Nontradables in Consumption
The inefficiency created by the combination of downward wage rigidity and a fixed exchange
rate manifests itself in underutilization of labor services in the nontraded sector. It is then
of interest to investigate the sensitivity of our findings to reducing the importance of the
nontraded sector. We do so by lowering the parameter 1 − a, which weights the consumption
of nontradables in the aggregator function. Lowering the share of nontradables should reduce
the welfare costs of pegs, the inefficiently low level of nontradable consumption they induce
is given a smaller weight in the utility function. Table 3 reports the welfare cost of currency
pegs for an economy in which a takes the value 0.4 and all other parameters are kept at their
baseline values. Under this calibration the share of traded consumption in total consumption
implied by the model is 43 percent on average. This value is higher than the ones observed
for Argentina and the peripheral European countries shown in table 1. The table shows that
the welfare costs of currency pegs continue to be extremely high even for a small share of
the nontraded sector.




                                              45
10.5     Intertemporal Elasticity of Substitution
We also investigate the sensitivity of our findings to increasing the intertemporal elasticity
of substitution, 1/σ. Specifically, we lower σ from its baseline value of 5 to a value of 2.
This latter value is widely used in emerging-country business-cycle analysis, see Uribe (2011)
and the references cited therein. Raising the intertemporal elasticity of substitution makes
households less risk averse and as a result more willing to assume external debt. Holding all
parameters other than σ constant at their baseline values, the lowering of σ results in debt
distributions (under both the currency peg regime and the optimal exchange rate regime)
that pile up to the left of the natural debt limit. The implied debt-to-output ratios are many
times larger than those observed over our calibration period. For this reason, we adjust the
value of β from its baseline value of 0.9375 to 0.964 to ensure that together with a value of
σ = 2, the currency-peg economy delivers an external debt share in line with that observed
over the calibration period (about 26 percent of annual output). In contrast to the baseline
calibration, under the present calibration the intertemporal elasticity of substitution, 1/σ,
exceeds the intratemporal elasticity, ξ. As a consequence and as suggested in section 6, the
average debt to output ratio is higher in the currency peg economy than in the optimal
exchange rate economy (0.24 versus 0.14, respectively), which represents a reversal of the
predictions obtained under the baseline calibration. Table 3 shows that under this alternative
calibration the welfare costs of currency pegs continue to be extremely high with a median
of 9.9 percent of consumption per period. This figure is slightly smaller than its baseline
counterpart. This is expected because less risk averse agents are more tolerant to economic
fluctuations, and because consumption is more volatile in the currency peg economy than in
the optimal exchange rate policy economy. However, in our model, the bulk of the welfare
losses associated with a currency peg stems not from this second-order source but from the
average unemployment induced by this type of policy, which is a first-order effect. And the
high rate of unemployment induced by a currency peg appears to be robust to changes in
σ. Specifically, when σ takes the value of 2, the average rate of unemployment continues
to be high, above ten percent. Such a high rate of unemployment implies a permanent
loss of nontradable output of about 12 percent per period, which given the weight of 0.74
of nontradable consumption in the aggregator function implies a permanent loss of total
consumption of about 9 percent per period. This loss of consumption is entirely avoided
under the optimal exchange rate policy because in that case the economy is always operating
at full employment.




                                             46
11        A Fiscal Alternative To Devaluations
Many observers have suggested the use of fiscal policy to ease the pains of currency pegs
currently felt in the periphery of the European Union. However, advocates of active fiscal
policy do not speak with a single voice. Some argue that the right medicine for emerging
country members of the European Union is fiscal restraint via tax increases and cuts in public
expenditures. Others hold diametrically opposed views and argue that only widespread
increases in government spending and tax cuts can offer pain relief. Our model suggests
that both of these extreme views are misguided. Instead, the model suggests that the way
to ease the pain of a currency peg by means of fiscal policy is more sophisticated in nature.
Specifically, optimal fiscal policy in the context of a currency peg consists in a time-varying
labor income subsidy that targets industries with high degrees of downward wage rigidity.
It can be shown that in our currency-peg economy the full-employment equilibrium can be
reached by implementing a proportional wage subsidy at the rate τt , where
                                                                      
                                                             ω(cTt )
                                       τt = max       0, 1 −               ,                           (27)
                                                             γwt−1

where ω(cTt ) denotes the full-employment real wage and γwt−1 denotes the real wage that
prevails when the wage rigidity is binding. If the combination of the currency peg and the
downward nominal wage rigidity prevent the real wage from falling to the full-employment
real wage, the subsidy is positive. Otherwise, the subsidy is zero. This subsidy scheme
can be financed in a revenue neutral fashion, by an appropriate proportional tax on any
source of income (labor income, wt ht , tradable income, ytT , profits, φt , or any combination
thereof). We note that these financing schemes work even when the labor supply is elastic.
The reason is that the subsidy is positive only in states of the world in which, in the absence
of the subsidy, households are off their labor supply schedule, or involuntarily unemployed.10
It is clear from equation (27) that the optimal subsidy inherits the stochastic properties of
the optimal devaluation rate studied in previous sections (see equation (21)). Because the
optimal devaluation rate is found to be highly volatile at business-cycle frequency, it follows
that the fiscal alternative presented here may indeed introduce an impractically high level
of volatility in the tax/subsidy regime. This conclusion gives credence to the dictum that
nominal rigidities are best addressed by monetary policy.
 10
      In a more recent contribution, Farhi et al. (2011) expand this idea to other economic environments.




                                                      47
12     Conclusion
In this paper we fill a gap between historical and model-based assessments of the costs
of currency pegs. While the former attribute major macroeconomic failures to currency
pegs, the latter find that their welfare consequences are negligible. Our theoretical approach
is based on a familiar narrative that goes back to Keynes’ (1925) and Friedman’ (1953)
reservations against fixed exchange-rate arrangements. We incorporate this narrative in the
context of a dynamic stochastic model of the open economy amenable to welfare evaluations.
We refocus attention on downward nominal wage rigidity as the central source of monetary
nonneutrality. Our theoretical contribution is to depart from sticky-wage models in the
Calvo-Rotemberg tradition by assuming that employment is not always demand determined.
A novel implication of the model we propose is an endogenous connection between the
amplitude of the business cycle and the average rate of unemployment. This connection
opens the door to large welfare gains from optimal stabilization policy, and therefore has
the potential to bring historical and model-based assessments of the pains of pegs closer
together.
   Using a calibrated version of our model, we find that external crises can be extremely
contractionary when the exchange rate is fixed. Specifically, the model predicts that a large
external shock, defined as a two-standard-deviation collapse in the value of tradable out-
put and a two-standard-deviation increase in the country interest-rate premium, causes a
massive increase in unemployment of about 20 percent of the labor force. This figure is con-
sistent with the unemployment rates observed in the aftermath of recent large contractions in
emerging market economies that followed a fixed exchange rate regime, including Argentina
1998-2001 and the periphery of the European Union (e.g., Latvia, Greece, Portugal, Spain,
and Ireland) post 2008. Furthermore, we find that under a currency peg unemployment is
highly persistent. Our model predicts that even five years after the trough of the crisis the
unemployment rate remains about 7 percentage points above average.
   Our model predicts that currency pegs are costly not only during crises but also over
regular business-cycle fluctuations. We find that the unconditional welfare costs of currency
pegs are enormous. At the median of the distribution of welfare costs, households living
under a currency peg require a ten percent increase in consumption every period to be as
well off as households living in an economy in which the central bank implements the optimal
exchange rate policy. The source of these large welfare costs is primarily that currency pegs
entail high levels of unemployment which affects negatively the supply and ultimately the
domestic absorption of nontradable goods. We find that the welfare costs of currency pegs
are larger than its median of ten percent when the initial state of the economy is characterized


                                              48
by weak fundamentals such as high external debt, high past real wages, high country premia,
or weak terms of trade. These findings shed light on why pressures to abandon the currency
peg emerged with force in Argentina in 2001 and across the emerging-market members of
the European Union in the wake of the great contraction of 2008. Besides being on a fixed
exchange rate, these countries had in common high country premia, high levels of external
debt, weak terms of trade, and a highly unionized labor force that all but prevented nominal
wage cuts.




                                            49
Appendix A: Proof of Proposition 1
Consider a set of stochastic processes {ct , cTt , cN                                       ∞
                                                    t , ht , pt , wt , dt+1 , λt , µt , t }t=0 satisfying
the conditions given in Definition 1 and the exchange rate policy (21). We first show that
ht must equal h̄ at all times. This part of the proof is by contradiction. Suppose ht < h̄ for
some t ≥ 0. Then, by (18) we have that

                                                     γwt−1
                                              wt =         .                                         (28)
                                                      t

Using (21) to eliminate t , implies that wt ≤ ω(cTt ). Using (5), (16), and (20) we can write
this inequality as
                         A2 (cTt , F (ht )) 0          A2 (cTt , F (h̄)) 0
                                            F (h t ) ≤                   F (h̄).
                         A1 (cTt , F (ht ))            A1 (cTt , F (h̄))
Because the left-hand side of this expression is strictly decreasing in ht , we have that ht
must equal h̄, which is a contradiction. We have therefore shown that under the exchange
rate policy given in (21), unemployment is nil at all dates and states. Evaluating (2), (4),
(6)-(9), (14) and (15) at ht = h̄, we obtain

                                                dt+1 ≥ d¯

                                     λt = U 0 (A(cTt , h̄))A1 (cTt , h̄)
                                          λt
                                               = βEt λt+1 + µt
                                        1 + rt
                                               µt ≥ 0,
                                                      ¯ = 0,
                                           µt (dt+1 − d)
                                                             dt+1
                                        cTt + dt = ytT +           ,
                                                            1 + rt
which are precisely the first-order necessary and sufficient conditions associated with the
social planner’s problem consisting in maximizing (24) subject to (4) and (15). The fact
that the first-order conditions of the social planner’s problem are necessary and sufficient
follows directly from the strict concavity of the planner’s objective and the convexity of the
planner’s constraint set.




                                                     50
Appendix B: Numerical Algorithm for Approximating
the Aggregate Dynamics Under a Currency Peg
Define the discretized state as follows:

                                          Y T = {y1T , y2T , . . . , yny
                                                                      T
                                                                         }

                                            R = {r1 , r2 , . . . , rnr }

                                           D = {d1 , d2 , . . . , dnd }

                                         W = {w1 , w2 , . . . , wnw }.

In iteration n, suppose the guess for the solution for the marginal utility of tradable goods
is given by the function Λn , mapping Y T × R × D × W into R. To obtain the next guess
Λn+1 , proceed as follows:
   (1) For a given state (yiT , rj , dk , w`) with i ∈ {1, . . . , ny}, j ∈ {1, . . . , nr}, k ∈ {1, . . . , nd},
` ∈ {1, . . . , nw}, denote the level of debt due next period by ds for s ∈ {1, . . . , nd}.
   (2) Use condition (15) to find the corresponding level of cT as

                                                               ds
                                        cT (ds ) = yiT +            − dk .
                                                             1 + rj

and use condition (20) to determine ω(cT (ds ))

                                                   A2 (cT (ds ), F (h̄)) 0
                                  ω(cT (ds )) =                          F (h̄).
                                                   A1 (cT (ds ), F (h̄))

  (3) If the full-employment wage violates constraint (17) for t = 1, then the current wage
must be equal to γw` . Therefore, we have that the current wage is given by
                                               
                                       w0 = max γw` , ω(cT (ds )) .

Pick the current wage, which will be a state variable for the next period, so that the wage
rate takes on one of the values in the set W . Formally, we have that

                                     qq = argminq∈{1,...,nw} .|wq − w0 |

and then denote the current wage choice given ds as wqq .
    (4) To find the level of employment associated with ds , note that if ω(cT (ds )) ≥ γw` ,


                                                        51
then h(ds ) = h̄, else h(ds ) solves

                                         A2 (cT (ds ), F (h(ds )) 0
                                γw` =                              F (h(ds )).
                                         A1 (cT (ds ), F (h(ds )))

   (5) Find the level of nontraded consumption from (14)

                                            cN (ds ) = F (h(ds )),

the level of consumption of the aggregate good from equation (2) as

                                        c(ds ) = A(cT (ds ), cN (ds )),

and the current value of the marginal utility of consumption of tradables from (6)

                                 λ(ds ) = U 0 (c(ds ))A1 (cT (ds ), cN (ds ))

   (6) Use equation (7) to construct µ as

                                 ii=ny nr
                       λ(ds )     X X
              µ(ds ) =        −β            P rob(yiiT , rjj |yiT , rj )Λn (yiiT , rjj , ds , wqq ).
                       1 + rj     ii=1 jj=1


If µ ≥ 0 and s = nd, then ds is the optimal choice of debt in the current period and s∗ = nd.
In this case:
                               Λn+1 = U 0 (c(dnd ))A1 (cT (dnd ), cN (dnd )).

Else construct µ for all s ∈ {1, . . . , nd−1}. Find the optimal s as s∗ = argmins∈{1,...,nd−1} |µ(ds )|.
   Construct
                       Λn+1 (yiT , rj , dk , w`) = U 0 (c(ds∗ ))A1 (cT (ds∗ ), cN (ds∗ )).

   (7) Keep iterating in this way, until the maximum distance (taken over the ny × nr ×
nd × nw states between Λn+1 and Λn is less than 1e − 8.




                                                       52
Appendix C: The Wealth Elasticity of Traded Consump-
tion
Using the assumed functional forms for preferences and technology, we can write expressions
(2), (5), and (6) , respectively, as
                                                             1/(1−1/ξ)
                          c = a(cT )1−1/ξ + (1 − a)(cN )1−1/ξ            ,
                                                               1/ξ
                                                1−a          cT
                                       p=                                ,
                                                 a           cN
and
                                                      1/ξ
                                         acσ−1/ξ cT         = λ−1 .

Throughout this analysis we drop time subscripts unless otherwise necessary. In the labor
market, the situation depends on the monetary policy in place. Under the optimal policy,
we have full employment at all times, which implies that

                                                   cN = 1.

This expression will also hold under a currency peg in states in which the downward-wage-
rigidity constraint is not binding. By contrast, when this constraint does bind under a
currency peg, the labor market will be in disequilibrium. In this case, we have that pF 0 (h) =
γw−1 and cN = F (h), where w−1 denotes the previous period’s real wage rate. Using the
assumed functional forms, we can combine these two expressions to obtain

                                                (α−1)/α
                                         αpcN               = γw−1

We now proceed to log linearize all of the above expressions around some point c̃T for tradable
consumption and unity or nontraded consumption. We denote with a circumflex accent log
deviations from this reference point. The log-linearized version of the above expressions is

                                        ĉ = ηĉT + (1 − η)ĉN ,

                                               1 T           
                                            p̂ =    ĉ − ĉN
                                               ξ
                                             
                                            1          1
                                         σ−      ĉ + ĉT = −λ̂,
                                            ξ          ξ



                                                     53
and                        
                           
                            0             Under the optimal exchange rate policy
                           
                           
                                          or when wage rigidity does not bind in a peg
                   ĉN =
                           
                           
                           
                           
                                α
                                    p̂     when wage rigidity does bind in a peg
                                1−α

                  a(c̃T )1−1/ξ
where η ≡    a(c̃T )1−1/ξ +(1−a)
                                 .   Solving for ĉT as a function of λ̂, we obtain

             
             
                                                      Under the optimal exchange rate policy
             
             
                    −λ̂
             
                ησ+(1−η) 1ξ
                                                       or when wage rigidity does not bind in a peg
      T
      ĉ =                                                                                            .
             
             
             
                              −λ̂
             
                ησ+(1−η) 1ξ +(σ− 1ξ )     1−η         when wage rigidity does bind in a peg
                                            1−α
                                         1+ξ α (   )




                                                             54
References
Akinci, Özge, “A Note on the Estimation of the Atemporal Elasticity of Substitution Be-
   tween Tradable and Nontradable Goods,” manuscript, Columbia University, February
   2, 2011.
Baldwin, Richard E., and Charles Wyplosz, The Economics of European Integration, London:
   McGraw-Hill, Third Edition, 2009.
Barattieri, Alessandro, Susanto Basu, and Peter Gottschalk, “Some Evidence on the Im-
   portance of Sticky Wages,” NBER working paper 16130, June 2010.
Bernanke, Ben S. and Kevin Carey, “Nominal Wage Stickiness and Aggregate Supply in the
   Great Depression,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 111, August 1996, 853-883.
Blundell, Richard and Thomas H. MaCurdy, “Labor Supply: A Review of Alternative
   Approaches,” in O. Ashenfelter and D. Card (eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol.
   3, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1999, pages 1559-1695.
Burstein, Ariel, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo, “Large Devaluations and the Real
   Exchange Rate,” Journal of Political Economy 113, August 2005, 742-784.
Calvo, Guillermo, “Temporary Stabilization: Predetermined Exchange Rates,” Journal of
   Political Economy 94, December 1986, 1319-1329.
Calvo, Guillermo A. and Carlos A. Végh, “Inflation Stabilization and BOP Crises in De-
   veloping Countries,” in John B. Taylor and Michael D. Woodford, Eds., Handbook of
   Macroeconomics, Vol. C , North Holland, 1999, 1531-1614.
Eichengreen, Barry, Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great Depression, 1919-39,
   Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1992.
Eichengreen, Barry, Ricardo Hausmann, and Hugo Panizza, “The Pain of Original Sin,”
   in Eichengreen, Barry and Ricardo Hausmann, eds., Other People’s Money: Debt De-
   nomination and Financial Instability in Emerging Market Economies, The University of
   Chicago Press, 2005, 13-47.
Eichengreen, Barry and Jeffrey Sachs, “Exchange Rates and Economic Recovery in the
   1930s,” The Journal of Economic History 45, December 1985, 925-946.
Farhi, E, G. Gopinath, and O. Itskhoki, “Fiscal Devaluations,” Harvard University, 2011.
Frankel, Jeffrey, “Monetary Policy in Emerging Markets,” in Benjamin M. Friedman and
   Michael Woodford, eds., Handbook of Monetary Economics, Volume 3B, North Holland,
   2011, 1439-1520.
Friedman, Milton, “The Case For Flexible Exchange Rates,” in Milton Friedman, Ed.,
    Essays in Positive Economics, Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1953, 157-
   203.


                                          55
Galı́, Jordi, and Tommaso Monacelli, “Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate Volatility in a
   Small Open Economy,” The Review of Economic Studies 72, July 2005, 707-734.
González Rozada, Martı́n, Pablo Andrés Neumeyer, Alejandra Clemente, Diego Luciano
   Sasson, and Nicholas Trachter, “The Elasticity of Substitution in Demand for Non-
   Tradable Goods in Latin America: The Case of Argentina,” Inter-American Development
   Bank, Research Network Working paper #R-485, August 2004.
Gottschalk, Peter, “Downward Nominal-Wage Flexibility: Real or Measurement Error?,”
   The Review of Economic and Statistics 87, August 2005, 556-568.
Holden, Steinar and Fredrik Wulfsberg, “Downward Nominal Wage Rigidity in the OECD,”
   The B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics 8, 2008, Article 15.
Justiniano, Alejandro, Giorgio Primiceri, and Andrea Tambalotti, “Investment Shocks and
   Business Cycles,” Journal of Monetary Economics 57, March 2010, 132-145.
Kaur, Supreet, “Nominal Wage Rigidity in Village Labor Markets,” mimeograph, Harvard
   University, January 2012.
Keynes, John Maynard (1925), “The Economic Consequences of Mr. Churchill,” in Donald
   Moggridge Ed., The Collected Writings of John Maynard Keynes, Vol. IX, 1972, New
   York: St. Martin’s Press, 207-230.
Kollmann, Robert, “Monetary policy rules in the open economy: effects on welfare and
   business cycles,” Journal of Monetary Economics 49, July 2002, 989-1015.
Lane, Philip R., and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, “The external wealth of nations mark II:
   Revised and extended estimates of foreign assets and liabilities, 1970-2004,” Journal of
   International Economics, 73, November 2007, 223-250.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr, Models of Business Cycles, Cambridge MA: Basil Blackwell, 1987.
Mendoza, Enrique, “The Terms of Trade, the Real Exchange Rate, and Economic Fluctua-
  tions,” International Economic Review 36, February 1995, 101-137.
Mongelli, Francesco P., “What Is European Economic and Monetary Union Telling Us About
   the Properties of Optimum Currency Areas?,” Journal of Common Market Studies 43,
   September 2005, 607-635.
Mundell, Robert A., “A Theory of Optimum Currency Areas,” American Economic Review
   51, September 1961, 657-665.
Neumeyer, Pablo A. and Fabrizio Perri, “Business Cycles in Emerging Markets: The Role
   of Interest Rates,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 52, March 2005, 345-380.
Olivei, Giovanni, and Silvana Tenreyro, “The Timing of Monetary Policy Shocks,” The
   American Economic Review 97, June 2007, 636-663.
Olivei, Giovanni, and Silvana Tenreyro, “Wage-Setting Patterns and Monetary Policy: In-
   ternational Evidence,” Journal of Monetary Economics 57, October 2010, 785-802.


                                            56
Ostry, Jonathan D. and Carmen M. Reinhart, “Private Saving and Terms of Trade Shocks:
   Evidence from Developing Countries,” IMF Staff Papers, September 1992, 495-517.
Reinhart, Carmen M., and Carlos A. Végh, “Nominal interest rates, consumption booms,
   and lack of credibility: A quantitative examination,” Journal of Development Economics
   46, April 1995, 357-378.
Smets, Frank and Raf Wouters, “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A Bayesian
   DSGE Approach,” American Economic Review 97, June 2007, 586-606.
Stockman, Alan C., and Linda L. Tesar, “Tastes and Technology in a Two-Country Model
   of the Business Cycle: Explaining International Comovements,” American Economic
   Review 85, March 1995, 168-185.
Uribe, Martı́n, “Exchange-Rate-Based Inflation Stabilization: The Initial Real Effects of
   Credible Plans,” Journal of Monetary Economics 39, June 1997, 197-221.
Uribe, Martı́n, “Open Economy Macroeconomics,” manuscript, Columbia University,
   2011.
Uribe, Martı́n and Z. Vivian Yue, “Country Spreads and Emerging Countries: Who Drives
  Whom?,” Journal of International Economics 69, June 2006, 6-36.
Winkelmann, Liliana and Rainer Winkelmann, “Why are the Unemployed So Unhappy?
  Evidence from Panel Data,” Economica 65, February 1998, 1-15.




                                           57
