NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE AMERICAN FAMILY IN BLACK AND WHITE:
A POST-RACIAL STRATEGY FOR IMPROVING SKILLS TO PROMOTE EQUALITY
James J. Heckman
Working Paper 16841
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16841

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2011

This research was supported by the American Bar Foundation, NICHD R01 HD065072, NICHD R01
HD054702, the Institute for New Economic Thinking (INET), the J.B. & M.K. Pritzker Family Foundation,
the Buffett Early Childhood Fund, the MacArthur Foundation, the Spencer Foundation and an anonymous
foundation. The views expressed here are those of the author and not necessarily those of the funders.
I thank Steve Durlauf, Miriam Gensowski, Lynne Pettler Heckman, Tim Kautz, Nick Mader, Seong
Hyeok Moon, Rich Neimand, Bob Pollak, and Paul Tough for their very helpful comments on drafts
of the paper. Molly Schnell gave devoted research assistance and helpful commentary. I thank Nick
Mader and Seong Moon for their help in producing some of the supporting materials for this paper.
Supporting material for this paper is at the website http://jenni.uchicago.edu/understanding_b-w_gap/.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by James J. Heckman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

The American Family in Black and White: A Post-Racial Strategy for Improving Skills to
Promote Equality
James J. Heckman
NBER Working Paper No. 16841
March 2011
JEL No. J15,J24
ABSTRACT
In contemporary America, racial gaps in achievement are primarily due to gaps in skills. Skill gaps
emerge early before children enter school. Families are major producers of those skills. Inequality
in performance in school is strongly linked to inequality in family environments. Schools do little
to reduce or enlarge the gaps in skills that are present when children enter school. Parenting matters,
and the true measure of child advantage and disadvantage is the quality of parenting received. A growing
fraction of American children across all race and ethnic groups is being raised in dysfunctional families.
Investment in the early lives of children in disadvantaged families will help close achievement gaps.
America currently relies too much on schools and adolescent remediation strategies to solve problems
that start in the preschool years. Prevention is likely to be more cost-effective than remediation. Voluntary,
culturally sensitive support for parenting is a politically and economically palatable strategy that addresses
problems common to all racial and ethnic groups.

James J. Heckman
Department of Economics
The University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and University College Dublin and IZA
and also NBER
jjh@uchicago.edu

An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w16841

3
Disparities between Blacks and Whites are persistent features of American society. On many
measures, Blacks as a group perform worse than Whites and the trends are not encouraging.
These disparities are continuing reminders of America's troubled history of racial discrimination.
They clash with American beliefs about equality, opportunity and social mobility.
What makes discussion of these disparities so painful is that in the past, American public
policy has been so wrong. The institution of slavery, the all-too-slow dismantling of segregation
in the South and discriminatory practices elsewhere, prevented ready acceptance of Blacks into
the mainstream of American society. When America was finally goaded into abolishing statesanctioned discrimination by the activities of the Civil Rights Movement, integration of African
Americans into the economy accelerated. There was a surge in Black economic status in the late
1960s and early 1970s. Progress was especially rapid in the previously segregated South.1
Some 40 years later, despite the visible success of an elite group within the Black
population, the economic and social progress of a large segment of African Americans has been
painfully slow. If anything, the official statistics overstate the progress of African males.2 The
success of the Civil Rights Movement in reversing discrimination on the books gave rise to the
hope that active government policy in the economy, the schools, and in the courts could produce
full equality in the larger society.
Why have these hopes not been realized? What can we learn from this stalled progress
and how should public policy respond? Setting aside preconceived notions and examining the
body of evidence amassed since 1960, are the factors producing their slow economic and social
progress unique to African Americans or are they the consequence of common forces that
operate equally on all Americans?

4
Black America has a unique history and now faces unique challenges. Nonetheless, there
is great wisdom in the insight of William Julius Wilson3 that the first order problems facing
African Americans in contemporary society are shared by many other groups. In particular, the
shortfalls in achievement in the 21st century stem from shortfalls in skills, not in the rewards
accorded those skills. Skills include education and on the job training as well as cognitive and
personality traits.
Unskilled persons of all races and ethnicities are challenged by common global economic
forces that cannot easily be reversed. Secular trends in trade and technology have boosted the
demand for skilled labor and the supply of skills has not kept pace. The percentage of
Americans graduating college is the highest in history. At the same time, the high school
dropout rate, properly counted, has increased in the past 40 years.4 American society is dividing
into affluent haves and disadvantaged have nots, with skills primarily determining advantage and
disadvantage. For Americans of all racial and ethnic groups, the supply of skills has responded
slowly to shifts in market demand. The response is particularly slow for African American
males.
President Lyndon Johnson recognized the importance of skills when he launched the War
on Poverty around the same time he promoted the 1964 Civil Rights Act. Our understanding of
the skills that are important and the strategies that are effective in fostering them has improved
greatly since that time. Many of the programs and policies designed to boost skills that were
launched in the 1960s War on Poverty failed.5 However, people continue to advocate many of
these unsuccessful approaches, especially those most concerned about closing racial gaps. Just
as we need to rethink the sources of racial inequality in contemporary American society, we need
to rethink our strategies for promoting skills.

5
Public policy to promote skills has to reckon with three essential truths distilled from a
large body of research conducted in the wake of the War on Poverty. First, the skills needed for
success in life are multiple in nature. Success requires more than cognition and smarts. Soft
skills are important. Conscientiousness, perseverance, sociability, and other character traits
matter a lot, even though they are largely neglected in devising policies to reduce inequality.
Second, skill formation is a dynamic, synergistic process. Skills beget skills. They cross
foster and promote each other. A perseverant child open to experience learns more. Early
success fosters later success. Advantages cumulate. Young children are flexible and adaptable
in ways that adolescents and adults are not. It is much easier to prevent deficits from arising in
the early years than to remediate them later. The War on Poverty took a shotgun, scattershot,
approach to fostering the skills of disadvantaged persons of all ages and stages of development.
Its policies did not target the years when interventions to promote skills are most effective.
Third, families play an essential role in shaping the skills of their children. Skill
formation starts in the womb. The early years of a child’s life before the child enters school lay
the foundations for all that follows. Large gaps in abilities between the advantaged and the
disadvantaged open up early before children enter school. Unequal as they are, American
schools do little to widen or narrow these gaps. The family plants and nourishes the seed that
grows into the successful student and adult. Families in jeopardy produce children in jeopardy
who often grow into adults who fail to realize their potential. We know much more about the
powerful role of the family in shaping adult skills than we did in the 1960s.
Across all race and ethnic groups, the American family is under strain.6 This fact has
substantial implications for the skills of the next generation because of the crucial role families
play in shaping the early lives of children. Currently, over 40% of all American children are

6
born out of wedlock and more than 12% of all children live in families where the mother has
never married. Such families provide fewer financial and parenting resources for child
development. It is well documented that the children of lone parent families perform worse in
life on many outcomes.7 Any effective policy to foster skills has to recognize the importance of
the family, the mechanisms through which families create child skills and the stress under which
many families operate.
When the Moynihan report on the state of the African American family was written,
roughly 26% of all African American children were born out of wedlock.8 The figure is now
72%. A venomous reception greeted Moynihan’s analysis. He was falsely charged with
“blaming the victim” because he pointed out the adverse consequences of out of wedlock birth
for children. For years it was politically incorrect to discuss the family as a contributor to Black
disparity. Fortunately, and due in no small part to the writings of William Julius Wilson, it is
now possible to have honest discussions of this delicate issue.9
Moynihan used strong language and focused exclusive attention on “the pathology of the
Negro family,” an unfortunate choice of words that obscured an important insight. It is now
recognized that the warnings raised by Moynihan apply more generally to all American families.
Dysfunctional families are on the rise in many quarters of American society. They often produce
dysfunctional children. They are major contributors to inequality in contemporary society.
Understanding that in 2011 the problems facing many African Americans are also the
problems facing many other Americans, reframes the policy discussion and helps us move past
traditional flash points. Many American children across all races and ethnicities are in the same
sinking boat.

7
Policies that recognize the importance of the early years, the central role of the family in
producing skills, and the importance of skills other than those measured by achievement tests are
likely to be far more effective than current school-based strategies and adolescent remediation
programs. Policies based on these three essential truths prevent, rather than remediate, problems.
They bolster schools by assisting families in creating and supporting successful students. They
relieve the burden on other social institutions by creating more capable and achievementmotivated youth.
Strategies that address inequality by recognizing the common problems facing all
Americans shift the dialogue about disparity beyond racial boundaries. Such strategies are much
more likely to gain widespread political support than race-based policies.
We need to learn from the ineffective programs launched by the War on Poverty so that
we can implement effective programs that recognize the powerful role of the family and the early
years in shaping the skills that matter. In an era of massive government deficits at all levels,
strategies for promoting skills must be cost-effective. They need to harness all of the resources
in the private sector to promote skills, including the love of mothers for their children.
This essay proceeds as follows. I first summarize a substantial body of evidence that
shows that discrimination in the labor market is no longer a first order cause of racial disparity. I
then discuss the skill gap: which skills matter and the important role that the family plays in
producing those skills. I then consider the consequences of adverse trends in American families
that retard skill formation and create widening inequality between the advantaged and
disadvantaged. Effective policies to supplement the resources of disadvantaged families are
proposed. The true measure of child poverty is parenting, and an effective skills policy bolsters
the parenting resources of the disadvantaged.

8

Overt Discrimination is No Longer a First Order Problem in American
Society
Discrimination exists and should be eliminated. The evidence suggests, however, that
discrimination in the reward to skills is not the primary driver of the achievement gap in
contemporary America. At this moment, inequality in skills is the first order problem.
The skills persons bring to the market, to school and to other quarters of society,
determine their success. So do the rewards to those skills. In the labor market, wages are the
rewards to skills. One group can have lower wages than another because payments per unit skill
are lower, because their skills are lower or because both factors operate. What is the relative
importance of each factor? Recent research addresses this question.
The columns labeled “actual” in Table 1 show the percentage shortfalls in hourly wages
of all employed Blacks and Hispanics compared to the wages of all employed Whites. To gauge
if disparity in wages is a uniquely African American experience, I compare their shortfalls with
those of Hispanics. A negative number denotes a shortfall. Black males earn 25% less than
White males. Hispanic males earn 15% less than White males. The corresponding figures for
females are 17% lower wages for Blacks and 7% lower wages for Hispanics. The gaps in annual
earnings are generally larger because minorities tend to be employed fewer hours.10 These gaps
are large and statistically significant, that is, they are not likely to arise solely by chance.

9
Table 1. Shortfalls in Hourly Wages by Age for Blacks and Hispanics in the Last 20 Years:
Actual Disparity and Adjusted for Ability

Black
Hispanic

Raw
-25%
-15%

Males
Adjusted
-6%
3%

Females
Raw
Adjusted
-17%
12%
-7%
17%



Denotes not statistically significant from zero, i.e. adjusted gap is likely to arise
from chance.
Source: Author's calculations from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth. For
details, see the web appendix (http://jenni.uchicago.edu/understanding_b-w_gap/).

This pattern of disparity is replicated in many other measures of social and economic
achievement: schooling, health, incarceration, occupational success.11 Blacks and Hispanics
have worse outcomes than Whites in American society. Furthermore, Blacks on average fare
worse than Hispanics.
Are these disparities due to pervasive labor market discrimination or to gaps in skills?
These two interpretations of the evidence in Table 1 (and their counterparts for other outcomes,
presented in the web appendix) have profoundly different implications for public policy. If
persons of identical skill are treated differently in the market on the basis of race or ethnicity, a
more vigorous enforcement of civil rights and affirmative action policies would be warranted. If,
on the other hand, the gaps are due to the skills that people bring to the labor market, then
policies that foster skills should be emphasized.
To resolve this issue, I adjust adult wages by scores on scholastic ability tests measured
in the teenage years.12 (See the columns labeled “adjusted” in Table 1.) After adjustment, the
gaps substantially diminish for Black males and are essentially zero for Hispanic males. The
gaps actually reverse for females—that is, adjusting for their ability, minority females earn more
than their White counterparts. (A positive number means that on average the ability-adjusted
wages of minorities are higher than those of Whites.)

10
There are gaps in educational attainment as well. High school dropout rates are higher
for minorities and a smaller proportion of them attend and graduate college. See the evidence in
Table 2. In this table, the proportion of Blacks entering college is 12 points lower than that of
Whites. For Hispanics, the figure is 14 points.
Table 2. Differences Between College Entry Proportions of Minorities and Whites (mid1990s)
Black-White

Hispanic-White

Actual

-.12

-.14

Adjusted

.16

.15

Source: Cameron and Heckman (2001).13

Adjusting for their differences in scholastic ability with the same measure of scholastic ability
used to adjust wages in Table 1, Blacks are 16 points more likely to go to college and Hispanics
are 15 points more likely. After accounting for differences in adolescent ability, family income
in the college going years and tuition costs play only minor roles in explaining the gaps.14
Any serious accounting of economic and social disparities must reckon with the
importance of skills in American society.15 Saying this does not deny the validity of a variety of
studies that show discriminatory inclinations in the labor market by firms. America is not yet a
color blind society. However, discrimination at the individual level is different from
discrimination at the group level, although these concepts are often confused.
Racial discrimination is present if an otherwise identical person is treated differently by
virtue of that person's race, and race has no direct effect on productivity. Audit pair studies
identify racial discrimination in sampled firms by sending auditors with equal qualifications of

11
different races and ethnicities to apply for jobs. They show evidence of pervasive
discrimination.16
Finding discrimination by race or gender at a randomly selected firm does not provide an
accurate assessment of the discrimination that takes place in realized market transactions.17
People sort in the labor market. Minorities avoid bigots and are hired by the less-bigoted firms.
Measured wages reflect this sorting. The impact of market discrimination on wages is not
determined by the most discriminatory participants in the market, or even by the average level of
discrimination among firms, but rather by the level of discrimination at the firms where ethnic
minorities or women actually end up working. Numerous studies that document discrimination
by audit pair methods do not detect the margin at which market transactions actually occur.
Thus there is no conflict between the discrimination reported in numerous audit studies
and the small gap in ability-adjusted wages. Blacks constitute roughly 12% of the U.S.
population. If 12% or more of the jobs are at nondiscriminating or slightly discriminating firms,
the contribution of discrimination to overall wage gaps would be small.
This is not to say that minorities do not face unfair situations regarding bigotry or to
downplay the real costs of locating nondiscriminating employers. But unequal reward to skills is
not the first order explanation for observed gaps in racial achievement in contemporary
American society. Any serious attack on the problem of racial and ethnic disparity in American
society has to address disparity in skills.18

12

Gaps in Skills
The data reveal an uncomfortable fact. Minority abilities as a group are generally lower than
those of White abilities. The gap is quite pronounced for the measure of scholastic ability used
to adjust wages and schooling in Tables 1 and 2.19
One response to racial and ethnic disparities in test scores is that the tests are culturally
biased. However, a large literature refutes such claims.20 The tests used to make the adjustments
in Table 1 predict performance in a number of activities for all race and ethnic groups.
The test scores reflect in part the differences in the years of schooling attained at the time
people take the test. Minorities generally have lower levels of schooling when they take the test
and hence get lower test scores. Accounting for this disparity does not change the main message
of Table 1—that it is gaps in skills not gaps in payments to skills that determine the lion’s share
of racial wage disparity.21
It is sometimes claimed that expectations of discrimination in the labor market
substantially reduce the educational aspirations of African American parents for their children
and of the children for themselves. The evidence shows otherwise.22
Some have argued that a large portion of the gap in test scores between minorities and
Whites is due to “stereotype threat.” Convincing evidence shows that minority students who are
told that the tests they are taking are being used to compare the abilities of minorities with those
of Whites perform worse on such tests compared to tests administered without such framing.23
The test used to produce the evidence in Tables 1 and 2 does not frame the exam in the
way that produces stereotype threat. In addition, the quantitative importance of the stereotype
threat in accounting for test score gaps is slight.24 The test score gaps between minorities and

13
majorities are real and they measure something that matters for performance in economic and
social life, although by no means do they estimate all that is important.

Gaps in Soft Skills
Most discussions of racial and ethnic achievement gaps focus on measures of scholastic ability.
Indeed, for many analysts, the achievement gap is only about differences in scores on tests of
scholastic ability. This emphasis reflects a broad consensus in American society about the value
of achievement tests that are used to monitor the success and failure of schools and students in
schools. The No Child Left Behind program has pushed this focus to what some have described
as a mania. The program has created a culture of teaching to the test in schools, with consequent
neglect of the subjects and byproducts of schooling that are not tested.25
An emerging body of evidence shows that, as is intuitively obvious and commonsensical,
more than book learning, or the smarts measured by achievement tests, is required for success in
life.26 As Woody Allen put it: “Eighty percent of success is showing up.”27 While the cognitive
skills measured by achievement tests are powerful predictors of life success, so are socioemotional skills—sometimes called “soft skills” or character traits. These involve motivation,
sociability (the ability to work with and cooperate with others), attention, self regulation, self
esteem, the ability to defer gratification and the like. Good schools and functional families
produce soft skills as well as cognitive skills.28 For many outcomes, soft skills are as predictive,
if not more predictive, of schooling, wages, participation in crime and participation in healthy
behaviors as cognitive skills.29 There is evidence that disadvantaged children of all race groups
have lower levels of soft skills.30

14
The Early Emergence of Skill Gaps
Gaps in skills between the advantaged and the disadvantaged emerge at early ages and persist.
Figure 1 shows achievement scores by age for White children classified by their mother’s
education, a measure of the social advantage of the child. More educated mothers marry more
educated men, have access to more financial resources for their children, and provide their
children with nurturing and supportive environments than do less educated women.31
Figure 1. Average Achievement Test Scores of Children by Age by Maternal Education

Scores are reported in standardized units (they are transformed to “z” scores, i.e., normalized scores with unit
variance.).32

There are two noteworthy features of this figure. First, gaps in achievement test scores
by social background of the child are substantial. The test score gap between more educated
Whites and less educated Whites is about the same as the gap in the test scores between Blacks
and Whites. Second, the gaps arise early and persist. Schools do little to budge these gaps even
though the quality of schooling attended varies greatly across social classes.33 Much evidence

15
tells the same story as Figure 1. Gaps in test scores classified by social and economic status of
the family emerge at early ages, before schooling starts, and they persist.34 Similar gaps emerge
and persist in indices of soft skills classified by social and economic status.35 Again, schooling
does little to widen or narrow these gaps.36

Biology and Genetics
Genetic determinists would argue that heritability of genes explains the performance of children
and the environments provided to them by their parents. They would interpret Figure 1 as
showing the power of genes in perpetuating inequality across the generations.
In The Bell Curve, Richard Herrnstein and Charles Murray implicitly attribute BlackWhite gaps in scholastic achievement test scores to genetic differences between Blacks and
Whites. Their book raised a firestorm of criticism that, ironically, has been successful in
discrediting the genetic explanation as the sole or even main source of Black-White disparity.37
The standard estimate of heritability in behavioral genetics is 50%.38 That is, 50% of the
variability across persons in measured behaviors is estimated to be due to genes inherited from
parents. Genes do not fully determine life outcomes. Neither do environments. Extreme claims
about genetic determinism are clearly at odds with the evidence. So are extreme claims about
environmental influences.
A striking example of the power of culture and environment is the gap in achievement
test scores between genetically very similar Ashkenazi and Sephardic Jews in Israel. They are
roughly 2/3 of the gap in measured achievement between Blacks and Whites.39 The results from
the intervention analyses discussed below strengthen the conclusion that environments shape
outcomes and that they can be favorably improved.

16
Schooling raises the scores on achievement tests, which are tests that measure acquired
knowledge along with “pure ability.” Herrnstein and Murray used such an achievement test to
measure intelligence.40 In addition, personality traits account for a substantial portion of the
variability in the test score they used (which is the test score used in the analyses of Tables 1 and
2).41 Furthermore, interventions can enhance these traits.
The lessons of modern genetics are more subtle. The Nature vs. Nurture debate is over.42
Environmental conditions affect gene expression. Substantial evidence shows that early adversity
affects biology and human development. Disadvantage literally gets under the skin and serves to
shape the biology of disadvantaged children.43
The gene expression of genetically identical (monozygotic) twins has been studied.
Environmental conditions trigger gene expression.44 Early environments are especially
important. By age three, and certainly by age 50, the genetic expressions of “identical” twins
differ as a result of their separate life experiences. This produces diverse behavioral and life
outcomes within twin pairs.45
One study of gene-environment interactions shows that a variant of the MAOA gene
predicts male conduct disorder and violence. However, the variant of the gene is most strongly
expressed when child-rearing environments are adverse. Many other such gene–environment
interactions have been documented.46 The heritability of traits is substantially modified by the
environment in which a child is raised. Children from less advantaged environments display
diminished heritability of traits (30% versus the standard 50% in behavioral genetics).47
Recent research establishes the validity of a form of Lamarckian evolution. Adversity is
partly heritable. The adversity of the mother affects the gene expression of the child. Early
environmental influences are especially important.48,49 History gets embedded in the expression

17
of our genes. Failing to address early disadvantage produces a biological legacy that persists
over generations.50

How Best to Foster Skills
What are the best ways to promote skills and reduce achievement gaps? Is it fixing schools? Is it
supplementing the resources of families? It is both but with proper timing and measure. In the
current fiscal climate, we cannot afford to duplicate the ineffective programs of the War on
Poverty and try to do everything. Prioritization is essential. Bad schools should be improved,
but supplementing the parenting resources of disadvantaged families is an effective and less
commonly understood way to improve educational outcomes.
One year after the Moynihan report circulated, the eminent sociologist James Coleman
and his colleagues51 produced a study that challenged a central premise of American policy.
The report showed that families and not the attributes of schools, the focus of much current
public policy, determined the success of children in schools as measured by their performance on
achievement tests.
After 40 years, the wisdom of Coleman and Moynihan has not yet been incorporated into
American public policy. Yet, their message is clear. Family matters, American families are in
trouble, and families are the main drivers of the success of children in schools.
At the present time, our social policy for fostering the skills of children largely focuses on
improving schools. This strategy is politically palatable because it avoids the charge of “blaming
the victim” and avoids any hint of intrusion into the sanctity of the family—a deeply held
American value. At the same time, a strictly school-based policy ignores the evidence about the
inequality present when children enter school.52 School-based policy does not attack skill gaps
at their source—the lack of family resources for effective early childhood development.

18
The evidence on the success of school reforms is at best mixed.53 For example, not all
charter schools are more effective than public schools. The latest evaluations show that 20% are
better; 20% are worse and most—60%—about the same.54 Moreover, parental involvement and
encouragement appear to be essential ingredients of successful charters.
Surely we can and should improve our schools. But, in light of the evidence from the
Coleman Report and a vast body of scholarly literature that arose from that study, improving the
schools by hiring better teachers, monitoring their performance, reducing classroom sizes, and
improving access to the Internet is unlikely to be enough to eliminate gaps, although much recent
public policy and philanthropic activity is predicated on that assumption. Schools work with
what parents bring them and they are more successful if parents support them.
Part of the hesitation in adopting any family policy is that we do not fully understand all
of the mechanisms of family influence. How do families produce advantage and disadvantage
across the generations? Research is active in this area. Much remains to be known. However,
we know for certain that parents do a lot more than pass on their genes, and good parenting
matters a lot.

Family Environments for All American Children Have Worsened
By many measures, family environments have worsened for children of all race and ethnic
groups, although the severity of the problem differs greatly among groups. Figure 2 shows that
in 2010 almost 30% of all American children live with a single parent. The greatest source of
growth in the past 30 years has been in the category “never married.” Numerous studies in
economics, demography and sociology confirm Moynihan’s concern that the child rearing
environments of children in single parent families are compromised and with them child
outcomes.55

19
Figure 2. Percent of Children Under 18 Living with One Parent, By Marital Status of the
Parent

Source: Author’s tabulations.

The Consequences of Early Adversity
The central role of the family in producing child skills and in forming character has been
recognized since time immemorial. American public policy has to shift to acknowledge that the
core skills needed for success in life are formed before children enter school. The main lesson
of Figure 1—that gaps in child test scores open up early and persist and that schools contribute
little to these gaps—needs to be acted on.
Corresponding to gaps in performance, a gap has emerged between the environments of
children of more educated women and the environments of children of less educated women.
Sara McLanahan refers to this as the “Great Divide” and notes that the children of the
advantaged and of the disadvantaged face “Diverging Destinies.”56

20
Fewer than ten percent of college educated women bear children out of wedlock. More
educated women marry later and marry more educated men. They work more. They have more
resources, have fewer children, and provide much richer child rearing environments that produce
dramatic differences in a child’s vocabulary, intellectual performance, nurturance, and
discipline.57 These advantages are especially pronounced for children of two parent stable
marriages.58 Children of such marriages appear to be at a major advantage compared to children
from other unions.
Even though they work more than less educated women, college-educated mothers
devote more time to child rearing than less-educated mothers, especially in providing child
enrichment activities.59 They spend more time reading to children and less time watching
television with them.
Disadvantaged mothers, as a group, talk less to their children and are less likely to read to
them daily. Exposure to this type of parenting leads to substantial differences in the verbal skills
of disadvantaged children when they start school.60 Disadvantaged mothers encourage their
children less and tend to adopt harsher parenting styles. Disadvantaged parents tend to be less
engaged with their children’s school work.61 The environments provided by teenage mothers are
particularly adverse.62 Fetal alcohol ingestion alone, which is more frequent with teenage and
less educated mothers, appears to have substantial deleterious consequences on adult outcomes.63
A central premise of Geoffrey Canada’s much discussed Harlem Children’s Zone project, and
especially his Baby College, is that parental engagement from the earliest years is an essential
aspect of creating success for disadvantaged children.64
Child poverty is not solely or even mainly about access to financial resources.65
Johnson’s War on Poverty attempted to remediate financial poverty, but neglected other

21
important factors. An overwhelming body of evidence suggests that parenting plays a crucial
role—what parents do and do not do; how they interact with and supplement the lives of their
children, especially their early lives. The true measure of child affluence and poverty is the
quality of parenting. A lone mother living in financial poverty can create a stimulating early
environment for her child.66

Supplement Disadvantaged Families, Don’t Blame Them
How to best aid struggling families? How to produce a cost-effective child skill formation policy
that recognizes the trends affecting many American families? Many great minds over the ages
have recognized that the family is a major source of social inequality. They have proposed
replacing the family to reduce inequality. That policy has been tried with disastrous
consequences.67 There is no good substitute for a mother’s love and care.
Public policy needs to be reformulated to recognize the dynamics of skill formation—the
biology and neuroscience that shows that skills beget skills; that success breeds success; that
disadvantage gets embodied into the biology of the child and retards the development of children
in terms of their health, character, and smarts.
While we do not yet know all of the mechanisms through which families influence their
children, we know enough to suggest the broad contours of an effective child development
strategy. Supplementing the early years of disadvantaged children addresses a major source of
inequality. Many programs that supplement the child rearing resources of families are effective.
While much remains to be known, much is also known.
For example, the Perry preschool program targeted disadvantaged, subnormal IQ African
American preschoolers in a city just outside Detroit.68 For two years, the program taught
children to plan, execute and evaluate daily projects in a structured setting. It fostered social

22
skills. There were weekly home visits to encourage parenting. The Perry Program was
evaluated using random assignment with long-term follow-up for 40 years. Rates of return are 710% per annum—higher than the return on equity over the post-war period 1945-2008 and
before the recent market meltdown.69 The Perry program did not boost the IQs of participants.
It worked by fostering soft skills.70
These and other successful child development programs work because they start early.
Benefits include enhanced school readiness, and reduced burdens on the schools for special
education. They produce benefits in the teen years with better health behaviors, reduced teenage
pregnancy and lower dropout rates. They promote higher adult productivity and self-sufficiency.
They supplement the family by working with both the parent and the child. They provide a
strong boost to character skills that matter. Successful programs offer a lifeline of family
supplementation for disadvantaged families. They engage the parents, are voluntary, and do not
impair the sanctity of the family. Disadvantaged families of all race groups gladly take up
opportunities to enhance the lives of their children. Most mothers, however disadvantaged, want
the best for their children. The voluntary nature of these programs avoids coercion and
condescension and promotes dignity.
The logic underlying enrichment of the early environments of disadvantaged children is
based on a deeper understanding of the life cycle of skill formation than was available to the
architects of the War on Poverty. More motivated and healthier children are better learners. The
process is dynamic and feeds back on itself—academic success and social success promote
greater self-confidence and a willingness of children to explore.

23
A strategy that places greater emphasis on parenting resources directed to the early years
is a strategy that prevents rather than remediates problems. It supplements families and makes
them active participants in the process of child development.
Remediation strategies as currently implemented are much less effective. This is the flip
side of the argument for early intervention. Many skills that are malleable in the early years are
much less so in the teenage years. As a consequence, remediating academic and social deficits in
the teenage years is much more costly. Even at great cost, remediation policies have not been
effective and certainly earn annual rates of return far below the 7-10% found for the Perry
Program.71
For high quality early childhood interventions, there are none of the trade-offs between
equity and efficiency that plague most public policies. Early interventions produce broadly
based benefits and reduce social and economic inequality. At the same time they promote
productivity and economic efficiency. They are both fair and efficient.
In contrast, the school-focused No Child Left Behind program72 diverts teaching away
from fostering other skills that matter for success in life besides tested math and reading.
Because it ignores inequality at the starting gate, No Child Left Behind leaves many children
behind.

Dynamic Synergies and the Timing of Effective Interventions
High quality early childhood programs are investments with rates of returns far higher than those
found for most governmentally provided skills programs. Figure 3 summarizes the evidence
from a large body of research in economics and developmental psychology. The figure plots the
rate of return to investment for an extra dollar of investment in the early years, in preschool, in

24
school and in job training for a person who has an initial (low) common baseline investment at
all ages. The return to investment at the earliest ages is high because it creates the foundation of
skills that make later investment productive.73 This pattern is a manifestation of dynamic
synergism—what economists call “dynamic complementarity.” For example, children who enter
school with character and cognitive skills gain more from formal education.74
Early investment percolates throughout the life cycle. If the base is not strong, and has
been compromised by early family disadvantage, skill investments at later ages are much less
productive. This is due to the lessened malleability of older children and adults compared to that
of young children.

Figure 3. Returns to a unit dollar invested

Source: Heckman (2008).75

25
The negative side of dynamic complementarity is that there is an equity-efficiency
tradeoff for skill investment programs targeted toward disadvantaged adolescents and adults who
lack a strong skill base. Remediation in the late adolescent and adult years to achieve the same
level of competence is much more costly. This feature of dynamic complementarity accounts for
the sorry record of a variety of skill enhancement programs, launched in the War on Poverty, that
still receive substantial public support.76 Current policy does not heed the wisdom inherent in
Figure 3. We overinvest in attempting to remediate the problems of disadvantaged adolescents
and underinvest in the early years of disadvantaged children.
In contrast to the 7-10% per annum earned by the Perry program and other early
childhood programs, returns on many other skill enhancement programs are much lower. They
are certainly lower for public job training, criminal rehabilitation programs, adult literacy
programs, and a variety of other later life remediation programs targeting disadvantaged
adolescents and young adults with low cognitive and character skills.77 For example, a recent
evaluation of the Job Corps showed meager earnings benefits a negative rate of return.78
Reducing pupil-teacher ratios in schools also has a negative rate of return.79 We need to listen to
the logic of developmental biology to devise strategies to reduce disparities in parenting across
all racial and ethnic groups.

Engage the Private Sector
How can we fund such programs? Times are hard and government budgets are strained.
Nonetheless, it would be possible to fund effective new programs if they replaced the numerous
ineffective programs currently in place. Few governmental programs of any sort would meet the

26
standard set by the high rates of return earned by childhood programs. As high quality early
childhood programs are implemented, the budgetary burden of remediation will be lessened.
Engaging the private sector—philanthropic, community and religious organizations—
bolsters the resource base supporting early childhood. Bringing in diverse partners encourages
experimentation with new approaches that build on the success of templates like Perry and the
Abecedarian program.80 Educare is one promising program that fosters public and private
partnerships.81 Engaging diverse groups encourages development of culturally and religiously
sensitive intervention programs that respect the sanctity of the family and the diversity of values
that characterize modern American society.
A New Strategy Based on New Knowledge
In contemporary American society, the racial gap in achievement is primarily due to gaps in
skills. Modern society is based on skills, and inequality in achievement across all race and ethnic
groups is primarily due to inequality in skills. Both cognitive and personality skills determine
life success.
Families are major producers of skills. They do much more than pass along their genes.
Inequality in skills and schools is strongly linked to inequality in family environments. While
the exact mechanisms through which families produce skills are actively being investigated, a lot
is already known. Parenting matters. The true measure of child poverty and advantage is the
quality of parenting a child receives, not just the money available to a household.
A growing fraction of American children across all race and ethnic groups is being raised
in dysfunctional families. The growing contrast between the early environments of advantaged
and disadvantaged children threatens to create greater inequality in the next generation of
Americans from an already high level.

27
We have learned a lot about how to foster skills since the 1960s when the War on Poverty
attempted to remediate skills deficits of people of all ages and developmental stages. The
science of skill formation shows how skill begets skill.
Investments that foster early life skills enhance the productivity of investment at later
ages. They support the schools and enhance the productivity of adult job training. Because of
the percolation effects of early investment due to the dynamic complementarity of skill
formation, policies that attack inequality at its early source are cost-effective. They promote
equality and, at the same time, promote economic efficiency. There is no equity-efficiency
tradeoff for such policies.
The malleability and plasticity characteristic of young children declines with age. This
effect is what makes investment in disadvantaged, low skilled young adults so difficult. To
achieve the same adult outcomes, later life remediation for disadvantage is far more costly than
early life prevention. There is an equity-efficiency tradeoff for later-life remediation activities.
As early life programs pay off, the budgets spent on remediation can be substantially reduced.
Our current policies to reduce achievement gaps ignore these simple truths. America
currently places too much emphasis on improving what goes on in schools compared to
improving what goes on in families. Supplementing the parenting resources of disadvantaged
Americans will bolster American schools and enhance the effectiveness of school reforms. It
will lower the burden of remediation. A comprehensive, cost-effective policy to enhance the
skills of disadvantaged children of all racial and ethnic backgrounds through voluntary,
culturally sensitive support for parenting is a politically and economically palatable strategy.

28

1

See John J. Donohue and James J. Heckman, "Continuous Versus Episodic Change: The Impact of Civil Rights

Policy on the Economic Status of Blacks," Journal of Economic Literature 29 (4) (1991).
2

See Richard Butler and James J. Heckman, "The Impact of the Government on the Labor Market Status of Black

Americans: A Critical Review," Equal Rights and Industrial Relations, ed. L. F. Hausman (Madison, WI: Industrial
Relations Research Association, 1977).; Amitabh Chandra, Is the Convergence of the Racial Wage Gap Illusory?
(National Bureau of Economic Research, 2003).; and James J. Heckman and Paul A. LaFontaine, "The American
High School Graduation Rate: Trends and Levels," Review of Economics and Statistics 92 (2) (2010).
3

William J. Wilson, The Truly Disadvantaged: The Inner City, the Underclass, and Public Policy (Chicago:

University Of Chicago Press, 1987); William J. Wilson, More Than Just Race: Being Black and Poor in the Inner
City (New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 2009).
4

See Heckman and LaFontaine.

5

See James J. Heckman, Robert J. LaLonde and Jeffrey A. Smith, "The Economics and Econometrics of Active

Labor Market Programs," Handbook of Labor Economics, eds. Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, vol. 3A (New
York: North-Holland, 1999).
6

See David Ellwood and Christopher Jencks, "The Uneven Spread of Single-Parent Families: What Do We Know?

Where Do We Look for Answers?," Social Inequality, ed. Kathryn M. Neckerman (New York: Russell Sage
Foundation, 2004).
7

Sara McLanahan, "Diverging Destinies: How Children Are Faring under the Second Demographic Transition,"

Demography 41 (4) (2004).
8

Daniel P. Moynihan, Employment, Income, and the Ordeal of the Negro Family (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill

Company, 1965). See http://www.dol.gov/oasam/programs/history/webid-meynihan.htm
9

See the essays in the Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science (2009, Vol. 621, Issue 1)

and, especially, the introductory essay by Douglas S. Massey and Robert J. Sampson, "Moynihan Redux: Legacies
and Lessons," The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 621 (1) (2009); William
Julius Wilson, "The Moynihan Report and Research on the Black Community," The ANNALS of the American
Academy of Political and Social Science 621 (1) (2009).

29

10

See the Web Appendix.

11

See the gaps documented in the Web Appendix and the recent review by Roland Fryer, "Racial Inequality in the

21st Century: The Declining Significance of Discrimination," (Forthcoming in the Handbook of Labor Economics,
Volume 4, 2010).
12

I use a procedure developed by Derek A. Neal and William R. Johnson, "Basic Skills and the Black-White

Earnings Gap," The Black-White Test Score Gap, eds. Christopher Jencks and Meredith Phillips (Washington, D.C.:
Brookings Institution Press, 1998).
13

Stephen V. Cameron and James J. Heckman, "The Dynamics of Educational Attainment for Black, Hispanic, and

White Males," Journal of Political Economy 109 (3) (2001).
14

See Ibid. The results are similar for men and women so I only report the pooled results.

15

See Pedro Carneiro, James J. Heckman and Dimitriy V. Masterov, "Understanding the Sources of Ethnic and

Racial Wage Gaps and Their Implications for Policy," Handbook of Employment Discrimination Research: Rights
and Realities, eds. R. Nelson and L. Nielsen (New York: Springer, 2005). and Pedro Carneiro, James J. Heckman
and Dimitriy V. Masterov, "Labor Market Discrimination and Racial Differences in Pre-Market Factors," Journal of
Law and Economics 48 (1) (2005).
16

Devah Pager, "The Use of Field Experiments for Studies of Employment Discrimination: Contributions,

Critiques, and Directions for the Future," The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social Science
609 (2007).
17

See James J. Heckman, "Detecting Discrimination," Journal of Economic Perspectives 12 (2) (1998).

18

Fryer reports ability adjusted disparities for many other outcomes. In virtually all cases he considers, measured

gaps are diminished (but not fully eliminated) by accounting for ability.
19

See the figures in the Web Appendix.

20

See Christopher Jencks, "Racial Bias in Testing," The Black-White Test Score Gap, eds. Christopher Jencks and

Meredith Phillips (Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 1998); Paul R. Sackett, Matthew J. Borneman and
Brian S. Connelly, "High Stakes Testing in Higher Education and Employment: Appraising the Evidence for
Validity and Fairness," American Psychologist 63 (4) (2008).

30

21

Carneiro, Heckman and Masterov, "Understanding the Sources of Ethnic and Racial Wage Gaps and Their

Implications for Policy."; Carneiro, Heckman and Masterov, "Labor Market Discrimination and Racial Differences
in Pre-Market Factors."
22

See Carneiro, Heckman and Masterov, "Understanding the Sources of Ethnic and Racial Wage Gaps and Their

Implications for Policy."; Carneiro, Heckman and Masterov, "Labor Market Discrimination and Racial Differences
in Pre-Market Factors."
23

Claude M. Steele and Joshua Aronson, "Stereotype Threat and the Test Performance of Academically Successful

African Americans," The Black-White Test Score Gap, eds. C. Jencks and M. Phillips (Washington, D.C.:
Brookings Institution Press, 1998).
24

See Paul R. Sackett, Chaitra M. Hardison and Michael J. Cullen, "On Interpreting Stereotype Threat as

Accounting for African American-White Differences on Cognitive Tests," The American Psychologist 59 (1)
(2004).
25

Daniel M. Koretz, Measuring Up: What Educational Testing Really Tells Us (Cambridge, MA: Harvard

University Press, 2008); Richard Rothstein, Rebecca Jacobsen and Tamara Wilder, Grading Education: Getting
Accountability Right (New York: Economic Policy Institute and Teachers College Press, 2008).
26

Mathilde Almlund, Angela L. Duckworth, James J. Heckman and Tim Kautz, "Personality Psychology and

Economics," Handbook of the Economics of Education, eds. Eric A. Hanushek, S. Machin and L. Wößmann
(Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2011, forthcoming).
27

William Safire, "On Language; the Elision Fields," New York Times 13 August 1989.

28

See the evidence summarized in Almlund, Duckworth, Heckman and Kautz.

29

Ibid.

30

See the evidence cited in Pedro Carneiro and James J. Heckman, "Human Capital Policy," Inequality in America:

What Role for Human Capital Policies?, eds. James J. Heckman, Alan B. Krueger and Benjamin M. Friedman
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003); Flavio Cunha, James J. Heckman, Lance J. Lochner and Dimitriy V. Masterov,
"Interpreting the Evidence on Life Cycle Skill Formation," Handbook of the Economics of Education, eds. Eric A.
Hanushek and Frank Welch, vol. 1 (Amsterdam: North-Holland, 2006).
31

See Annette Lareau, Home Advantage: Social Class and Parental Intervention in Elementary Education, Second

ed. (Lanham, MD: Rowman and LIttlefield Publishers, Inc., 2000).

31

32

Source: Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, Flavio Cunha, Greg Duncan, James J. Heckman and Aaron Sojourner, "A

Reanalysis of the IHDP Program," (Unpublished manuscript, Infant Health and Development Program,
Northwestern University, 2006).
33

It is not possible to reliably measure cognition before age 3. See Michael Lewis and Harry McGurk, "Evaluation

of Infant Intelligence," Science 178 (4066) (1972).
34

See the evidence summarized in Cunha, Heckman, Lochner and Masterov.

35

See the evidence summarized in Carneiro and Heckman, "Human Capital Policy."; Cunha, Heckman, Lochner and

Masterov; James J. Heckman, "Schools, Skills and Synapses," Economic Inquiry 46 (3) (2008).
36

Similar gaps arise when classifying children by various combinations of maternal ability, long-term family

income, and material education. See the Web Appendix.
37

See, e.g., James J. Heckman, "Lessons from the Bell Curve," Journal of Political Economy 103 (5) (1995); B.

Devlin, S. Feinberg, D. Resnick and K. Roeder, eds., Intelligence, Genes, and Success: Scientists Respond to the
Bell Curve (New York: Springer, Copernicus, 1997).
38

David C. Rowe, The Limits of Family Influence: Genes, Experience, and Behavior (New York NY: Guilford

Press, 1994).
39

See Yona Rubinstein and Dror Brenner, "Pride and Prejudice: Evidence from the 'Promised Land'," (Unpublished

Manuscript, Brown University, 2010). Note, however, that there is some small amount of genetic variation across
the two groups.
40

See Christopher Winship and Sanders Korenman, "Does Staying in School Make You Smarter? The Effect of

Education on IQ in the Bell Curve," Intelligence, Genes, and Success: Scientists Respond to the Bell Curve, eds. B.
Devlin, S. Feinberg, D. Resnick and K. Roeder (New York: Springer, Copernicus, 1997); Neal and Johnson; Karsten
T. Hansen, James J. Heckman and Kathleen J. Mullen, "The Effect of Schooling and Ability on Achievement Test
Scores," Journal of Econometrics 121 (1-2) (2004).
41

See Lex Borghans, Bart H. H. Golsteyn, James J. Heckman and John Eric Humphries, "IQ, Achievement, and

Personality," (University of Chicago, Department of Economics, 2010). See also the evidence in Almlund,
Duckworth, Heckman and Kautz.
42

Matt Ridley, Nature Via Nurture: Genes, Experience, and What Makes Us Human, First ed. (New York, NY:

Fourth Estate, 2003).

32

43

See the essays in the Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences Issue: The Biology of Disadvantage , 1186

(2010).
44

Avshalom Caspi, Joseph McClay, Terrie E. Moffitt, Jonathan Mill, Judy Martin, Ian W. Craig, Alan Taylor and

Richie Poulton, "Role of Genotype in the Cycle of Violence in Maltreated Children," Science 297 (5582) (2002).
45

See Mario F. Fraga, Esteban Ballestar, Maria F. Paz, Santiago Ropero, Fernando Setien, Maria L. Ballestar,

Damia Heine-Suñer, Juan C. Cigudosa, Miguel Urioste, Javier Benitez, Manuel Boix-Chornet, Abel SanchezAguilera, Charlotte Ling, Emma Carlsson, Pernille Poulsen, Allan Vaag, Zarko Stephan, Tim D. Spector, YueZhong Wu, Christoph Plass and Manel Esteller, "Epigenetic Differences Arise During the Lifetime of Monozygotic
Twins," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 102 (30) (2005).
46

See Terrie E. Moffitt, Gene-Environment Interaction in Problematic and Successful Aging, Unpublished

manuscript, Duke Institute for Genome Sciences and Policy, Duke University. Presented at the Workshop on
Genetic Methods and Life Course Development, National Institute on Aging, Bethesda, MD. February 11-12, 2008.
and the figures posted on the display Web site for the Marshall Lecture at http://jenni.uchicago.edu/Milan_2008/.
47

Eric Turkheimer, Andreana Haley, Mary Waldron, Brian D'Onofrio and Irving I. Gottesman, "Socioeconomic

Status Modifies Heritability of IQ in Young Children," Psychological Science 14 (6) (2003).
48

Frances A. Champagne and James P. Curley, "How Social Experiences Influence the Brain," Current Opinion in

Neurobiology 15 (2005); Frances A. Champagne, Ian C. G. Weaver, Josie Diorio, Sergiy Dymov, Moshe Szyf and
Michael J. Meaney, "Maternal Care Associated with Methylation of the Estrogen Receptor-Alpha1b Promoter and
Estrogen Receptor-Alpha Expression in the Medial Preoptic Area of Female Offspring," Endocrinology 147 (6)
(2006).
49

Stephen Suomi reports parallel findings on genetic moderation of environmental influences for rhesus monkeys

that have 95 percent of human genes. See Stephen J. Suomi, "Developmental Trajectories, Early Experiences, and
Community Consequences: Lessons from Studies with Rhesus Monkeys," Developmental Health and the Wealth of
Nations: Social, Biological, and Educational Dynamics, eds. Daniel P. Keating and Clyde Hertzman (The Guilford
Press, 1999); Stephen J. Suomi, "Gene-Environment Interactions and the Neurobiology of Social Conflict," Annals
of the New York Academy of Sciences 1008 (2003).
50

Gunnar Kaati, Lars Olov Bygren, Marcus Pembrey and Michael Sjostrom, "Transgenerational Response to

Nutrition, Early Life Circumstances and Longevity," Eur J Hum Genet 15 (7) (2007); Eva Jablonka and Gal Raz,

33

"Transgenerational Epigenetic Inheritance: Prevalence, Mechanisms, and Implications for the Study of Heredity and
Evolution," The Quarterly Review of Biology 84 (2) (2009); Christopher W. Kuzawa and Elizabeth Sweet,
"Epigenetics and the Embodiment of Race: Developmental Origins of Us Racial Disparities in Cardiovascular
Health," American Journal of Human Biology 21 (1) (2009); Peter D. Gluckman, Mark A. Hanson and Alan S.
Beedle, "Non-Genomic Transgenerational Inheritance of Disease Risk," BioEssays 29 (2) (2007).
51

See James S. Coleman, Equality of Educational Opportunity (Washington, DC: U.S. Dept. of Health, Education,

and Welfare, Office of Education, 1966).
52

See Susan B. Neuman, Changing the Odds for Children at Risk: Seven Essential Principles of Educational

Programs That Break the Cycle of Poverty (Westport, CT: Praeger Publishers, 2009).
53

See Diane Ravitch, The Death and Life of the Great American School System: How Testing and Choice Are

Undermining Education (New York, NY: Basic Books, 2010); Philip Gleason, Melissa Clark, Christina Tuttle and
Emily Dwoyer, The Evaluation of Charter School Impacts (National Center for Education Evaluation and Regional
Assistance, Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education, 2010).
54

Ravitch.

55

See, e.g., McLanahan; Sara McLanahan and Gary D. Sandefur, Growing up with a Single Parent: What Hurts,

What Helps (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1994). Ginther and Pollack show that children living in
blended families (without both biological parents present) do about the same as children of lone parents. See Donna
K. Ginther and Robert A. Pollak, "Family Structure and Children's Educational Outcomes: Blended Families,
Stylized Facts, and Descriptive Regressions," Demography 41 (4) (2004).
56

McLanahan, "Diverging Destinies: How Children Are Faring under the Second Demographic Transition."

57

Betty Hart and Todd R. Risley, "American Parenting of Language-Learning Children: Persisting Differences in

Family-Child Interactions Observed in Natural Home Environments," Developmental Psychology 28 (6) (1992);
Betty Hart and Todd R. Risley, Meaningful Differences in the Everyday Experience of Young American Children
(Baltimore, MD: P.H. Brookes, 1995).
58

See Sara McLanahan, Fragile Families and the Reproduction of Poverty (Princeton, NJ: Center for Research on

Child Wellbeing and Fragile Families, 2008).

34

59

Suzanne M. Bianchi, John P. Robinson and Melissa A. Milkie, Changing Rhythms of American Family Life, eds.

Douglas L. Anderton, Dan Clawson, Naomi Gerstel, Joya Misra, Randall G. Stokes and Robert Zussman (New
York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation, 2006).
60

See the evidence on school readiness cited in Neuman. See also Kristin L. Moilanen, Daniel S. Shaw, Thomas J.

Dishion, Frances Gardner and Melvin Wilson, "Predictors of Longitudinal Growth in Inhibitory Control in Early
Childhood," Social Development 19 (2) (2009).
61

Ronald Ferguson, "Why America's Black-White School Acheivement Gap Persists," Ethnicity, Social Mobility,

and Public Policy, eds. Glenn C. Loury, Tariq Modood and Steven M. Teles (New York, NY: Cambridge University
Press, 2005); Lareau.
62

See Marco Francesconi, Adult Outcomes for Children of Teenage Mothers (IZA, 2007); Judith A. Levine, Harold

Pollack and Maureen E. Comfort, "Academic and Behavioral Outcomes among the Children of Young Mothers,"
Journal of Marriage and Family 63 (2) (2001).
63

See J. Peter Nilsson, Does a Pint a Day Affect Your Child's Pay? The Effect of Prenatal Alcohol Exposure on

Adult Outcomes (Institute for Labour Market Policy Evaluation, 2008); Ann Streissguth, "Offspring Effects of
Prenatal Alcohol Exposure from Birth to 25 Years: The Seattle Prospective Longitudinal Study," Journal of Clinical
Psychology in Medical Settings 14 (2) (2007); Xingqi Zhang, Joanna H. Sliwowska and Joanne Weinberg, "Prenatal
Alcohol Exposure and Fetal Programming: Effects on Neuroendocrine and Immune Function," Experimental
Biology and Medicine 230 (6) (2005).
64

Paul Tough, Whatever It Takes: Geoffrey Canada's Quest to Change Harlem and America (New York, NY: First

Mariner Books, 2009).
65

Susan E. Mayer, What Money Can't Buy: Family Income and Children's Life Chances (Cambridge, MA: Harvard

University Press, 1997).
66

When an American Indian tribe substantially enhanced its income by opening a casino, child behavioral outcomes

improved dramatically but not uniformly. Most of the improvement arose in children whose parents improved their
parenting. See E. Jane Costello, Scott N. Compton, Gordon Keeler and Adrian Angold, "Relationships between
Poverty and Psychopathology: A Natural Experiment," Journal of the American Medical Association 290 (15)
(2003).

35

67

U.S. Congress, Senate Committee on Labor and Public Welfare. Special Sub-committee on Indian Education,

Indian Education: A National Tragedy --A National Challenge (Senate Report 91-501). 91st Congress, 1st Sess.,
November 3, 1969.
68

L. J. Schweinhart, Helen V. Barnes and David Weikart, Significant Benefits: The High-Scope Perry Preschool

Study through Age 27 (Ypsilanti, MI: High/Scope Press, 1993).
69

James J. Heckman, Seong Hyeok Moon, Rodrigo Pinto, Peter A. Savelyev and Adam Q. Yavitz, "The Rate of

Return to the Highscope Perry Preschool Program," Journal of Public Economics 94 (1-2) (2010).
70

James J. Heckman, Lena Malofeeva, Rodrigo Pinto and Peter A. Savelyev, "Understanding the Mechanisms

through Which an Influential Early Childhood Program Boosted Adult Outcomes," (Department of Economics,
University of Chicago, 2010).
71

See the evidence in Heckman, LaLonde and Smith, "The Economics and Econometrics of Active Labor Market

Programs."; Cunha, Heckman, Lochner and Masterov.
72

Rothstein, Jacobsen and Wilder.

73

See Flavio Cunha and James J. Heckman, "The Technology of Skill Formation," American Economic Review 97

(2) (2007).
74

Greg J. Duncan, Chantelle J. Dowsett, Amy Claessens, Katherine Mugnuson, Aletha C. Huston, Pamela

Klebanov, Linda S. Pagani, Leon Feinstein, Mimi Engel, Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, Holly Sexton, Kathryn Duckworth
and Crista Japel, "School Readiness and Later Achievement," Developmental Psychology 43 (6) (2007); Jeanne
Brooks-Gunn and Lisa B. Markman, "The Contribution of Parenting to Ethnic and Racial Gaps in School
Readiness," The Future of Children 15 (1) (2005).
75

Heckman, "Schools, Skills and Synapses."

76

See the evidence in Heckman, LaLonde and Smith, "The Economics and Econometrics of Active Labor Market

Programs."; Cunha, Heckman, Lochner and Masterov, "Interpreting the Evidence on Life Cycle Skill Formation."
77

See the evidence in Cunha, Heckman, Lochner, and Masterov.

78

See Peter Z. Schochet, John Burghardt and Sheena McConnell, "Does Job Corps Work? Impact Findings from the

National Job Corps Study," American Economic Review 98 (5) (2008).
79

See the evidence in Cunha, Heckman, Lochner, and Masterov.

36

80

For discussion of a range of proven programs, see Childhood Programs and Practices in the First Decade of Life:

A Human Capital Integration, eds. Arthur J. Reynolds, Arthur J. Rolnick, Michelle M. Englund and Judy A. Temple
(Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press, 2010).
81

http://www.educareschools.org/pages/index.php?q=node/6.

