                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  DOES PRICE REVEAL POOR-QUALITY DRUGS? EVIDENCE FROM 17 COUNTRIES

                                            Roger Bate
                                           Ginger Zhe Jin
                                           Aparna Mathur

                                        Working Paper 16854
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16854


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2011




We would like to thank the Legatum Foundation and Legatum Institute for funding the original research.
Dozens of people helped in collecting samples and testing them. In particular we thank, Thompson
Ayodele, Franklin Cudjoe, Sujat Khan, BarunMitra, Amir Attaran, Lorraine Mooney and Kimberly
Hess, all of whom did us great service. Matt Jensen provided excellent research assistance, and Emel
Filiz Ozbay provided helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Roger Bate, Ginger Zhe Jin, and Aparna Mathur. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Does Price Reveal Poor-Quality Drugs? Evidence from 17 Countries
Roger Bate, Ginger Zhe Jin, and Aparna Mathur
NBER Working Paper No. 16854,
March 2011, Revised March 2012
JEL No. D18,D4,D8,I11,I18,L15

                                              ABSTRACT

Focusing on 8 drug types on the WHO-approved medicine list, we constructed an original dataset of 899
drug samples from 17 low- and median-income countries and tested them for visual appearance,
disintegration, and analyzed their ingredients by chromatography and spectrometry. Fifteen percent
of the samples fail at least one test and can be considered substandard. After controlling for local
factors, we find that failing drugs are priced 13-18% lower than non-failingdrugs but the signaling
effect of price is far from complete, especially for non-innovator brands. Thelook of the pharmacy,
as assessed by our covert shoppers, is weakly correlated with the results of qualitytests. These findings
suggest that consumers are likely to suspect low quality from market price, non-innovator brand and the look
of the pharmacy, but none of these signals can perfectly identify substandard and counterfeit drugs.




Roger Bate                                            Aparna Mathur
American Enterprise Institute                         American Enterprise Institute
1150 Seventeenth Street, NW                           1150 Seventeenth Street, N.W.
Washington DC 20036                                   Washington, DC 20036
rbate@aei.org                                         amathur@aei.org

Ginger Zhe Jin
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742-7211
and NBER
jin@econ.umd.edu
                                                  I. Introduction

         Poor-quality medicine is a global public health problem. Not only do counterfeit drugs

prevail, some legitimate manufacturers make substandard drugs due to inappropriate production

and some genuine drugs could degrade and become substandard through inappropriate

distribution. According to the World Health Organization (WHO 2003), substandard and

counterfeit drugs have been found in both developed and developing countries1, accounting for

more than 10% of the global medicines market and over US$32 billion in annual earnings. Even

medicines sold for deadly diseases such as malaria are faked or poorly manufactured (Dondorp et

al. 2004; WHO 2009). Poor-quality drugs are dangerous: they may be wrongly labeled, contain

the wrong type of ingredient, formulate the active ingredients incorrectly, or be contaminated

with pathogens, leading to ineffectiveness, direct harm, or even death (WHO 2003; 2010).

         Surprisingly, there is little economic analysis on this topic although the policy efforts to

stem the flow of counterfeit and substandard medicines have begun. One policy tool is to

strengthen the enforcement of intellectual property (e.g. the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement)

while others argue that trademark protection does not necessarily lead to better quality control

and could hurt access to quality generic drugs (Oxfam 2011).2

         From the economic point of view, the harm of substandard or counterfeit drugs depends

on whether consumers can tell drug quality from direct or indirect information. If poor-quality

drugs can always pretend to be of high quality, consumers are deceived and manufacturers are

discouraged to produce high-quality in the long run (Grossman and Shapiro 1988a). Regulatory

enforcement of trademarks and quality standards could curb the proliferation of poor-quality

1 In an operation targeting online sale of counterfeit and illegal medicines, the World Customs Organization seized
1,014,043 counterfeit pills worth approximately 2,598,163 US$ in one week of October 2010. The types of drugs
seized (life-style drugs, antimalarials, sleeping pills, antibiotics, and heart medications, amongst others) show that
the problem now affects all countries, developed and emerging.
2 There is academic evidence that better intellectual property protection is associated with more R&D investment in
pharmaceuticals or related diseases (Pazderka 1999, Lanjouw and Cockburn 2001) but none of these studies
consider substandard drugs.
                                                             2
drugs and reduce consumer fraud.3 In contrast, a poor consumer may suspect low quality from

the package or market cues, but still choose to purchase low price drugs in hope that low-price

drugs will work sometimes and that is better than no treatment in expectation. In this case, the

welfare consequence of a ban on low quality products is not so clear: on one hand, it may

deprive the extremely poor of a treatment that sometimes works; on the other hand, consumer

belief on the efficacy of substandard or counterfeit drugs is likely wrong and a misinformed

choice could be worse than no purchase.

         More importantly, the issue of poor-quality drugs is not independent of drug affordability.

According to WHO (2008), over 50 surveys have shown that drug prices are high in many low-

and middle-income countries, with some treatments requiring over 15 days’ wages to purchase

30 day supply. Public policies – for example tariff reduction, price ceiling, and compulsory

licensing of patented drugs – have tried to lower drug price, but buying potentially low-quality

drugs is another way to fight against drug unaffordability, especially for the poor.

         This paper provides the first empirical study on the economics of poor-quality drugs with

an emphasis on (1) the prevalence of poor-quality drugs in association with local regulation,

income and literacy rate, and (2) the extent to which consumers can infer the likelihood of poor

quality from market price and appearance of pharmacy. Drawing insights from economic

theories, we show that price and quality are fundamentally linked and the fight against poor-

quality drugs cannot be isolated from drug affordability.




3 It is important to note that not all counterfeits will breach a trademark. A drug that claims to be Ciprofloxacin on
the package but contains chalk is “falsified” but breaks no intellectual property rules since it does not infringe a
competitor’s trademark.




                                                          3
       One reason for the limited literature on this topic is the lack of systematic data on poor

quality medicines. To overcome this difficulty, we compiled original data on the price and quality

of 899 drug samples across 17 developing and mid-income countries. In particular, our network

of covert shoppers purchased 8 types of drugs from 185 private pharmacies and each collected

drug sample went through three progressive tests ranging from visual inspection, disintegration

and ingredient test, to Raman spectrometry test for the spectra of ingredients. We find that 15%

of the drug samples fail the most stringent test (spectrometry).

       It is more difficult to read consumers' mind on their knowledge of drug quality.

According to Cockburn et al. (2005), many pharmaceutical companies and governments are

reluctant to publicize the problem of substandard and counterfeit drugs, fearing that the publicity

will prevent patients from taking genuine medicines. Under such secrecy, consumer knowledge

of drug quality is limited to self-inspection, word-of-mouth, and market cues. It is often difficult

if not impossible to tell poor-quality drugs from packaging. In our data, only 3% of drug samples

fail the visual test. Full information may not be available after consumption either, because drug

effectiveness varies from person to person and even authentic drugs may not work well if the

patient does not follow doctor's instruction. However, consumers may not be completely in the

dark either: some quality information may be inferred from a large number of idiosyncratic cases

and tied to observable attributes such as price and distributional channels.

       In our data, covert shoppers report their subjective assessment of whether the pharmacy

looks “good” or “poor.” This assessment turns out to be correlated with our objective test results,

but the correlation is low (with correlation coefficients ranging from 0.14 to 0.27 all with p-

value<0.001). In comparison, drug price is another way to reveal drug quality. After controlling

for drug type, local regulations, income and literacy rate, we find that drugs that fail the most

stringent spectrometry test are priced 13.6-18.7% lower. The absolute price differential, on

                                                 4
average US$ 0.59 to 0.80 (per treatment course), could mean a big difference in local currencies.

This suggests that buyers are likely to suspect low-quality when they pay less.

       Why is there a demand for likely inferior medicines? One possibility is that patients

derive benefit from them because some inferior drugs work or give the impression of working

due to a placebo effect without being harmful. Ignorance of pharmacology is another reason: less

educated patients might buy cheap medicines because they incorrectly believe that if expensive

medicines treat one quickly cheap low-quality medicines just take longer to work. Alternatively,

a family living in extreme poverty may decide that buying cheap medicines is a risk worth taking

rather than not taking any medicine at all.

       While poor-quality drugs are on average sold at a cheaper price, the price signal is far

from complete. In our data, a large overlap exists between the price distributions of drugs that

passed all the three quality tests and drugs that failed at least one test. Even after we control for

drug type and local factors, the standard deviation of unexplained log price is 0.43 for non-

failing drugs and 0.37 for failing drugs, both larger than the average 0.17 difference between the

two groups. Further calculation suggests that drugs sold at 37% lower than the average price are

only 9.51 percentage points more likely to fail any test (25.66% vs. 14.14%), while drugs sold at

36% higher than the average price are only 7.89 percentage points less likely to fail any test

(6.25% vs. 14.14%). This suggests that the signaling effect of price is not as clear as the theory

suggests: high price does not always guarantee high quality, and the existing price dispersion is

likely to reflect market frictions in addition to the imperfect information of drug quality.

       For example, some non-failing drugs in our data are not innovator brands and they are

priced more than 30% lower than innovator brands. As a result, the prices of these presumably

true “generics” (act identically to innovator brands) overlap significantly with those of failing

drugs. The inability to distinguish generics from inferior copies leaves some patients with the

                                                  5
incorrect impression that all cheap drugs will probably work. Such impression will invite

cheaters and further blur the signaling effect of price on quality. This raises a concern that

isolated efforts to lower drug price (e.g. by encouraging genuine generics) could worsen the fight

against counterfeit and substandard drugs because they undermine the role of price in signaling.

       Even when price is able to signal quality, the difficulty to detect poor-quality products

from genuine drugs (from non-price information) will push up the price of genuine drugs

because the expected price premium from high quality must exceed the temptation to cut corners

(Wolinsky 1983, Shapiro 1982). To support this argument, we find that the price discount for

failing drugs is greater in countries with lower-than-median literacy rate (25.8%) than in those of

higher literacy rate (12.3%), after controlling for local factors and city fixed effects. These

findings highlight the fundamental links between price and quality, suggesting that public

policies on price and quality must be coordinated.

       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we review the relatively

limited economic literature on counterfeit/substandard goods and a separate medical literature on

the prevalence of poor-quality drugs. To help readers understand the economics behind

theoretical predictions, we sketch the framework of Wolinsky (1983) and elaborate intuition

behind each prediction. Section III describes the data. Section IV presents empirical models and

results. Section VI concludes with a short discussion on our findings.



                                          II. Literature

       Economists have provided two theories about counterfeit goods depending on whether

consumers know they are counterfeits before purchase (Grossman and Shapiro 1988a, 1988b). In

the first theory, consumers are imperfectly informed of product quality and are unable to

distinguish genuine products from counterfeits. In this case, counterfeits are sold at the same

                                                6
price as authentic ones and a tougher policy against counterfeits enhances the total welfare, as

consumers are less likely defrauded and honest producers are encouraged to produce quality

products according to consumer demand (Grossman and Shapiro 1988a).

       In other markets, however, it is not clear that information asymmetry exists. Consumers

may buy a product that they know, or at least strongly suspect, to be a fake. The sale of fake

Gucci handbags, Samsonite luggage, and Pierre Cardin accessories at a fraction of the cost of

legitimate products and from outlets that are clearly not official distribution outlets suggests that

the buyer is likely aware that she is not buying an authentic product. In a separate equilibrium,

Grossman and Shapiro (1988b) show that consumers may choose to pay for counterfeits at a

price lower than that of brand-names but higher than that of outside options because they enjoy

the “status” conveyed by a counterfeit of brand name. Clearly, the psychological benefit of

“status” does not apply to counterfeit drugs. However, Grossman and Shapiro’s analysis can be

extended to a patient buying a cheaper (and on average less efficacious) product as long as

consumers believe such products can be effective with a positive probability. Why such a belief

exists in equilibrium is another question that we will return to later on.

       A broader theoretical literature considers low- and high-quality products even if the low-

quality ones do not appear in the form of counterfeits. The analogy to our context is that some

low quality drugs are substandard because legitimate manufacturers secretly cut corners or the

well-manufactured drugs were inappropriately stored in the distribution process. Wolinsky

(1983) shows a unique equilibrium where price completely reveals product quality although the

exact quality chosen by a firm is known only to the firm itself initially. Below we recast

Wolinsky's model in the context of substandard drugs. Interested readers should refer to

Wolinsky (1983) for proof.



                                                  7
       Consider a competitive drug market where the drug can be produced at different quality

levels, all consumers prefer high to low quality, consumers differ in their willingness to pay for

quality, and it is more costly to produce better quality. The actual quality of a drug is only known

to the manufacturer, but some noisy information about drug quality such as the look of the

package is available to some consumers with zero cost.

       In this setting, it is possible to have a separate equilibrium where every price reveals a

unique quality level but price must exceed the marginal cost of the signaled quality (except for

the lowest quality). Otherwise, a manufacturer will have incentive to secretly cut quality and earn

positive profit from cheating. Another necessary condition is that some consumers must have

free access to some (imperfect) information about product quality other than price. When a firm

charges price p but provides quality lower than what p signals in equilibrium, some consumers

will shy away from the product because they have access to (imperfect) information of drug

quality. The expected sales reduction discourages cheating as profit from honest production

exceeds the potential profit of cheating. In other words, a signaling equilibrium must entail some

negative consequence of cheating and consumer access to (imperfect) information is the

mechanism to generate such negative consequence in Wolinsky's model. Other researchers have

shown the same insight in different settings where the negative consequence of cheating may

arise from lower reputation and fewer repeat sales (Shapiro 1982, Klein and Leffler 1981).

       More importantly, the extent to which price exceeds marginal cost depends on the nature

of consumer information. The poorer the information is, the less negative consequence there is

for cheating. To counter the increased temptation to cheat, there must be higher profit from

honest production, which implies higher mark up in the signaling equilibrium. Note that this

insight is different from the observation that price is higher for higher quality when consumers

have perfect information about product quality (without inference from price). In that case, price

                                                 8
difference only reflects cost difference (assuming the market is competitive and every one has

equal access to production technology). But when consumer information is imperfect, price

difference includes not only the cost difference but also the mark up difference, the latter of

which increases with the imperfection of consumer information.

       Above all, we have two theoretical predictions in a signaling equilibrium: (1) if

consumers can infer product quality from price, price is a monotone function of quality; and (2)

if price signals quality, the price difference between high and low qualities is smaller when

consumers have access to better information about quality (besides price).

       The reality of medicines is more complicated than theory. On the one hand, consumers

may not be completely fooled because they may inspect the packaging of a drug and observe

drug performance from personal experience or comments from friends and colleagues. This has

already been captured in the above theory. On the other hand, price may not have a one-to-one

correspondence to drug quality because many other reasons lead to price dispersion: search cost

on price information alone may generate price dispersion (Stigler 1961), so do cost differences in

production or distribution. To the extent that consumers cannot differentiate these confounding

factors from price, they may form a rational belief that low price signals a high probability of

low quality but low (high) price does not confirm low (high) quality. In this sense, providing

quality information directly may complement the imperfect function of price signals, reduce the

price-cost markup for authentic drugs, and facilitate consumer shopping for affordable

medicines.

       Another factor that is not considered in Wolinsky (1983) but may affect equilibrium price

and quality is price control regulation. Atella, Bhattacharya and Carbonari (2008) examine drug

price and quality outcomes under minimum quality standard and price control regulations.

Although they do not consider counterfeit drugs and assume consumers have perfect information

                                                9
about drug quality, their model predicts that price control reduces the price difference between

high and low quality drugs, reduces the average drug quality available on the market, and

weakens the positive correlation between price and quality. The second and third predictions are

further confirmed using data from US and Italy. Like in Wolinsky (1983), these findings suggest

that price and quality must be considered jointly in the drug market.

        Existing medical studies focus on detecting the existence of substandard or counterfeit

drugs. Given the difficulty in obtaining cooperation from local manufacturers and regulators,

medical researchers often acquire a small sample of drugs and have them tested in the lab for

quality (not trademark violation). For example, Dondorp et al. (2004) find that 53% of the 188

tablet packs purchased in Southeast Asia under the label of artesunate (an antimalarial drug) did

not contain any artesunate. This quality problem, caused primarily by counterfeits, has increased

significantly as compared to an earlier survey in the same area (38% of 108 drug samples,

Newton et al. 2001). A more recent study (WHO 2009) acquired a larger sample of 491

antimalarials from Africa, adopted more comprehensive laboratory test procedures, and found

high failure rates (10-54%) in all of the three sample countries.

       Our data generation process follows the same rationale as in the medical literature, but we

cover a broader range of drugs (8 including antimalarials, antibiotics and anti-mycobacterials),

more source countries (17 including low- and mid-income ones), and three levels of quality tests.

Greater regional variations in our data allow a better understanding as to how the presence of

substandard and counterfeit drug associates with local regulations, income and literacy rate. We

also restrict sampling to regular pharmacies excluding kiosks, bus vendors, or other types of drug

sellers, so our estimate of failure rate is not directly comparable to that in the literature.

       More importantly, our data include purchase price for 899 drug samples. These prices,

combined with the objective lab test results on drug quality, help measure the extent to which

                                                   10
consumers can infer poor quality from cheap price. Although economic theories highlight the

importance of market price in quality revelation, most existing studies on price-quality

relationship are not specific to substandard or counterfeit drugs. Studies have shown that generic

drugs are significantly cheaper than innovator brands but both types are authentic and bio-

equivalent. For instance, Rizzo and Zeckhauser (2005) show that the first generic entrant is

priced roughly 25% lower than its brand-name competitor. With subsequent generics entrants,

the price of generics declines rapidly. However, brand-name producers do not necessarily lower

their price in response to generic entry (Caves, Whinston and Hurwitz 1991; Grabowski and

Vernon 1992; Frank and Salkever 1997). We are aware of three economic studies on counterfeits,

but none of them focus on drugs. Based on a field experiment on eBay, Jin and Kato (2006) show

that price and quality of sportscards can be negatively related if consumers are misled by high

quality claims from low-quality sellers. It turned out that such high-claim cards are more likely

to be counterfeits. Using a natural experiment in Chinese shoe market, Qian (2008; 2011)

presents evidence that brands with less government protection differentiate their products from

counterfeits by innovation, self-enforcement, vertical integration of downstream retailers, and

subtle high-price signals.

       Above all, we believe this paper is the first effort to study price-quality relationship for

substandard and counterfeit drugs. Although policy makers have emphasized drug affordability

and quality control separately, we show that these two dimensions are fundamentally linked and

must be considered together.



                                            III. Data

III.1 Data description



                                                11
         Over the past three years (2008-2010), we created networks of covert shoppers across

cities and countries to help collect medicines.4 In the study sample, medicines were procured by

these local covert shoppers from 185 private pharmacies across 17 developing and mid-income

countries. In particular, covert shoppers helped identify non-slum, middle class areas of their city

and then took a random walk through those areas collecting samples from regular pharmacies

excluding kiosks, bus vendors and other types of drug sellers where quality may be lower. On

entering the pharmacy they asked the pharmacist or shop assistant to show them all the drugs

sold to treat malaria, TB and bacterial infections, which they required for their family. The

primary aim was to act as any other shopper5, they therefore would listen to the advice of the

pharmacist if it was given, and then randomly select products if a significant choice was

available, buying three products (or fewer if only one or two were available) of each drug type in

each location.6 It is not uncommon for people to home treat without prescription, particularly in

Africa where visiting a doctor is difficult and expensive, so ensuring a supply of antimalarials

and antibiotics is normal. Following this protocol we believe we can compare one city with

another but a more precise stratification would have required far greater knowledge of each city

than we had.

         Samplings took place in eleven African cities, three Indian cities, and five cities from

mid-income countries. All of the eight drug types were from the World Health Organization’s

essential medicines list, including antimalarials, antibiotics and anti-mycobacterials (for the

4 Covert shoppers were selected based on their citizenship and knowledge of the cities chosen for study. All were
compensated financially for helping collect samples.
5 There was not a single incidence where a pharmacist balked at the request, although it is of course possible they
were suspicious and changed the products sold as a result. This implies that the failure rate found in our sample may
be an underestimate of the actual failure rate.
6 Note that all the drugs were purchased without a prescription. In no case did the lack of a prescription prevent a
drug sale. It is not clear whether there are laws requiring pharmacists to only sell drugs if a prescription is available
in the sampled countries and cities. If there are such laws, they were not being followed by pharmacies or enforced
by regulators.


                                                           12
treatment of tuberculosis).7 With the exception of ciprofloxacin, a widely used antibiotic, no

other drug was available in every location. Indeed, no antimalarials were available for purchase

from the cities of Istanbul, Sao Paolo and Moscow. To ensure comparability, we bought the most

standard formulations. All of the samples were tablets, most in blister packages, which are the

easiest products to store and hence proliferate in emerging markets.8

         All medicines were assessed in three types of tests. The first is a visual inspection of

packaging and pills for correctness. The second type of tests, referred to as minilab tests,

includes disintegration test for basic solubility and semi-quantitative thin-layer chromatography

(TLC) for the presence and relative concentration of active ingredients. Both visual and minilab

tests follow the Global Pharma Health Fund e.V. Minilab® protocol to identify substandard,

degraded or counterfeit medicines.

         The third type of test is a Raman spectrometry test for product authentication. Unlike the

Minilab tests, which test for a specific attribute of a drug, a spectrometer provides a spectra of

the entire treatment, including active ingredients, binding agents, dyes and other “excipients”.

The spectra can be compared against a known genuine version of the drug (like comparing

fingerprints), or for analyzing the presence of specific ingredients, since each ingredient will

likely have its own unique peak in the spectra. In this sense, it is more stringent than visual and

minilab tests. All the tests were conducted with the Africa Fighting Malaria Minilab in the

United Kingdom within 60 days of purchase.




7 Our aim was to pick essential drugs to combat serious infections and for diseases that are generally home treated
in poor nations. It may be tempting to classify the eight drug types into the categories of acute or chronic drugs, but
the distinction is not as easy as it seems. Malaria can be an acute condition, so is TB at the margin. Even if we could
classify drugs by acute and chronic, it is not clear the difference is driven by acute versus chronic rather than some
other attributes that differ across the eight drug types. For this reason, in the regression we use drug fixed effects as
pure controls.
8 Many of the sampled drugs were imported, fewer were locally made. However, since some of them may be
counterfeits, it is difficult to assess whether the labeled manufacturer source is the actual source.
                                                             13
       Minilab tests were run in duplicate, with the generous assumption that the result more

consistent with the reference was recorded. Quality control of the Minilab was performed daily

prior to testing and consisted of performing TLC on Minilab-reference samples for the medicine

classes being analyzed. In addition, Minilab reagents were quality control tested using reference

samples when a new lot was introduced. The Minilab protocol awards medicines a “pass” for

active ingredient (by TLC) if they have 80% or more of the labeled active ingredient(s). For

fixed-dose combinations and sulphadoxine–pyrimethamine, a “pass” was awarded only if both

active ingredients met this standard. The spectrometry tests were conducted with a Raman

Spectrometer, to assess sample spectra against approved versions of the medicines, or at the least

to check that the spectra of the active ingredient was present.

       Some of these pharmacological data have been previously published in the literature

(Bate et al. 2008, 2009a, 2009b, 2010a; Bate and Hess 2010). We do not have access to a

compendial laboratory to assess all possible problems with medicines, hence some medicines

could pass all of the above tests but still fail certain tests for solubility, permeability, product

degradation, trace element contamination and pathogenic contamination. In other words if a drug

fails one of the above tests it is definitely substandard, but if it passes it may be a higher quality,

but still far from perfect medicine.

       While we can establish whether the drug fails the tests or not, we cannot control for all

the causes for why the drug may fail. As mentioned earlier, some products are counterfeits, but

other causes for drug failures include quality control failures at a legitimate manufacturer or poor

storage along the distribution chain. As such, our measure of drug failure may capture some

cases of genuine drugs being identified as inferior products. That being said, by buying from

real pharmacies instead of rural traders, kiosks or bus vendors, the sampled drugs were more



                                                  14
likely to be stored well. Another reason for storage not being a major issue for our sample is that

a few well-known brands have no quality problems in any of the sample locations.9

        The price information is less comprehensive than the quality data. Given the initial aim of

the drug quality project was to establish quality, not all of the initial covert buyers (residents of

each city) kept all of the receipts they received. In some instances receipts were illegible, and in

some, they were simply not given by the medicine seller. Nevertheless price data are available

for 899 drugs that went through all the quality tests. All prices are nominal and converted to US

dollars according to the exchange rate as of the purchase date. For malaria and bacterial

infections, price is reported per treatment pack, i.e. the dose presumed to cure the disease. For

TB, price is reported for one uniform package. In the sampling process, we ensured that the

packs procured were directly comparable in terms of treatment course. Since most cities only

appear in our data for one year, city fixed effects will absorb most of the unobserved inflation. In

addition to price and quality data, we also collect covert shoppers’ subjective assessment of

pharmacy appearance. By definition, this assessment is binary (good or poor) and subjective, but

it provides direct evidence on consumer knowledge about product quality, which is an important

factor in the signaling equilibrium as discussed above.

        The main data described above are supplemented with data on local drug regulations,

income and literacy rate. We believe local regulations are related to the price and cost of

substandard and counterfeit drugs, while income and literacy rate are likely to affect both

demand and cost of supply. Specifically, we obtain male and female adult literacy rates for ages

15 and over from the 2009 UNDP Human Development Report (UNDP 2009). They are country-

specific and were compiled by UNESCO from censuses and surveys conducted between 1999

and 2007. We take the average of female and male literacy rates as they are highly correlated
   9
     For example, one of the prominent brands of ACT for which we had 43 samples, showed no quality problems
across locations.
                                                      15
(correlation coefficient = 0.89). One may argue that females are more likely to purchase drugs

for the family and therefore female literacy rate may matter more than male literacy rate.

Unfortunately, we do not have systematic measure on city-specific gender composition in drug

purchase, but robustness checks find that using male, female or average literacy rate generates

similar results. Literacy rate is available for all countries except for Ethiopia and Turkey.

       The year- and city-specific GDP per capita data are denominated in US$ according to the

exchange rate as of the purchase time. Another way to measure price and GDP per capita is by

purchase power parity (PPP). Since the regression results are similar when we switch both

measures to PPP, we only report results for which price and GDP are measured by exchange rate.

The GDP per capita data were constructed using the 2008 city GDP estimates by

PricewaterhouseCoopers (PWC 2009) and the 2009 and 2010 city population estimates from the

2009 revision of the UN’s World Urbanization Prospects Report (UN 2009). We extended the

2008 GDP estimates to 2009 and 2010 using country level GDP growth rates from the

International Monetary Fund (IMF). We extended the city population estimates backwards to

2008 using the UN report’s 2005–2010 average population growth figure. For Istanbul,

Lubumbashi, Kigali, Kampala, and Lusaka, city-level data was not available and we used

country-level GDP per capita from the IMF World Economic Outlook Database as of October

2010 (IMF 2010). After these procedures, GDP per capita data are available for all countries.

       We include four variables to capture local drug regulations: one is whether a drug has

been registered in the purchase country or not. As shown in Oxfam (2011) and Bate et al.

(2010b), drug registration is the most primitive regulation on legitimate drugs but its availability

and implementation vary greatly across countries. Using drug registration data collected in Bate

et al. (2010a and 2010b), we created a dummy variable equal to one if a drug has been registered

in the purchase country at the purchase time. To the extent that drug registration represents

                                                 16
minimum quality requirement, the model of Atella, Bhattacharya and Carbonari (2008) predicts

higher quality in countries with drug registration.

         Some countries impose import tariff, sales taxes and other duties on ethical drugs, we

borrow country-specific tax and duties from Bate, Tren and Urbach (2006). They are the average

Taxes and Duties applied to Chapter 29 (active pharmaceutical ingredients) and Chapter 30

(finished pharmaceutical) products in 2006, by country. This variable is available for 10

countries, accounting for 735 of the 899 drug samples.10 By definition, we expect higher price in

countries with higher tariff and taxes but it is difficult to predict how these duties affect drug

quality: on one hand, tariff and other duties may prompt government officials to take a closer

look at the drugs; on the other hand, high price may invite counterfeit and substandard

production.

         The third regulatory variable is the number of months a person will be sentenced in

prison if he is found guilty for counterfeiting drugs. We hand collected minimum and maximum

penalty from the latest legal documents we can find in each country. For example, Egyptian IP

Law sets down a number of penalties, including prison terms, for persons making or selling

counterfeit goods. Monetary penalties range from $90 to $9,000, and terms of imprisonment

range from 2 months to 3 years. Prison terms are mandatory only for repeat offenses.11 In July

2008, the Indian cabinet approved a bill that increases fines for convicted counterfeiters from

USD$250 to a minimum of USD$22,550 or three times the value of the drugs confiscated. They

also increased the jail sentences for those convicted of counterfeiting from 5 years to a minimum

of 10 years to life.12 To accommodate diverse sentencing guidelines, monetary fines are coded as


9 Please refer to Bate, Tren and Urbach (2006) for detailed data description, as different types of tax duties come
from different data sources.

10 Available at: http://www.notofakes.com/Resources/TravelAdvisory/Africa/Egypt/tabid/495/Default.aspx.

11 Available at: http://cdsco.nic.in/Guidelines%20under%20new%20penal%20provisions.pdf.
                                                        17
zero month and death penalty is coded as 360 months (30 years). We use maximum penalty in

the data. This variable is available for 12 countries, accounting for 691 of the 899 drug samples.

It is difficult to predict the correlation between penalty and the presence of poor-quality drugs:

penalty should increase the negative consequence of counterfeit and substandard production, but

penalty may be higher in response to serious problems in drug quality.

       The last regulatory variable indicates the presence of direct price regulations such as

price ceilings, mandatory retail price, and price guidance. We hand collected these regulations

from each country’s most recent government documents. Given the wide variety of price

regulations, we define a binary variable equal to one if a country has adopted any price

regulation on pharmaceuticals in the data collect year and zero otherwise. This variable is

available for 10 of the 19 cities, accounting for 554 of the 899 observations. According to Atella,

Bhattacharya and Carbonari (2008), price control regulations should reduce the average quality

available in the market, reduce price difference between high and low qualities, and weaken the

correlation between price and quality. Evidence has shown that price control regulation can lead

to lower price and more drug consumption (Danzon 1997). However, Anis and Wen (1998) and

Danzon and Chao (2000a, 2000b) suggest that price control regulation could raise market price

in some cases.



III.2 Data Summary

       Focusing on the 899 drug samples with both price and quality data, Table 1 provides a

summary of key variables. Overall, the sample includes 79 observations on Artemsisin

Combination Therapies (ACTs), 79 on Artemisinin monotherapies (Artmono), 69 on




                                                18
Chloroquine (CQ), 185 on Ciprofloxacin, 146 on Isoniazid, 168 on Rifampicin, 78 on

Sulphadoxine/Pyrimethamine (SP) and 119 on Erythromycin. The Appendix describes each type

of drug, the dosages used, as well as the type of illness it treats. It also presents the definition of

the three quality tests.

        Visual appearance test is the first screening tool used to monitor for substandard and

counterfeit products: one can spot spelling mistakes and other errors (wrong fonts, inks,

pagination etc.) and where possible compare with an example of a genuine version. Nearly 97

percent of the drugs passed the visual test. Approximately 89 percent of drugs passed the minilab

(disintegration and chromatography) tests, and 85 percent passed the spectrometry test. The three

tests are progressive: 29 of the 31 samples that fail the visual test also fail the minilab tests; and

all the drugs that fail the minlab tests fail the spectrometry test.

        In short, we have approximately 15 percent of sampled drugs that failed the most

stringent spectrometry test. This number approximates common perceptions about the percent of

fake drugs circulating in the market (for instance, see Cockburn and Newton, 2005), but is lower

than many studies for the worst areas of Africa and Southeast Asia, perhaps indicating our focus

on regular pharmacies which tend to provide better quality than other vendors. The average drug

price for our sample was $4.26 with a minimum value of .078 (for CQ) and a maximum of $48.9

(for ciprofloxacin).

        Conditional on data availability, approximately 89 percent of the drugs were registered in

the country in which they were sold, the average adult literacy rate is 81 percent, the length of

the penalty for counterfeiting is 233 months, and the total tariffs and taxes are on average 12

percent. Unlike previous medical studies on a specific part of the world, our data cover a wide

range of GDP per capita, from US$ 193.79 in Lubumbashi, Congo (2010) to US$ 19208.18 in

Moscow, Russia (2010).

                                                   19
         Table 2 provides a slightly more disaggregated look at the data. It shows for each city and

each year, the average pass rate of drugs for different types of test. For instance, the highest pass

rates for drugs were in Istanbul in 2010 where 35 drugs passed all tests successfully and Sao

Paolo in 2010, with 32 drugs passing both visual and minilab tests and 97 percent passing the

spectrometry result. The lowest pass rates were for Lubumbashi in 2010 where only 60 percent

of the drugs passed the spectrometry test but in this case only 10 drugs were sampled. The lowest

pass rate for a reasonable size sample was from Nairobi, where only 70 percent passed the

spectrometry test in the 2010 sample.

         Table 2 also shows the unusual structure of our data. While we observe most drugs and

accordingly their prices in multiple years, most cities from which the samples are taken are only

observed in a single year. The only exceptions are Delhi (observed in 2008 and 2010) and

Nairobi (observed in 2009 and 2010). India is the only country from which we sampled more

than one city.13 This structure suggests that the sample is largely a pooled cross-section. If we

control for city fixed effects, the effect of GDP per capita, literacy rate and local regulations will

only be identified by variations within Delhi and Nairobi.

         In addition to countries and cities, the data identify 185 unique pharmacies, each of which

corresponds to at least two types of drugs. This structure allows us to control for unobserved

pharmacy attributes by pharmacy fixed effects. Moreover, every covert shopper reported whether

he/she assessed the look of the pharmacy “good” or “poor”. This subjective opinion will help us

measure the extent to which the “look” of a pharmacy signals drug quality to a cautious

consumer. If consumers infer drug quality from the look of the pharmacies and a better-looking

pharmacy is more likely to charge a higher price, a regression not accounting for pharmacy


12 To account for within-India variation, we obtain GDP data at the state level (higher than a city).


                                                          20
identity may mistakenly attribute the signaling effect to price. Inversely, if price remains

significantly correlated with quality after we control for pharmacy fixed effects or shopper

assessment, it is clear that price has a separate signaling effect in addition to the look or other

attributes of pharmacies. The degree to which covert shoppers' subjective assessment predicts

the actual lab results will also highlight the nature of consumer information as discussed in the

theoretical literature.

        Table 3 shows variable averages when we split the sample into failing and non-failing

drugs, where failing is defined as failing any of the three tests. The most interesting observation

is the difference in drug prices. The average price in the non-failing sample was more than 75%

higher than the average price in the failing sample. The regression results in the next section will

further confirm that the price difference remains statistically significant when we control for

local regulations, income, literacy rate, city fixed effects or even pharmacy fixed effects. Other

interesting results from the comparison are higher degree of product registration, higher fraction

of innovator brands and better pharmacy assessment for non-failing drugs. Moreover, non-failing

drugs are more likely to appear in countries with higher adult literacy rates, higher income levels

and price regulations.

        Figure 1 plots the kernel densities of log(price) for failing and non-failing drugs.

Consistent with Table 3, the average price of non-failing drugs is higher than that of failing

drugs, but both distributions are dispersed and have a large overlap with each other. This

suggests that any signaling effect that price has on drug quality may be far from complete. We

will test this more rigorously in Section IV.




                                       IV. Empirical Analysis

                                                21
        Our empirical analysis consists of three parts: first, we show how local drug regulations,

income and literacy rate correlate with whether a sample drug fails any quality test. This does not

represent any causal relationship but could be informative to policy makers given the on-going

debate on anti-counterfeit policies. The second part of the analysis focuses on price-quality

relationship. To test the two predictions shown in Section II, we examine whether failing drugs

are on average sold at lower prices than non-failing drugs. We also compare this price difference

to the unexplained price variations, and test whether the difference in average price varies by

adult literacy. The last part of this section examines whether shopper’s subjective assessment on

the look of pharmacies correlates with our quality test results and whether the price difference

between high and low quality drugs is driven by the look of pharmacies instead of the true

signaling effect of price.



IV.1 The prevalence of poor-quality drugs

        Denoting i as a specific drug sample, d as drug type , c as city, and t as year, we run the

following probit regression:

        𝑃𝐴𝑆𝑆𝑖𝑑𝑐𝑡 = 1

        𝑖𝑓   𝛼𝑑 + 𝛼𝑡 + [𝛼𝑐 ] + 𝛽1 𝐺𝐷𝑃𝑃𝐶𝑐𝑡 + 𝛽2 𝐿𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡 + 𝛽3 𝐼𝑛𝑛𝑜𝑣𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑑𝑐𝑡

               +𝛽4 𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑑𝑅𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑑𝑐𝑡 + 𝛽5 𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑃𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑡 + 𝛽6 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙𝑇𝑎𝑥𝑐𝑡 + 𝛽7 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑅𝑒𝑔𝑐 + 𝜀𝑖𝑑𝑐𝑡 > 0

where

        𝑃𝐴𝑆𝑆 = a dummy equal to one if sample i passes a specific quality test,

        𝛼𝑑 = drug type fixed effects, total 8 dummies,

        𝛼𝑐 = city fixed effects, total 19 dummies,




                                                 22
           𝛼𝑡 = year fixed effects, total 3 dummies14,

           𝑙𝑜𝑔𝐺𝐷𝑃𝑃𝐶 = log (GDP per capita), in US$,

           𝐿𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑒 = adult literacy rate in percentage points,

           𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑑𝑅𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑠𝑡 = a dummy equal to one if the drug that sample i intends to be has been

                              registered in the purchase country,

           𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑃𝑒𝑛 = max # of months in prison if caught counterfeiting drugs,

           𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙𝑇𝑎𝑥 = total tariff and tax for the drug that sample i intends to be, in percentage

                              points.

           𝑖𝑛𝑛𝑜𝑣𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑟 = 1 if the drug intends to be an innovator brand,

           𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑅𝑒𝑔 =. 1 if the country has price regulations on pharmaceuticals in the study year.

           In theory, stricter regulations on drug quality should raise the cost of substandard or

counterfeit production, thus increasing the probability that our drug samples pass the quality

tests. This implies 𝛽4 > 0, 𝛽5 > 0. Predications on 𝛽3, 𝛽6 and 𝛽7 are less clear: high import

tariffs, no price regulation and the status of innovator brands may imply higher drug price thus

inviting counterfeits, but it is also likely that innovator brand holders devote more efforts to

brand protection by hiring investigators, pursuing counterfeiters and making the package harder

to imitate. It is also possible that price regulations limit the range of mark up (i.e. price – cost)

thus reducing the potential reward for high quality drugs which implies more drug failures.

           Table 4 reports four sets of results for the above probit regression: Column (1) focuses on

whether a drug sample passes the visual appearance test, Column (2) on the combined Minilab

tests (disintegration and chromatography), Column (3) on the spectrometry test; and Column (4)

adds city fixed effects to Column (3). In theory, we could include pharmacy fixed effects but we


14
     Including all three full sets of fixed effects will create collinearity. Stata-implemented regressions will
      automatically drop two dummies in two of the three sets to avoid collinearity problem.
                                                                23
choose not to because pharmacy identity predicts many outcomes perfectly which leaves the

estimation sample much smaller than that without pharmacy fixed effects. Note that failing any

of the three tests is equivalent to failing the spectrometry test because that is the most stringent

one. All results are presented as marginal effects, with robust standard errors clustered by city.

       Across all columns, it is clear that registered drugs are more likely to pass any test.

Moreover, drugs of innovator brands are more likely to pass minilab and spectrometry tests, and

drugs with higher taxes and duties are more likely to fail these two tests. The correlations

between test results and price regulations are less clear: the presence of price regulations tends to

be associated with lower passing rate for visual appearance but higher passing rates for the other

tests. Maximum penalty for counterfeiting drugs is significantly correlated with minilab and

spectrometry tests but with a counterintuitive negative sign. This reflects the possibility that

countries with severe counterfeit problems may adopt harsher penalties. Note that registered

drugs and innovator brands continue to be positively related to passing the tests even after we

add city fixed effects, as they are country-drug-year specific. The other regulatory variables

(taxes, maximum penalty, price regulations) drop off Column (4) because they only vary by city.

       Compared to Table 3, GDP per capita is not significantly correlated with test results

(except for Column 4 which is identified from variations within Delhi and Nairobi) but countries

with higher adult literacy rates tend to pass the tests more.

       Above all, the most robust result from Table 4 is that both product registration and

innovator brands are strongly correlated with better drug quality.



IV.2 Price-Quality Relationship

       We examine price-quality relationship in the following specification:



                                                  24
        𝑙𝑜𝑔𝐷𝑟𝑢𝑔𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑖𝑑𝑐𝑡

                       = 𝛼𝑑 + 𝛼𝑡 + [𝛼𝑐 ] + [𝛼𝑠 ] + 𝛽𝐹𝑎𝑖𝑙𝐴𝑛𝑦𝑇𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑑𝑐𝑡 + 𝛾1 𝐺𝐷𝑃𝑃𝐶𝑐𝑡

                       + 𝛾2 𝐿𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡 + 𝛾3 𝐼𝑛𝑛𝑜𝑣𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑑𝑐𝑡 + 𝛾4 𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑑𝑅𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑑𝑐𝑡 + 𝛾5 𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑃𝑒𝑛𝑐

                       + 𝛾6 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙𝑇𝑎𝑥𝑐 + 𝛾7 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑅𝑒𝑔𝑐 + 𝜖𝑖𝑑𝑐𝑡

where

        𝛼𝑠 = pharmacy fixed effects,

        𝐹𝑎𝑖𝑙𝐴𝑛𝑦𝑇𝑒𝑠𝑡 = 1 if sample i fails any of the three tests,

and the other variables are described above. We use log of drug price instead of price itself as the

dependent variable, because drug price is highly skewed and the distribution of log price is much

closer to normal distributions as shown in Figure 1. If price provides an effective signal of

whether a drug passes any quality test, we expect 𝛽 < 0. Table 5 reports three sets of OLS

results, with progressive addition of city fixed effects in column (2) and pharmacy fixed effects

in column (3). All regressions allow robust standard errors clustered by city.

        As expected, drugs are more expensive if consumers are richer or better educated, or if

the drug is of innovator brand, registered, subject to high taxes and duties, and not directly

regulated in price. Nevertheless, drugs that fail at least one of our quality tests are priced 21.4%

lower in Column (1) and 13.6-18.7% lower (which corresponds to US$0.59-0.80) after the

addition of city fixed effects or pharmacy fixed effects. This suggests that unobservable attributes

such as city-specific regulation enforcement or pharmacy service do not explain most of the price

discount for poor-quality drugs. In other words, consumers could have suspected lower quality

from lower price.

        Suppose the 13.6-18.7% price discount does signal poor quality drugs, how effective is

the signal? This will depend on how drug price varies by other factors. These factors are likely in

our error term as we cannot control for all the information that a consumer may observe in the
                                                 25
local market. In light of this, we use an iterated general least square (GLS) procedure to estimate

the standard error of the unexplained log price variations for both failing and non-failing drugs

separately. The estimates are reported in the bottom row of Table 5.15

           Before we add city or pharmacy fixed effects, the standard error of unexplained log price

variations is 0.43 for non-failing drugs and 0.37 for failing drugs, both much bigger than the

0.136-0.187 difference in the average log price between the two groups. While city heterogeneity

and pharmacy heterogeneity are able to reduce the unexplained log price variations, the

remaining variations are still large relative to the average price difference.

           Figures 2-4 plot the kernel density of log price of non-failing and failing drugs after we

exclude the price variations explained by the regressions in Table 5. The average log price of

non-failing drugs is normalized as zero. All the three sets of comparisons (no city fixed effects,

with city fixed effects, and with pharmacy fixed effects) show a huge overlap in the two price

distributions. This suggests that the 13.6-18.7% difference in average price, though statistically

significant, is not enough to ensure that consumers always infer poor quality from lower price. In

fact, if we use the first set of log price distributions (i.e. no city fixed effects) to compute the

probability of a drug failing any test by brackets of price, we find that drugs sold at 37% lower

than the average price are only 9.51 percentage points (or 81%) more likely to fail any test

(25.66% vs. 14.14%), while drugs sold at 36% higher than the average price are only 7.89

percentage points (55.8%) less likely to fail any test (6.25% vs. 14.14%).

           Figures 5-6 follow the logic of Figures 2-3 (without and with city fixed effects) but we

separate the price distributions of non-failing drugs into innovator brands and non-innovator

brands. Assuming non-failing non-innovator brands are true generics, it is clear that the price


15
     Because GLS assumes the variance of error is the same conditional on failing on non-failing drugs, the estimated
      coefficients are not identical to what we reported in Table 5. However, all coefficients only differ in the third
      decimal points and there is no change in the statistical significance.
                                                             26
signal (on drug quality) is noisier for generics. The coefficient of innovator brands as reported in

Table 5 indicates that innovator brands are on average 33.6-37.1% more expensive than generics.

Combined with the facts that innovator brands have a tighter price distribution and are less likely

to fail any test, this suggests that either the high price (hence higher future profit from high

quality) discourages innovators from cheating or the innovators have more resources to seek self-

policing and government protection.

        Above all, we show that drugs that fail at least one of the quality tests are priced 13.6-

18.7% lower on average, however the price dispersion is so large that consumers cannot ensure

high quality by high price alone. In the strictest form, this rejects the first prediction as described

in Section II. Now we turn to test the second prediction that in a signaling equilibrium the price

difference between low- and high-quality drugs should increase with the imperfection of quality

information that consumers have free access to in the local market (in addition to price).

        Empirically, it is difficult to measure consumer access to quality information, so we

search for rough proxies. To the extent that a literate consumer can at least read labels on a drug

package, one may argue that consumers in a city with higher literacy rates have better ability to

identify poor quality drugs. In light of this, Table 6 presents two sets of results: in the first two

columns, we estimate two separate coefficients of failing any test depending on whether the adult

literacy rate is below 67.5% (sample median); in the remaining four columns, we split the sample

by above- or below-median literacy rate and rerun the price specification for the two subsamples

separately. We report results with and without city fixed effects for robustness check.

       As expected from the theory, Table 6 shows that the price discount for failing drugs is

larger in low-literacy cities (25.3-27.8%) than in high-literacy cities (12.3-16.0%). Moreover,

results in Columns (1) and (2) suggest that the average discount we have seen in Table 5 for the

full sample is driven by the deep discount in low-literacy cities. This finding is largely consistent

                                                   27
with the theoretical argument that more information friction on the consumer side pushes up the

mark up for high-quality drugs, which in turn makes good-quality drugs less affordable to

consumers. When we repeat the above exercise for the observations with higher-than-median

GDP per capita and the rest of the sample, we find that the discount difference between the high

and low GDP groups is much smaller (20.3% in high GDP cities and 22.1% in low GDP cities).

While we should be cautious in interpreting income versus literacy in our small sample of cities

(the two are correlated), the above results suggest that the affordability of legitimate drugs is

more likely tied with drug quality through consumer ability to detect bad quality than with GDP

levels per se.



IV.3   Can consumers tell poor-quality drugs from the look of the pharmacy?

       Evidence presented so far shows that poor-quality drugs are sold at significantly lower

prices on average but the signaling effect of price is far from complete. A related question is

whether consumers can infer drug quality from other market cues. One candidate is the type of

distribution channels, as some brand-name manufacturers in other contexts have used

downstream distribution outlets to fight against counterfeits (Qian 2008; 2010). The control of

pharmacy fixed effects in Table 5 confirms that average price remains significantly lower for

failing drugs no matter what inference a typical consumer could draw from the look of a

pharmacy. However, pharmacy fixed effects could capture many unobservables in addition to

consumer perception of a pharmacy, so it is still interesting to examine the perceived look of

pharmacies explicitly.

       Our data includes a binary variable indicating whether the covert shopper perceived the

pharmacy as “good” or “poor.” This measure is imperfect, as different shoppers may have

different definitions of “good” looking pharmacies. Nevertheless, it is the closest measure to

                                                 28
consumer perception. Table 7 shows the piece-wise correlations between shopper assessment of

pharmacy and the results of our quality tests. While shopper assessment is significantly and

positively correlated with each of the three test outcomes, the correlations are quite low: 0.14

with visual test, 0.27 with minilab test, and 0.24 with spectrometry test. In contrast, the

correlations within the three test results are much higher (0.44 to 0.82).

        Table 8 reruns the above two specifications with shopper assessment of good looking

pharmacies either as the dependent variable (Columns 1-2) or as an additional right hand side

variable in the test result regression (Columns 3-4) and the log price regression (Columns 5-7).

As before, we add city and pharmacy fixed effects in the price regression but only use city fixed

effects for the determination of shopper assessment or test results due to few variations within

pharmacy.16

          In comparison with Table 4, Columns (1) to (2) of Table 8 show that shopper assessment

is more closely related to literacy rate and GDP per capita than our objective measures of drug

quality. This could reflect consumer trust in legal enforcement or the market in general. In the

prediction of whether a drug sample passes all three tests (which is equivalent to passing the

spectrometry test), we find that shopper assessment has a marginally significant positive effect

with p-value between 0.1 and 0.05. This is consistent with the weak correlations between

shopper assessment and test results as shown in Table 7. In the log price regressions, we continue

to find significant price discount for failing drugs (13.8-17.1%), which suggests that the

signaling effect of price is not confounded by consumer inference from the look of pharmacies.

Nevertheless, shopper assessment is also positively correlated with drug price (Columns 5-6),


16
  Only 9 observations show variations of shopper assessment within a pharmacy. This happens if different covert
shoppers bought from the same pharmacy or the same shopper had different views about the pharmacy if he/she
bought drugs at different times.


                                                       29
suggesting that shopper assessment contains some useful information. The negative coefficient

on shopper assessment in Column (7) is driven by the very few observations that show variations

in shopper assessment within a specific pharmacy.

        Finally, we would like to mention a number of robustness checks we have done but not

reported in tables. One is measuring drug price and GDP per capita by purchase power parity

(PPP) instead of exchange rate. The PPP measures are higher in absolute values, but regression

results hardly change because coefficients are identified from relative comparison across

observations. Another concern is about missing values in some control variables (mostly the tax,

penalty and price regulations). The reported regressions include dummy variables indicating

missing values for each independent variable with missing values. Alternatively, we have rerun

the price regression (1) using observations with no missing value in any variable (resulting in a

sample of 463 observations), or (2) excluding the variables with significant numbers of missing

values and then conditional on no missing values in other variables (resulting in a sample of 821

observations). In both cases, we find the estimate of price discount for failing drugs (20.64% and

25.42%) similar to what is reported in Table 5 Column 1 (21.4%).17 The third concern is whether

female literacy rate is better than average literacy rate because women may be more likely to

purchase drugs for their families. To address this concern, we have rerun the price regression

with female literacy rate, male literacy rate, or both on the right hand side. In all cases, the

coefficient on whether a drug fails any test is similar to that using average literacy rate (-0.193, -

0.204, -0.225 versus -0.214 in Table 5 Column 1).

        We also split the sample according to whether female literacy rate is above or below

sample median. Similar to the results of Table 6, we find the price discount for failing drugs is

much higher in low-literacy cities (20.31%) than in high-literacy cities (16.7%).

17
  Note that regressions with city or pharmacy fixed effects are not sensitive to missing values because most
variables with missing values are city or country specific.
                                                          30
                                           V. Conclusion

       Overall, this paper uses a hand-collected data set to examine the problem of poor-quality

drugs. We have five main findings: first, 15% of the collected drug samples fail at least one

quality test and the failure is most significantly correlated with whether the drug tends to be an

innovator brand and whether it is registered with local authority. Second, drugs that fail at least

one quality test are priced on average 13.6-18.7% lower. Though statistically significant, this

price difference is small relative to the unexplained variations in price, suggesting that the

signaling effect of price is likely incomplete. Third, the price signaling effect is especially noisy

for generics. Innovator brand is a good signal itself, as drugs with innovator brands are more

likely to pass the tests, charge much higher price (30%+), and have a tighter price distribution.

Fourth, price difference between failing and non-failing drugs is greater and most conspicuous in

countries with lower-than-median literacy rate. Fifth, our covert shoppers are able to extract

meaningful information from the look of pharmacies, but their subjective assessment is noisy and

does not explain the signaling effect of price.

       These findings are largely consistent with the theoretical insights that price could reveal

quality and in such a revealing equilibrium the mark up on high quality products must be greater

if consumers have more difficulty detecting quality problems from non-price information.

However, the price-quality relationship found in our data is not as clean as the theory predicts,

especially for drugs with non-innovator brands. While the high price of innovator brands

motivate innovators to keep the reputation of good quality, this incentive is reduced for more

affordable generic drugs. Less profit also implies fewer resources for generic manufacturers to

engage in self-policing or lobby for government protection.



                                                  31
       More generally, our work reveals a tension between drug affordability and the fight

against substandard and counterfeit drugs. The 13.6-18.7% lower price for failing drugs, as well

as the information contained in innovator brand and pharmacy appearance, suggests that

consumers are likely to suspect lower quality when they pay less. Why do they choose to buy

drugs that are likely to be of lower quality? One reason is poverty: in our data, the price

differential between failing and non-failing drugs (controlling for other factors) is about $0.59-

0.80, which could be substantial for a country like India where more than 40 percent of the

population lives on less than $1 a day. Severe poverty, plus ignorance on the harm of poor-

quality drugs, could foster demand for counterfeit and substandard drugs.

       Unfortunately, public policies that aim to lower drug price may distort the price

mechanism to sort out high quality drugs. In our data, failing drugs and non-failing generics

overlap greatly in price, making it difficult to identify failing drugs based on price. Moreover, the

existence of low-price true generics leads consumers to believe that cheap drugs work often,

which could invite the entry of counterfeits and encourages legitimate producers to cut corners.

       We argue that a policy in favor of generics (over innovator brands) must be accompanied

by better regulation or information about product quality. This can be achieved by tighter

registration requirement, stricter law enforcement against non-registered drugs, more frequent

sampling and testing of existing drugs, a more transparent information system to report and track

substandard manufacturers, and better consumer education on ways to identify poor drug quality.

While medical researchers and non-profit organizations have tried to fulfill these functions, local

regulators can have more authority and cost advantage to perform them. For example, local drug

regulators can periodically test random drug samples and de-register those found to be of poor

quality. They can also blacklist counterfeit manufacturers and prosecute them for legal penalty.



                                                 32
When consumers are equipped with better quality information, price will play a lesser role of

signaling and quality drugs will become more affordable.




                                              33
References

Atella, Vincenzo; Jay Bhattacharya and Lorenzo Carbonari, “Pharmaceutical Industry, Drug
        Quality and Regulation: Evidence from US and Italy” NBER working paper #14567,
        2008.
Bate, Roger, Hess, K, Mooney, L. “Medicine Registration and Medicine Quality: A Preliminary
        Analysis of Key Cities in Emerging Markets”, Research and Reports in Tropical
        Medicine, December 2010, vol 1. Pp 89-93, doi 10.2147/RRTM. S15199.
Bate, Roger, Emily Putze, Sarah Naoshy, Alexandra McPherson, and Lorraine Mooney. "Drug
        Registration - a necessary but not sufficient condition for good quality drugs – a
        preliminary analysis of 12 countries." Africa Fighting Malaria Working Paper (Africa
        Fighting Malaria), 2010.
Bate, Roger, Richard Tren, and Jasson Urbach. Still Taxed to Death: An Analysis of Taxes and
        Tariffs on Medicines, Vaccines and Medical Devices. Washington, DC: AEI-Brookings
        Joint Center for Regulatory Studies, 2006.
Bate R, Coticelli P, Tren R, Attaran A. “Antimalarial drug quality in the most severely malarious
        parts of Africa – A six country study.” PLoS ONE. 2008;3(5): e2132.
        doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0002132.
Bate R, Hess K. “Anti-malarial drug quality in Lagos and Accra – a comparison of various
        quality assessments.” Malar J. 2010;9:157. doi:10.1186/1475-2875-9-157.
Bate R, Tren R, Mooney L, et al. Pilot Study of Essential Drug Quality in Two Major Cities in
        India. PLoS ONE. 2009;4(6): e6003.;doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0006003.
Bate R, Tren R, Hess, K, Mooney, L, Porter, K, Pilot study comparing technologies to test for
        substandard drugs in field settings, African Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology
        Vol.3(4), pp.165-170 April, 2009.
Caves, Richard E., Whinston, Michael D., and Hurwitz, Mark A. “Patent Expiration, Entry, and
        Competition in the U.S. Pharmaceutical Industry.” Brookings Papers on Economic
        Activity: Microeconomics (1991), pp. 1-48.
Cockburn, R, PN Newton, EK Agyarko, D Akunyili, and NJ White. "The Global Threat of
        Counterfeit Drugs: Why Industry and Governments Must Communicate the Dangers."
        PLoS Medicine 2(4): e100, 2005.
Cooper, Russell, and Thomas Ross (1984) "Prices, Product Qualities and Asymmetric
        Information: The Competitive Case." The Review of Economic Studies Vol. 51, No. 2 ,
        1984: 197-207.
Dondorp, A. M., et al. "Fake antimalarials in Southeast Asia are a major impediment to malaria
        control: multinational cross-sectional survey on the prevalence of fake antimalarials."
        Tropical Medicine & International Health Vol. 9 Issue 12, 2004: 1241-1246.
Danzon, Patricia M. Pharmaceutical Price Regulation. AEI Press, 1997.
Danzon, Patricia and Li-Wei Chao, “Cross-national Price Differences for Pharmaceutials: How
        Large, and Why?” Journal of Health Economics 19 (2000a): 159-95.
Danzon, Patricia and Li-Wei Chao, “Does Regulation Drive Out Competition in Pharmaceutical
        Markets?” Journal of Law and Economics 63 (20000b): 311-57.
Frank, Richard G., and Salkever, David S. “Generic Entry and the Pricing of Pharmaceuticals.”
        Journal of Economics and Management Strategy. 6(1997): 75-90.
Grabowski, Henry G., and Vernon, John M. “Brand Loyalty, Entry, and Price Competition in
        Pharmaceuticalsafter the 1984 Drug Act”. Journal of Law and Economics 35 (1992):
        331-350.

                                               34
Grossman, Gene, and Carl Shapiro. "Counterfeit-Product Trade." American Economic Review,
        March 1988: 59-75.
Grossman, Gene, and Carl Shapiro. "Foreign Counterfeiting of Status Goods." The Quarterly
        Journal of Economics Vol 103, No.1, 1988: 79-100.
IMF. “World Economic Outlook Databse, October 2010 Edition.”
        http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2010/02/weodata/index.aspx (accessed February
        23, 2011)
Jin, Ginger Z. and Andrew Kato “Price, Quality and Reputation: Evidence From An Online Field
        Experiment”, RAND Journal of Economics. Winter 2006, Vol. 37 No.4.
Klein, B, and K Leffler. "The Role of Market Forces in Assuring Contractual Performance."
        Journal of Political Economy, LXXXIX, 1981: 615-641.
Lanjouw, Jean O. and Iain M. Cockburn, “New Pills for Poor People? Empirical Evidence After
        GATT,” World Development 29 (2001): 265-89.
Newton P, Proux S, Green M, Smithuis F, Rozendaal J, Prakongpan S, Chotivanich K, Mayxay
        M, Looareesuwan S, Farrar J,Nosten F, White NJ. “Fake artesunate in southeast Asia”
        Lancet. 2001 Jun 16;357(9272):1948-50.
Oxfam, “Eye on the Ball Medicine regulation – not IP enforcement – can best deliver quality
        medicines” 143 Oxfam Brief Paper, February 2, 2011.
Pazderka, Bohumir, “Patent Protection and Pharmaceutical R&D Spending in Canada,”
        Canadian Public Policy 25 (1999): 29-46.
PricewaterhouseCoopers. "UK Economic Outlook." 2009.
        https://www.ukmediacentre.pwc.com/imagelibrary/downloadMedia.ashx?MediaDetailsI
        D=1562 (accessed February 23, 2011)
Qian, Yi. "Impact of Entry by Counterfeits." Quarterly Journal of Economics Vol. 123, No.4,
        2008: 1577-1609.
Qian, Yi. “Brand management and strategies against counterfeits”, working paper 2010.
Rizzo, John A. and Richard Zeckhauser. “Generic Scrip Share and the Price of Brand-Name
        Drugs: The Role of Consumer Choice.” 2005
Shapiro, Carl. "Consumer Information, Product Quality and Seller Reputation." Bell Journal of
        Economics , 1982: 20-35.
Stigler GJ. “The Economics of Information.” J. Polit. Econ, 1961; 69:213-25
The Pharmaletter. "Brazil one of the top emerging markets for Pharma, with current growth of
        23% pa." The Pharmaletter website. March 2009.
        http://www.thepharmaletter.com/file/13345/brazil-one-of-the-top-emerging-markets-for-
        pharma-with-currentgrowth- (accessed September 8, 2010).
The United Nations Development Programme. Indicators - Human Development Report 2009.
        2009. http://hdrstats.undp.org/en/indicators/ (accessed 10 25, 2010).
United Nations Office of Drugs and Crime. "Transational Trafficking and the Rule of Law in
        West Africa: a Threat Assessment." United Nations Office of Drugs and Crime Website.
        July 2009. http://www.unodc.org/documents/data-and-
        analysis/Studies/West_Africa_Report_2009.pdf (accessed September 17, 2010).
United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs. “World Urbanization Prospects:
        The 2009 Revision.” 2009. http://esa.un.org/unpd/wup/index.htm (accessed 2 23, 2011)
Wolinsky, Asher. "Prices as Signals of Product Quality." The Review of Economic Studies Vol 50
        No.4, 1983: 647-658.
World Health Organization. "Counterfeit Medicines. Fact sheet No. 275." January 2010.
        http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs275/en/index.html.

                                             35
World Health Organization, “Substandard and counterfeit medicines. Fact Sheet No. 275.”
      November 2003. http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/2003/fs275/en/
World Health Organization, “Survey of the Quality of Selected Antimalarial Medicines
      Circulating in Madagascar, Senegal, and Uganda” November 2009.
World Health Organization; Health Action International Africa. "Anti-malarial Medicines in
      Kenya: Availability, Quality and Registration Status." 2007.
WorldAtlas. Largest Cities in the World. http://www.worldatlas.com/citypops.htm (accessed 10
      25, 2010).




                                              36
Figure 1: Raw distributions of log (drug price) for failing and non-failing drugs




Figure 2: Distributions of log (drug price) for failing and non-failing drugs, after controlling for

local regulations, income and literacy rate (without city fixed effects)




                                                 37
Figure 3: Distributions of log (drug price) for failing and non-failing drugs, after controlling for

local regulations, income and literacy rate (with city fixed effects)




Figure 4: Distributions of log (drug price) for failing and non-failing drugs, after controlling for

local regulations, income and literacy rate (with pharmacy fixed effects)




                                                 38
Figure 5: Distributions of log (drug price) for failing drugs, non-failing innovator brands, and

non-failing generics, after controlling for local regulations, income and literacy rate (without city

fixed effects)




Figure 6: Distributions of log (drug price) for failing drugs, non-failing innovator brands, and

non-failing generics, after controlling for local regulations, income and literacy rate (with city

fixed effects)




                                                 39
                                         Table 1: Descriptive Statistics

                                            N       Mean       Std. Dev.    Min       Max
Drug Price (US$)                           899      4.259        5.200     0.070     48.900
                               ACTs         79      5.591        1.997     2.100      9.000
                            Artmono         55      5.912        1.566     2.900      9.200
                                  CQ        69      0.368        0.514     0.070      2.400
                               Cipro       185      8.171        8.516     0.880     48.900
                            Isoniazid      146      2.367        2.206     0.280      8.300
                          Rifampicin       168      4.056        3.838     0.380     16.200
                                SP         78       1.110        0.493     0.400      2.400
                       Erythromycin        119      3.456        3.840     0.460     15.200
=1 if Pass Visual Appearance Test          899      0.966        0.183       0          1
=1 if Pass Minilab Test                    899      0.890        0.313       0          1
=1 if Pass Spectrometry Test               899      0.845        0.362       0          1
=1 if fail any test                        899      0.155        0.362       0          1
=1 if the pharmacy looks “good”            899      0.249        0.433       0          1
=1 if innovator brand                      899      0.080        0.272       0          1
=1 if fail any test | innovator brands      72      0.056        0.229       0          1
=1 if fail any test | non-innovator        827      0.163        0.370       0          1
=1 if Product Registered                   892       0.896       0.306        0         1
brands
Adult Literacy Rate (%)                    828      73.097      10.547       65       99.55
GDP Per Capita (US$)                       899     4839.51     5007.20     193.79   19759.09
Maximum Penalty (months)                   691      233.52      135.80        0        360
Total Tax                                  623      11.705       9.447        0        31.4
=1 if price regulations exist              646       0.786       0.410        0         1




                                                       40
           Table 2: Test-passing Rates by Country, City and Year

Country          city             year            N          % of passing all

                                                                   three tests
Angola         Luanda            2010             53                 75.47
 Brazil       San Paolo          2010             32                 96.88
 China         Beijing           2010             40                 92.50
 Congo      Lubumbashi           2010             10                 60.00
 Egypt          Cairo            2010             58                 87.93
Ethiopia        Addis            2010             36                 80.56
 Ghana          Accra            2009             49                 83.67
 India         Chennai           2009            100                 89.00
 India          Delhi            2008             74                 81.08
 India          Delhi            2010             40                 82.50
 India         Kolkata           2010             39                 84.62
 Kenya         Nairobi           2009             8                  75.00
 Kenya         Nairobi           2010             40                 70.00
Nigeria         Lagos            2009             53                 79.25
 Russia       Moscow             2010             37                 94.59
Rwanda          Kigali           2010             14                 92.86
Tanzania         Dar             2010             53                 83.02
Thailand      Bangkok            2009             41                 82.93
Turkey         Istanbul          2010             35                100.00
Uganda        Kampala            2010             44                 81.82
Zambia         Lusaka            2010             43                 86.05
 Total                                           899                 84.54




                                    41
      Table 3: Summary Statistics, by Whether the Drug Passed or Failed All the Tests

                                        Passing all tests                 Fail at least one test

                                  N         Mean         Std. Dev.   N         Mean      Std. Dev.

Drug Price (US$)                 760        4.570           5.473    139       2.560       2.772

                         ACTs     68        5.679           2.039    11        5.049       1.698

                     Artmono      41        5.949           1.543    14        5.807       1.687

                           CQ     54        0.398           0.553    15        0.263       0.337

                         Cipro   167        8.596           8.728    18        4.236       4.782

                     Isoniazid   122        2.506           2.333    24        1.665       1.199

                   Rifampicin    147        4.244           3.972    21        2.741       2.409

                            SP    58        1.187           0.482    20        0.890       0.467

                Erythromycin     103        3.766           4.031    16        1.469       0.832

=1 if Product Registered         755        0.951           0.216    137       0.591       0.473

Adult Literacy Rate (%)          696        73.41           10.89    132       71.44        8.34

GDP Per Capita (US$)             760       5100.73       5220.40     139     3411.08      3290.96

Maximum Penalty (months)         585       233.03           137.52   106      236.26       126.43

Total Tax                        520        11.47            9.23    103       12.89       10.45

=1 if price regulations exist    577        0.804           0.397    89        0.674       0.471

=1 if pharmacy looks “good”      760        0.795           0.404    139       0.511       0.502

=1 if innovator brand            760        0.089           0.286    139       0.029       0.168




                                                    42
                                     Table 4: Test results in correlation with local factors, Probit

                                                    (1)                 (2)              (3)                (4)
                                                                                        Pass               Pass
                                                                 Pass minilab
                                              Pass visual test                      spectrometry       spectrometry
                                                                     tests
                                                                                         test               test
                                                 marginal           marginal          marginal          marginal
                                                 effect/t           effect/t            effect/t        effect/t
Adult Literacy Rate (%)                           0.001              0.000            0.004***
                                                 (1.578)            (0.075)             (2.836)
Log GDP per capita (US$)                          0.003              0.032               -0.018         0.098***
                                                 (0.563)            (1.623)            (-1.053)         (11.903)
Maximum Legal Penalty for Drug
                                                 4.07E-06          -0.0002**         -0.0003***
Counterfeiting (in months)
                                                     (0.124)          (-1.992)        (-3.053)
  =1 if registered with local drug authority       0.124***          0.384***        0.474***          0.489***
                                                     (2.600)           (7.204)         (7.993)          (7.844)
 Total tariffs, taxes and duties (%)                -0.001*          -0.003**         -0.003**
                                                    (-1.716)          (-2.262)        (-2.022)
  =1 if intends to be an innovator brand              0.002          0.063***        0.108***          0.122***
                                                     (0.232)           (4.145)         (6.794)          (8.659)
  =1 if price regulations exist                   -0.018***          0.069***        0.103***
                                                    (-3.601)           (3.610)         (5.431)
 Year FE                                               Yes               Yes             Yes              Yes
 Drug Type FE                                          Yes               Yes             Yes              Yes
 City FE                                               No                No              No               Yes
 N                                                     828               899             899              864
 Adjusted R2                                          0.319             0.225           0.213            0.217
Note: *** p<0.01; ** p<0.05 ; * p<0.1. T-statistics are reported in parentheses. All regressions contain missing dummies indicating
missing values in included variables. Columns (1) and (4) have fewer than 899 observations because some variables included in the
regressions perfectly predict the dependent variable. Literacy rate, maximum penalty, taxes and price regulations drop out of Column
(4) because they are absorbed in city fixed effects.



                                                                   43
                                                  Table 5: Price-Quality relationship

                                                                                    (1)              (2)             (3)
 Dependent variable = log (drug price)                                            coef/t           coef/t          coef/t
  =1 if fails any of the quality tests                                         -0.214***        -0.187***       -0.136***
                                                                                 (-6.119)         (-5.282)        (-2.858)
 Adult Literacy Rate (%)                                                        0.028***
                                                                                 (3.231)
 Log GDP per capita (US$)                                                       0.452***         0.379***        0.354***
                                                                                 (5.223)         (10.436)         (9.593)
 Maximum Legal Penalty for Drug Counterfeiting (in months)                     -0.004***
                                                                                 (-6.568)
  =1 if registered with local drug authority                                    0.142***         0.166***         0.088**
                                                                                 (3.436)          (5.049)         (2.017)
 Total tariffs, taxes and duties (%)                                             0.021**
                                                                                 (2.504)
  =1 if intends to be an innovator brand                                        0.355***         0.336***        0.371***
                                                                                 (5.477)          (6.417)         (6.020)
  =1 if price regulations exist                                                -0.511***
                                                                                 (-3.439)
 Year FE                                                                            Yes              Yes             Yes
 Drug Type FE                                                                       Yes              Yes             Yes
 City FE                                                                            No               Yes             No
 Pharmacy FE                                                                        No               No              Yes
 N / Adjusted R2                                                               899/0.892        899/0.911       899/0.910
 σ of unexplained log(drug price) for drugs passing all tests                      0.426            0.385           0.347
 σ of unexplained log(drug price) for drugs failing at least one test              0.372            0.326           0.311
Note: *** p<0.01; ** p<0.05 ; * p<0.1. T-statistics are reported in parentheses. All regressions contain missing dummies indicating
missing values in included variables. All columns allow robust standard errors with the error term clustered by city. Column (3) does
not include city fixed effects because they will be absorbed by pharmacy fixed effects. Standard deviations (σ) of unexplained
log(drug price) are estimated using iterated general least squares assuming heteroscadasticity between failing and non-failing drugs.
Literacy rate, maximum penalty, taxes and price regulations drop out of Columns (2) and (3) because they are absorbed in city or
pharmacy fixed effects.


                                                                  44
                                Table 6: Price-quality relationship by above- or below-median literacy rate

                                                       (1)           (2)             (3)             (4)           (5)             (6)
                                                        log(drugprice)                log(drugprice)                log(drugprice)
                                                                                  (if literacy >=sample          (if literacy <sample
                                                         (full sample)
                                                                                          median)                        median)
                                                      coef/t        coef/t         coef/t          coef/t        coef/t          coef/t
 =1 if fails any of the quality tests                                            -0.143***       -0.123***     -0.258***       -0.258***
                                                                                    (-3.135)        (-2.640)     (-9.556)         (-9.556)
  =1 if fails any of the quality tests * if
                                                     -0.160***     -0.129***
 literacy > sample median
                                                       (-3.201)      (-2.976)
  =1 if fails any of the quality tests * if
                                                     -0.278***     -0.253***
 literacy < sample median
                                                      (-6.699)     (-6.577)
 Year FE                                              Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes
 Drug Type FE                                         Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes
 City FE                                              No           Yes            No            Yes           No              Yes
 N                                                    828          828            444           444           384             384
 Adjusted R2                                         0.901        0.919          0.801         0.807         0.942          0.942
Note: *** p<0.01; ** p<0.05 ; * p<0.1. T-statistics are reported in parentheses. All regressions contain adult literacy rate,
GDP per capita, product registration, maximum penalty, taxes, price regulations, innovator brands, and missing dummies
indicating missing values in included variables. All columns allow robust standard errors with the error term clustered by
city. Samples conditional on countries with valid literacy rate.




                                                                    45
                     Table 7: Correlations between covert shoppers’ pharmacy assessment and quality test results

                                                                      Pass                       Pharmacy
                                   Pass visual         Pass      spectrometry                    Assessed
                                       test        minilab test        test      Fail any test     Good
Pass visual test                         1
Pass minilab test                    0.4983             1
Pass spectrometry test               0.4419          0.8226              1
Fail any test                        -0.4419         -0.8226            -1             1
Pharmacy Assessed Good               0.1448          0.2738          0.2373         -0.2373         1
Note: all correlations are statistically significant with p-value less than 0.0001.




                                                                     46
                                                    Table 8: Covert shoppers’ pharmacy assessment

                                                  (1)         (2)                   (3)            (4)                (5)            (6)                   (7)
                                               Pharmacy looks good                    Pass all tests                           Log (drug price)
                                               marginal    marginal              marginal       marginal
                                                                                                                    coef/t           coef/t           coef/t
                                               effects/t   effects/t             effects/t      effects/t
 =1 if fails any of the quality tests                                                                             -0.171***        -0.165***        -0.138***
                                                                                                                    (-5.109)         (-5.133)        (-2.901)
 =1 if pharmacy looks "good"                                                       0.131*          0.141           0.252***         0.139***         -0.073*
                                                                                  (1.740)         (1.612)           (4.151)          (4.132)         (-1.754)
 Adult Literacy Rate (%)                        0.011**                           0.003**                          0.027***
                                                (1.970)                           (2.379)                           (3.518)
 Log GDP per capita (US$)                         0.020        0.151***           -0.031*        0.068***          0.413***        0.351***         0.370***
                                                (0.886)        (69.895)           (-1.688)        (4.396)           (5.403)         (9.577)          (9.768)
 Maximum Legal Penalty                           -0.000                         -0.000***                         -0.004***
                                                (-1.469)                          (-2.801)                          (-8.043)
 =1 if registered                                 0.159        0.479***          0.406***        0.418***            0.076*        0.129***          0.087**
                                                (1.607)         (7.796)           (6.712)         (6.578)           (1.811)         (3.740)          (1.981)
 Total tariffs, taxes and duties (%)           -0.003**                          -0.004**                          0.021***
                                                (-2.001)                          (-2.254)                          (2.846)
 =1 if innovator brand                            0.009           0.008          0.102***        0.117***          0.355***        0.337***         0.370***
                                                (0.780)          (0.112)          (6.754)         (9.296)           (5.990)         (6.588)          (6.012)
 =1 if price regulations exist                    0.023                          0.108***                         -0.475***
                                                (0.878)                           (4.647)                           (-3.561)
 Year FE                                           Yes             Yes               Yes            Yes                Yes            Yes              Yes
 Drug Type FE                                      Yes             Yes               Yes            Yes                Yes            Yes              Yes
 City FE                                           No              Yes               No             Yes                No             Yes              No
 Pharmacy FE                                       No              No                No             No                 No             No               Yes
 N                                                 899             632               899            864                899            899              899
 Pseudo R2 / Adjusted R2                          0.305           0.167             0.236          0.239              0.897          0.913            0.910
Note: *** p<0.01; ** p<0.05 ; * p<0.1. T-statistics are reported in parentheses. Columns (1)- (4) use probit; Columns (5) -(7) use OLS. All regressions
contain missing dummies indicating missing values in included variables. All columns allow robust standard errors with the error term clustered by city.
Literacy rate, maximum penalty, taxes and price regulations drop out of Columns (2), (4), (6) and (7) because they are absorbed in city or pharmacy
fixed effects.

                                                                               47
                                                      Appendix

A.1. Description of Drugs Sampled

         Drug Name                         Dosage                       For Treatment Of
        Ciprofloxacin                   250mg, 500mg                   Bacterial infections
        Erythromycin                    250mg , 500mg                  Bacterial infections
          Isoniazid                         100mg                         Tuberculosis
         Rifampicin                         300mg                         Tuberculosis
      Chloroquine (CQ)                      250mg                            Malaria
Sulphadoxine/Pyrimethamine               500mg/25mg                          Malaria
            (SP)
 Artemesinin monotherapies                  50mg                             Malaria
  (ARTMono) (Artemether,                 50mg,100mg
         artesunate,                        60mg
    dihydrosartemesinin)
   Artemsisin Combination                20mg/120mg                          Malaria
      Therapies (ACTs)
  Artemether/Lumefantrine



A.2. Description of Tests Used

Test                             How it is Performed            What a Pass or Fail Implies
Visual Inspection                By comparison with a real      Fail implies an obvious
                                 version, or by simply noting   counterfeit product
                                 spelling errors, or other
                                 errors
Minilab (Disintegration)         Does the drug dissolve in      Failure implies drug solubility
                                 body temperature water         poor
                                 within 30 minutes
Minilab (Thin Layer              Assessing the active           Failure implies insufficient
Chromatography)                  ingredient of the drug using   active ingredient
                                 TLC
Raman Spectrometry                Assessing the Rama Spectra     Failure implies incorrect drug
                                 of the product                 formulation




                                                      48
