NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TEACHER INCENTIVES AND STUDENT ACHIEVEMENT:
EVIDENCE FROM NEW YORK CITY PUBLIC SCHOOLS
Roland G. Fryer
Working Paper 16850
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16850

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2011

This project would not have been possible without the leadership and support of Joel Klein. I am also
grateful to Jennifer Bell-Ellwanger, Joanna Cannon, and Dominique West for their cooperation in
collecting the data necessary for this project, and to my colleagues Edward Glaeser, Richard Holden,
and Lawrence Katz for helpful comments and discussions. Vilsa E. Curto, Meghan L. Howard, Won
Hee Park, Jörg Spenkuch, David Toniatti, Rucha Vankudre, and Martha Woerner provided excellent
research assistance. Financial Support from the Fisher Foundation is gratefully acknowledged. The
usual caveat applies. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Roland G. Fryer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Teacher Incentives and Student Achievement: Evidence from New York City Public Schools
Roland G. Fryer
NBER Working Paper No. 16850
March 2011
JEL No. I0,J0
ABSTRACT
Financial incentives for teachers to increase student performance is an increasingly popular education
policy around the world. This paper describes a school-based randomized trial in over two-hundred
New York City public schools designed to better understand the impact of teacher incentives on student
achievement. I find no evidence that teacher incentives increase student performance, attendance, or
graduation, nor do I find any evidence that the incentives change student or teacher behavior. If anything,
teacher incentives may decrease student achievement, especially in larger schools. The paper concludes
with a speculative discussion of theories that may explain these stark results.

Roland G. Fryer
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center 208
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
rfryer@fas.harvard.edu

When I was in Chicago, our teachers designed a program for performance pay and secured a
$27 million federal grant. ... In Chicago’s model – every adult in the building – teachers, clerks,
janitors and cafeteria workers – all were rewarded when the school improved. It builds a sense of
teamwork and gives the whole school a common mission. It can transform a school culture.
- Secretary of Education Arne Duncan, The National Press Club, July 27, 2010

1

Introduction

Many educational reforms have been attempted over the past few decades with the goal of increasing
academic achievement: lowering class size, increasing spending, providing incentives for teachers
to obtain more education, and so on.1 In 1961, 23.5 percent of teachers had a Master’s degree
or a higher degree. In 2001, 56.8 percent of teachers had at least a Master’s degree. Student to
teacher ratios in public schools have decreased from over 22 to 1 in 1971 to less than 16 to 1 in
2001, a decrease of 33 percent in class size in 30 years. America spends more on education than it
has ever before: per-pupil spending has increased (in 2005 dollars) from approximately $4,700 per
student in 1970 to over $10,000 (Snyder and Dillow, 2010). Yet, despite these reforms to increase
achievement, Figure 1 demonstrates that test scores have been largely constant over the past thirty
years.
Human capital, especially teacher quality, is believed to be one of the most important inputs into
education production. A one-standard deviation increase in teacher quality raises math achievement
by 0.15 to 0.24 standard deviations per year and reading achievement by 0.15 to 0.20 standard
deviations per year (Rockoff, 2004; Hanushek and Rivkin, 2005; Aaronson et al., 2007; Kane and
Staiger, 2008). The difficulty, however, is that one cannot identify ex ante the most productive
teachers. Value added measures are not strongly correlated with observable teacher characteristics
1

There have been many other attempts to increase achievement and close the achievement gap. Early childhood
interventions such as Head Start, Nurse-Family Partnership, and the Abecedarian Project boost kindergarten readiness, but the effects on achievement often fade once children enter school (Currie and Thomas, 1995; Olds, 2006).
More aggressive strategies that place disadvantaged students in better schools through busing (Angrist and Lang,
2004) or through school choice plans (Rouse, 1998; Krueger and Zhu, 2004; Cullen et al., 2005; Hastings et al., 2006)
have also left the racial achievement gap essentially unchanged. School districts have been sources of innovative
strategies, including smaller schools and classrooms (Fin and Achilles, 1999; Nye et al., 1995; Krueger, 1999; Krueger
and Whitmore, 2001; Jepsen and Rivkin, 2002), mandatory summer school (Jacob and Lefgren, 2004), student incentives (Bettinger, 2010; Fryer, 2010), after-school programs (Lauer et al., 2006; Redd et al., 2002), budget, curricula,
and assessment reorganization (Borman et al., 2003; Borman et al., 2007; Cook et al., 2000), and policies to lower
the barrier to teaching via alternative paths to accreditation (Decker et al., 2004; Kane et al., 2008).

2

(Aaronson et al., 2007; Rivkin et al., 2005; Kane and Staiger, 2008; Rockoff et al., 2008). Some
argue that this, coupled with the inherent challenges in removing low performing teachers and
increased job market opportunities for women, contributes to the fact that teacher quality and
aptitude has declined significantly in the past 40 years (Corcoran et al., 2004; Hoxby and Leigh,
2004).2
One potential method to increase student achievement and improve the quality of individuals
selecting teaching as a profession is to provide teachers with financial incentives based on student
achievement. Theoretically, teacher incentives could have one of the three effects. If teachers lack
motivation or incentive to put effort into lesson planning, parental engagement, and so on, financial
incentives for student achievement may have a positive impact by motivating teachers to increase
their effort. If, however, teacher incentives have unintended consequences such as explicit cheating,
teaching to the test, or focusing on specific, tested objectives at the expense of more general
learning, teacher incentives can have a negative impact on student performance (Holmstrom and
Milgrom, 1991; Jacob and Levitt, 2003). Similarly, some argue that teacher incentives can decrease
a teacher’s intrinsic motivation or lead to harmful competition between teachers in what some
believe to be a collaborative environment (Johnson, 1984; Firestone and Pennell, 1993). Third, if
teachers do not know how to increase student achievement, the production function has important
complementarities outside their control, or the incentives are either confusing or too weak, teacher
incentives may have no impact on achievement.
There has been growing enthusiasm among education reformers and policy makers around the
world to link teacher compensation to student achievement in myriad ways.3 This is due, in part, to
the low correlation between a teacher’s observables at the time of hiring and his value-added, and,
in part, to policy makers’ belief that a new payment scheme will attract more achievement-minded
applicants. A number of states, including Colorado, Florida, Michigan, Minnesota, South Carolina,
2

Corcoran et al. (2004) find that in the 1964-1971 period, 20-25 percent of new female teachers were ranked in
the top 10 percent of their high school cohort, while in 2000, less than 13 percent were ranked at the top decile.
Hoxby and Leigh (2004) similarly find that the share of teachers in the highest aptitude category fell from 5 percent
in 1963 to 1 percent in 2000 and the share in the lowest aptitude category rose from 16 percent to 36 percent in the
same period.
3
Merit pay faces opposition from the the two major unions: The American Federation of Teachers (AFT) and the
National Education Association (NEA). Though in favor of reforming teacher compensation systems, the AFT and
the NEA officially object to programs that reward teachers based on student test scores and principal evaluations,
while favoring instead systems that reward teachers based on additional roles and responsibilities they take within
the school or certifications and qualifications they accrue. The AFT’s official position cites the past underfunding
of such programs, the confusing metrics by which teachers were evaluated, and the crude binary reward system in
which there is no gradation of merit as the reasons for its objection. The NEA’s official position maintains that any
alterations in compensation should be bargained at the local level, and that a singular salary scale and a strong base
salary should be the standard for compensation.

3

Tennessee, Texas, and Washington, D.C., have implemented statewide programs for districts and
schools to provide individual and group incentives to teachers for student achievement and growth,
and many more individual school districts have implemented similar policies. In 2010, the U.S.
Department of Education selected 62 programs in 27 states to receive over $1.2 billion over five years
from the Teacher Incentive Fund. States applying for funds from “Race to the Top,” the Obama
Administration’s $4.4 billion initiative to reform schools, are evaluated on plans to improve teacher
and principal effectiveness by linking teacher evaluations to student growth and making decisions
about raises, tenure, and promotions depending on student achievement. Similar initiatives are
underway in the United Kingdom, Chile, Mexico, Israel, Australia, Portugal, and parts of India.
The empirical evidence on the efficacy of teacher incentives is ambivalent. Data from field
experiments in Kenya and India yield effect sizes of approximately 0.20 standard deviations in
math and reading (Glewwe et al., 2010; Muralidharan and Sundararaman, forthcoming). Data
from a pilot initiative in Tennessee suggests no effects of incentives on student achievement. Other,
non-experimental analyses, of teacher incentive programs in the United States have also shown no
measurable success, though one should interpret these data with caution due to the lack of credible
causal estimates (Glazerman et al., 2009; Vigdor, 2008).
In the 2007-2008 through the 2009-2010 school year, the United Federation of Teachers (UFT)
and the New York City Department of Education (DOE) implemented a teacher incentive program
in over 200 high-need schools, distributing a total of roughly $75 million to over 20,000 teachers.4
The experiment was a randomized school-based trial, with the randomization conducted by the
author. Each participating school could earn $3,000 for every UFT-represented staff member,
which the school could distribute at its own discretion, if the school met the annual performance
target set by the DOE based on school report card scores. Each participating school was given
$1,500 per UFT staff member if it met at least 75% of the target but not the full target. Note:
given that the average New York City public school has roughly sixty teachers, this implies a
transfer of $180,000 to schools on average if they met their annual targets and a transfer of $90,000
if they met at least 75% of, but not the full target. School report card scores hinge on student
performance and progress on state test scores for elementary and middle schools, Regents exam
results and graduation rates for high schools, student attendance, and learning environment survey
results administered to teachers, parents and students for all schools.
4

The details of the program were negotiated by Chancellor Joel Klein and Randi Weingarten, along with their
staffs. At the time of the negotiation, I was serving as an advisor to Chancellor Klein and convinced both parties
that we should include random assignment to ensure a proper evaluation.

4

An important feature of our experiment is that schools had discretion over their incentive plans.
As mentioned above, if a participating school met one-hundred percent of the annual targets, it
received a lump sum equivalent to $3000 per full-time unionized teacher. Each school had the
power to decide whether all of the rewards would be given to a small subset of teachers with the
highest value-added, whether the winners of the rewards would be decided by lottery, and virtually
anything in-between. The only restriction was that schools were not allowed to distribute rewards
based on seniority. Theoretically, it is unclear how to design optimal teacher incentives when the
objective is to improve student achievement. Much depends on the characteristics of the education
production function. If, for instance, the production function is additively separable, then individual
incentives may dominate group incentives, as the latter encourages free-riding. If, however, the
production function has important complementarities between teachers in the production of student
achievement, group incentives may be more effective at increasing achievement (Baker, 2002).
To our surprise, an overwhelming majority of the schools decided on a group incentive scheme
that varied the individual bonus amount only by the position held in the school. This could
be because teachers have superior knowledge of education production and believe the production
function to have important complementarities, because they feared retribution from other teachers
if they supported individual rewards, or simply because this was as close to pay based on seniority
(the UFT’s official view) that they could do.
The results from our incentive experiments are informative. Providing incentives to teachers
based on school’s performance on metrics involving student achievement, improvement, and the
learning environment did not increase student achievement in any statistically meaningful way.
If anything, student achievement declined. Intent-to-treat estimates yield treatment effects of 0.015 (0.024) standard deviations (hereafter σ) in mathematics and -0.011σ (0.020) in reading for
elementary schools, and -0.048σ (0.017) in math and -0.032σ (0.011) in reading for middle schools,
per year. Thus, if an elementary school student attended schools that implemented the teacher
incentive program for three years, her test scores would decline by -0.045σ in math and by -0.033σ
in reading - neither of which is statistically significant. For middle school students, however, the
negative impacts are more sizeable: -0.144σ in math and -0.096σ in reading over a three-year period.
The impact of teacher incentives on student attendance, behavioral incidences, and alternative
achievement outcomes such as predictive state assessments, course grades, Regents exam scores,
and high school graduation rates are all negligible. Furthermore, we find no evidence that teacher
incentives affect teacher behavior, measured by retention in district or in school, number of per5

sonal absences, and teacher responses to the learning environment survey, which partly determined
whether a school received the performance bonus.
We also investigate the treatment effects across a range of subsamples – gender, race, previousyear achievement, previous-year teacher value added, previous-year teacher salary, and school size –
and find that although some subgroups seem to be affected differently by the program, none of the
estimates of the treatment effect are positive and significant if one adjusts for multiple hypothesis
testing. The coefficients range from -0.264σ (0.074), in global history for white high school students,
to 0.120σ (0.094), in math state exam scores for white elementary school students.
The paper concludes with a (necessarily) speculative discussion about what can explain the stark
results, especially when one compares them with the growing evidence from developing countries.
One explanation is that incentives are simply not effective in American public schools. This could
be due to a variety of reasons, including differential teacher characteristics, teacher training, or
effort. We argue that a more likely explanation is that all incentive schemes piloted thus far in
the US, due in part to strong influence by teacher’s unions, have been more complex and provided
teachers with less agency than incentive experiments in developing countries. This ambiguity and
lack of agency in American incentive schemes, relative to those attempted in developing countries,
may explain our results. Other explanations such as the incentives were not large enough, groupbased incentives are ineffective, or teachers are ignorant of the production function all contradict
the data in important ways.
The next section provides a brief review of the emerging literature on the effect of teacher
incentives on student achievement. Section 3 provides details of the experiment and its implementation. Section 4 describes the data and research design used in the analysis. Section 5 presents
estimates of the impact of teacher incentives on a host of student and teacher outcomes. The final
section concludes. There is an online data appendix that provides details on how we construct our
covariates and our sample from the school district administrative files used in our analysis.

2

A Brief Literature Review

There is a nascent but growing body of literature on the role of teacher incentives on student
performance (Glazerman et al., 2009; Glewwe et al., 2010; Lavy, 2002; Lavy, 2009; Muralidharan
and Sundararaman, forthcoming; Springer et al., 2010; Vigdor, 2008.), including an emerging
literature on the optimal design of such incentives (Neal, 2011). There are four papers, three

6

of them outside the US, which provide experimental estimates of the causal impact of teacher
incentives on student achievement: Duflo and Hanna (2005), Glewwe et al. (2010), Muralidharan
and Sundararaman (forthcoming), and Springer et al. (2010).
Duflo and Hanna (2005) randomly sampled 60 schools in rural India, and provided them with
financial incentives to reduce absenteeism. The incentive scheme was simple; teachers’ pay was
linear in their attendance, at the rate of Rs 50 per day, after the first 10 days of each month. They
found that teacher absence rate was significantly lower in treatment schools (22 percent) compared
to control schools (42 percent), and that student achievement in treatment schools were 0.17σ
higher than in control schools.
Glewwe et al. (2010) report results from a randomized evaluation that provided teachers for
grades 4 through 8 in Kenya with group incentives based on test scores and find that while test
scores increased in program schools in the short run, students did not retain the gains after the
incentive program ended. They interpret these results as being consistent with teachers expending
effort towards short-term increases in test scores but not towards long-term learning.
Muralidharan and Sundararaman (forthcoming) investigate the effect of individual and group
incentives in 300 schools in Andhra Pradesh, India and find that both group and individual incentives increased student achievement by 0.12σ in language and 0.16σ in math in the first year, both
equally successful. In the second year, however, individual incentives are shown to be more effective
with an average effect of 0.27σ across math and language performance, while group incentives had
an average effect of 0.16σ.
Springer et al. (2010) evaluated a three-year pilot initiative on teacher incentives conducted in
the Metropolitan Nashville School System from the 2006-07 school year through the 2008-09 school
year. 296 middle school mathematics teachers who volunteered to participate in the program were
randomly assigned to the treatment or the control group, and those assigned to the treatment
group could earn up to $15,000 as a bonus if their students made gains in state mathematics test
scores equivalent to the 95 percentile in the district. They were awarded $5,000 and $10,000 if their
students made gains equivalent to the 80th and the 90th percentiles, respectively. Springer et al.
(2010) found there was no significant treatment effect on student achievement and on measures of
teachers’ response such as teaching practices.5
5
There are several non-experimental evaluations of teacher incentive programs in the US, all of which report
non-significant impact of the program on student achievement. Glazerman et al. (2009), who report a non-significant
effect of -0.04 standard deviations on student test scores for the Teacher Advancement Program in Chicago and Vigdor
(2008), who reports a non-significant effect of the ABC School-wide Bonus Program in North Carolina. Outside the
US, Lavy (2002, 2009) reports significant results for teacher incentive programs in Israel.

7

The contribution of our paper is three-fold. First, the incentive scheme allows for schools to
choose how to allocate incentive payments. If schools have superior knowledge of their production
function (relative to a social planner) or better knowledge about their staffs, this design is optimal.
Second, our experiment is the largest on teacher incentives in American public schools by orders
of magnitude and the incentive scheme is similar to those being implemented in school districts
across the country. Third, our set of outcomes is expansive and includes information on student
achievement, student behavior, teacher retention, and teacher effort.

3

Program Details

3.1

Overview

On October 17, 2007, New York City’s Mayor, Schools Chancellor, and the President of the United
Federation of Teachers (UFT) announced an initiative to provide teachers with financial incentives
to improve student performance, attendance, and school culture. The initiative was conceived as
a two-year pilot program in roughly 400 of the lowest performing public schools in NYC.6 School
performance was tied to metrics used to calculate NYC’s school report card - a composite measure
of school environment, student academic performance, and student academic progress. The design
of the incentive scheme was left to the discretion of the school. There were three requirements:
(1) incentives were not allowed to be distributed according to seniority; (2) schools had to create a
compensation committee that consisted of the principal, a designee of the principal, and two UFT
staff members; and (3) the committee’s decision had to be unanimous. The committee had the
responsibility of developing how incentives would be distributed to each teacher and other staff.
Below, we describe how schools were selected and the incentive scheme, and provide an overview
of the distribution of incentive rewards to schools.

3.2

School Selection

Table 1 provides an accounting of how we selected our experimental sample. Eligible middle and
high schools were selected based on the average proficiency ratings on 4th and 8th grade state tests,
respectively. Eligible elementary schools were selected based on poverty rates, student demographic
characteristics such as the percentage of English Language Learners and special education students.
6

The pilot program did not expand to include more schools in the second and third years due to budget constraints,
but all schools that completed the program in the first or second year were invited to participate again in the following
years.

8

The NYC Department of Education identified 438 schools that met the above mentioned eligibility
criteria. Of these schools, 34 were barred by the UFT for unknown reasons and 8 were District
75 (i.e. special education) schools. The remaining 396 comprise our experimental sample, among
which 212 schools were randomly selected by the author and offered treatment.7 In November 2007,
schools in the treatment group were invited to participate in the program. To formally accept the
offer, schools were required to have at least 55 percent of their active full-time staff represented by
the UFT at the school to vote for the program.8 Schools forwarded voting results through email to
the DOE by late November. Of the 212 schools randomly chosen to receive treatment, 179 schools
garnered enough votes to participate, 33 declined treatment.9 To increase the number of schools
eligible to participate, we added 21 schools off the wait list; 19 garnered the requisite votes. So,
overall, 233 schools in our experimental sample were invited to participate in the program, and
198 schools actually participated. The final experimental sample in year one consists of the lottery
sample, with 233 treatment schools and 163 control schools.10
In the second year, 195 schools out of the 198 schools that received treatment in the first year
were invited to participate in the second year pilot program (the other three schools were closed
because of low performance). Of the 195 schools offered treatment, 191 schools voted to participate
in the second year. In the third year of treatment, 191 schools that received treatment in the second
year were invited to participate; 189 schools voted to participate in the program.

3.3

Incentive Scheme

Figure 2 shows how the progress report card score, which is the basis for awarding incentives, is
calculated. Environment, which accounts for 15 percent of the progress report card score, is derived
from attendance rate (5 percent of the overall score) and learning environment surveys administered
to students, teachers, and parents in the spring semester (10 percent). Attendance rate is a school’s
average daily attendance. Student performance (25 percent) depends on the percentage of students
7

There were 34 schools that met the eligibility criterion, but were excluded by the UFT for unknown reasons.
Repeated attempts to convince the DOE and the UFT to allow schools to opt-in to the experimental group
before random assignment were unsuccessful.
9
Anecdotal evidence suggests that schools declined treatment for a variety of reasons, including fear that more
work (not outlined in the agreement) would be required for bonuses. As one teacher in a focus group put it, “money
ain’t free.”Furthermore, some teachers in focus groups expressed resentment that anyone would believe that teachers
would be motivated by money.
10
There were 187 elementary schools, 82 middle schools, 39 K-8 schools, 73 high schools, 1 K-12 school, and 14
schools that served both middle and high school students in the sample. 68 schools in our experimental sample also
participated in Fryer’s (2010) student incentive program in the 2007-08 and 2008-09 academic years. Excluding these
schools from the sample did not change the qualitative results.
8

9

at grade level and the median proficiency ratings in ELA and math state tests for elementary and
middle schools, and the 4-year and 6-year graduation rates and diploma-weighted graduation rates
for high schools.11 Student progress, which accounts for 60 percent of the overall score, depends on
the average changes in proficiency ratings among students and the percentage of students making
at least a year of progress in state tests for elementary and middle schools. Student progress in high
schools is measured by the percentage of students earning more than 10 credits and the Regents
exam pass rates in the core subjects - English, math, science, United States history, and global
history. Schools can also earn extra credit points by exemplary gains in proficiency ratings or credit
accumulation and graduation rates among high-need students such as English Language Learners,
special education students, or those in the lowest tercile in ELA and math test scores citywide.
In each of the three categories, learning environment, student performance and student progress,
schools were evaluated by their relative performance in each metric compared to their peer schools
and all schools in the city, with performance relative to peer schools weighted three times of the
weight given to performance relative to all schools citywide. However, because it is calculated using
many metrics and because scores in each metric are calculated relative to other schools, how much
effort is needed to raise the Progress Report card score by, say, one point is not obvious.
The table below shows the number of points by which schools had to increase their progress
report card scores in the 2007-08 academic year in order to be considered to have met their goal
and receive their incentive payment. The table illustrates that the target depends on the citywide
ranking based on the previous year’s Progress Report card score. If, for example, an elementary
school was ranked at the 20th percentile in the 2006-07 academic year, it needed to increase its
progress report card score by 15 points to meet the annual target.

11

The DOE awards different levels of diplomas - Local, Regents, Advanced Regents, and Advanced Regents with
Honors - depending on the number of Regents exams passed. The more Regents exams a student has to take to
obtain a diploma the more weight it was given. In the 2007-08 academic year, the weights given to Local, Regents,
Advanced Regents, and Advanced Regents diplomas were 1.0, 2.0, 2.5, and 3.0, respectively. In order to graduate
with a Local diploma, students who entered high school in September, 2004 had to receive a total of 44 credits and
score 55 or above in comprehensive English, mathematics A, global history and geography, United States history and
government, and any science Regents exams. To graduate with a Regents diploma, students had to score 65 or above
in the same five required Regents exam areas. To graduate with an Advanced Regents diploma, students had to score
65 or above in the already mentioned Regents exam areas and in addition, in mathematics B, life science, physical
science, and foreign langauge Regents exams. Further details on graduation requirement and progress report card
score calculation can be found on the DOE website.

10

Progress Report Target Points
Citywide Ranking

Elementary
High

Based on the Previous Year

& Middle

≥ 85th percentile

7.5

2

≥ 45 and < 85

12.5

3

≥ 15 and < 45

15

4

≥ 5 and < 15

17.5

6

20

8

< 5th percentile

Notes: Numbers calculated by the author.
A. An Example
Consider the following simplified example with an elementary school that ranks at about the
10th percentile citywide, and at about the 25th percentile among its peer schools. This school would
have to increase its total progress report card scores by 17.5 points to meet the annual target. Let’s
now assume that the school increased the attendance rate to be about the 30th percentile citywide
and the 75th percentile in the peer group. Then, holding everything constant, the school will
increase the overall score by 1 point. Similarly, if the school increased their performance to the
same level, the school will increase its score by 5 points. If student progress increased to the same
level, its progress report card score will increase by 12 points. Hence, if the peer group and district
schools stay at the same level, a low-performing school would be able to meet the annual target only
if it dramatically increased its performance in all of the subareas represented in the progress report.
On the other hand, because all scores are calculated relative to other schools, some schools can
reach their incentive targets if their achievement stays constant and their peer schools underperform
in a given year.

B. A Brief Comparison With Other School District Incentive Schemes
Most school districts that have implemented performance pay use similar metrics to NYC to
measure teacher’s performance. For example, the Teacher Advancement Program (TAP) in Chicago
– started by Arne Duncan and described in the quote at the beginning of this paper – rewarded
teachers based on classroom observations (25%) and school-wide student growth on Illinois state
exams (75%). Houston’s ASPIRE program uses school value added and teacher value added in state

11

exams to reward the top 25% and 50% of teachers. Alaska’s Public School Performance Incentive
Program divides student achievement into six categories and rewards teachers based on the average
movement up to higher categories. Florida’s S.T.A.R used a similar approach.
A key difference between the incentive schemes piloted in America thus far and those piloted
in developing countries is that those in America compare teachers’ or schools’ performance to the
distribution in the district. That is, teachers are not rewarded unless the entire school satisfies
a criterion or their performance is in the top X percentile of their district, despite how well any
individual or group of teachers performs. NYC’s design rewards teachers based only on school’s
overall performance. A teacher participating in Houston’s ASPIRE program would be rewarded
the pre-determined bonus amount only if his teacher value added in one subject is in the top 25% of
the district, regardless of how he or his school performs. Chicago’s TAP program rewards teachers
similarly. This ambiguity – the likelihood of receiving an incentive depends on my effort and the
effort of others – may have served to flatten the function that maps effort into output.

3.4

Incentive Distribution

The lump-sum performance bonus awarded to a school was distributed to teachers in whatever way
the school’s compensation committee decided. Recall that the compensation committee consisted
of the principal, a designee of the principal, and two UFT staff members. The committee was not
allowed to vary the bonus by seniority, but could differentiate the compensation amount by the
position held at school, by the magnitude of contribution made (e.g., teacher value added), or could
distribute the bonus amount equally. The committee was chosen by December of the first year, and
the committee reported to the UFT and the DOE their decision on how to distribute the bonus.
School bonus results were announced in September of the following year for elementary, K-8 and
middle schools and in November for high schools, shortly after the DOE released Progress Report
cards. Rewards were distributed to teachers either by check or as an addition to their salary, in
accordance with the distribution rule decided upon by the compensation committee. In the first
year, 104 schools out of 198 schools that participated met the improvement target and received the
full bonus, while 18 schools met at least 75 percent of the target and received half of the maximum
incentive payment possible. In total, the compensation received by participating schools totaled
$22 million. In the second year, 154 schools out of 191 schools that participated received the full
bonus, while 7 schools received half the maximum compensation. The total compensation awarded
to schools in the second year was $31 million. We do not have precise numbers for year three, but
12

the DOE claims that the total costs of the experiment was approximately $75 million.
Figure 3A shows the distribution of individual compensation in the experiment. Most teachers
in the schools that received the full bonus of $3,000 per staff were rewarded an amount close to
$3,000. Figure 3B presents a histogram of the fraction of teachers receiving the same amount in
each school in order to characterize how many schools decided upon an egalitarian distribution rule.
More than 80% of schools chose to reward the same bonus amount to at least 85% of the teaching
staff each year.

4

Data and Research Design

We combined data from two sources: student-level administrative data on approximately 1.1 million
students across the five boroughs of the NYC metropolitan area from 2006-2007 to 2009-2010 school
year, and teacher-level human resources data on approximately 96,000 elementary and middle school
teachers during this same time period. The student level data include information on student race,
gender, free- and reduced-price lunch eligibility, behavior, attendance, matriculation with course
grades, and state math and ELA test scores for students in grades three through eight. For high
school students, our data contain Regents exam scores and graduation rates. Data on attendance
and behavioral incidences are available for all students.
Our main outcome variable is an achievement test unique to New York. The state ELA and
math tests, developed by McGraw-Hill, are high-stake exams administered to students in the third
through the eighth grade. Students in third, fifth, and seventh grades must score at level 2 or
above (out of 4) on both math and ELA tests to advance to the next grade without attending
summer school. The math test includes questions on number sense and operations, algebra, geometry, measurement, and statistics. Tests in the earlier grades emphasize more basic content such
as number sense and operations, while later tests focus on advanced topics such as algebra and
geometry. The ELA test is designed to assess students on three learning standards - information
and understanding, literary response and expression, critical analysis and evaluation, and includes
multiple-choice and short-response sections based on a reading and listening section, along with a
brief editing task.
All public-school students are required to take the math and ELA tests unless they are medically excused or have a severe disability. Students with moderate disabilities or limited English
proficiency must take both tests, but may be granted special accommodations (additional time,

13

translation services, and so on) at the discretion of school or state administrators. In our analysis,
test scores are normalized to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one for each grade
and year across the entire New York City sample.
We construct measures of attendance, behavioral problems and GPA using the NYC DOE data.
Attendance is measured as the number of days present divided by the number of days present plus
the number of days absent.12 Behavioral problems are measured as the total number of behavioral
incidences in record each year. GPA is measured as the mean course grade each year, calculated at
a 1-4 scale for elementary school students and a 1-100 scale for middle school students. Attendance,
behavioral problems and GPA were normalized to have mean zero and standard deviation one by
grade level each year in the full New York City sample.
We use a parsimonious set of controls to aid in precision and to correct for any potential
imbalance between treatment and control groups. The most important controls are achievement
test scores from previous years, which we include in all regressions. Previous year’s test scores are
available for most students who were in the district in the previous year.13 We also include an
indicator variable that takes on the value of one if a student is missing a test score from a previous
year and zero otherwise.
Other individual-level controls include a mutually exclusive and collectively exhaustive set of
race dummies, indicators for free lunch eligibility, special education status, and English language
learner status. A student is income-eligible for free lunch if her family income is below 130 percent
of the federal poverty guidelines, or categorically eligible if (1) the student’s household receives
assistance under the Food Stamp Program, the Food Distribution Program on Indian Reservations
(FDPIR), or the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Program (TANF); (2) the student was
enrolled in Head Start on the basis of meeting that program’s low-income criteria; (3) the student
is homeless; (4) the student is a migrant child; or (5) the student is a runaway child receiving
assistance from a program under the Runaway and Homeless Youth Act and is identified by the
local educational liaison.
Special education status is determined through a series of observations, interviews, reviews of
report cards and administration of tests after the initial referral by teachers or parents. Student
classified as in need of special education drafts an Individualized Education Program (IEP) with
teachers and special staff and follows it while integrating the general curriculum as much as possible.
12

The DOE does not collect absence data from schools after the first 180 days, so attendance rate calculated is
the rate in the first 180 days.
13
See Table 2 for exact percentages of experimental group students with valid test scores from previous years.

14

English Language Learners are those who speak a language other than English at home and score
below proficient on English assessments when they enter the school system. They receive support
through bilingual programs and English as a Second Language (ESL) programs.
We include other measures of academic achievement and behavior problems as controls. The
squared previous year’s state test scores are included in the parsimonious set of controls, as well as
the total number of behavioral incidences recorded in 2006-2007 school year.
We also construct school level controls. To do this, we assign each student who was present at
the beginning of the year, i.e., in September, to the first school that they attended. We construct
the school-level variables based on these school assignments by taking the mean value of student
demographic variables and student test scores for each school. Variables constructed this way
include percentage of black, Hispanic, special education, limited English proficiency, and free-lunch
eligible students. Also constructed is the total number of behavioral incidences in a school in the
2006-07 academic year.
We construct teacher-level variables from NYC Human Resources (HR) records and Teacher
Value Added data. Teacher gender and race are constructed by taking the most recent non-missing
records from 2004 to 2010 HR records. Teacher experience, or years of experience as a teacher, is
taken from the October, 2007 HR file. Teacher Value Added (TVA) data are available from the
2006-2007 academic year until the 2008-2009 academic year. We take the TVA measured in the
standard deviation unit, and standardize the number by grade level each year to have mean zero
and standard deviation zero in the full city sample. For teachers who taught more than one grade,
we take the average of TVA across grade levels. In addition, we construct the cumulative teacher
absences in May of each academic year.
Table 2 provides pre-treatment descriptive statistics. The first four columns show the mean
and standard deviation of student and teacher characteristics in all schools in the NYC district,
the experimental sample, the treatment group, and the control group. In addition, the last two
columns show the p-value of the difference between the mean of the entire district and that of the
experimental sample and the p-value of the difference between the treatment group and the control
group. The table of summary statistics shows that most student and teacher characteristics are
balanced between the treatment and the control group. The only exceptions are the percentage of
white teacher, the percentage of Asian teachers, and teacher-value-added in math in the 2006-2007
academic year.

15

Research Design
The simplest and most direct test of any teacher incentive program would be to examine the
outcome of interest (e.g., test scores) regressed on an indicator for enrollment in the teacher incentive
program for grades g, in school s, in year t (incentivei,g,s,t ) and controls for basic student and school
characteristics, Xi and Xs , respectively:
outcomei,g,s,t = α1 + β1 Xi + γ1 Xs + δg + ζt + π1 incentivei,g,s,t + εi,g,s,t .
Yet, if schools select into teacher incentive programs because of important unobserved determinants of academic outcomes, estimates obtained using the above equation may be biased. To
confidently identify the causal impact of incentive programs, we must compare participating and
non-participating schools which would have had the same academic outcomes had they both participated in the program. By definition, this involves an unobservable counterfactual.
In the forthcoming analysis, the counterfactual is constructed by exploiting the random assignment of schools into treatment and control groups. Restricting our analysis to schools that were
selected (by the UFT and the DOE) to be included in the experimental sample, we can estimate the
causal impact of being offered a chance to participate in an teacher incentive program by comparing the average outcomes of schools randomly selected for treatment and the average outcomes of
schools randomly selected for control. Schools that were not chosen to participate form the control
group corresponding to the counterfactual state that would have occurred to treatment schools if
they had not been offered a chance to participate.
Let Ts be an indicator for a treatment school. The mean difference in outcomes between treatment schools (Ts = 1) and control schools (Ts = 0) is known as the “Intent-to-Treat” (ITT) effect,
and is estimated by regressing student outcomes on Ts . In theory, predetermined student school
characteristics (Xi and Xs ) should have the same distribution across treatment and control groups
because they are statistically independent of treatment assignment. In small samples, however,
more precise estimates of the ITT can often be found by controlling for these characteristics. The
specifications estimated are of the form:
outcomei,g,s,t = α2 + β2 Xi + γ2 Xs + π2 Ts + δg + ζt + εi,s ,
where our vector of student level controls, Xi , includes an indicator for gender, a mutually inclusive
and collectively exhaustive set of race dummies, an indicators for free-lunch eligibility, special
16

education status, and English language learner status, separately, and pre-determined measures of
the outcome variables when possible (i.e., pre-intervention test scores and the number of behavioral
incidences). The set of school-level controls, Xs , includes the percentages of students at school who
are black, Hispanic, free-lunch eligible, English language learners, and special education students,
and the pre-lottery number of behavioral incidences at school. The ITT is an average of the causal
effects for students enrolled in treatment schools compared to those enrolled in control schools, at
the time of random assignment. The ITT therefore captures the causal effect of being offered a
chance of participating in the incentive program, not of actually participating.
Under several assumptions (that the treatment group assignment is random, control schools are
not allowed to participate in the incentive program, and treatment assignment only affects outcomes
through school enrollment), we can also estimate the causal impact of actually participating in
the incentive program. This parameter, commonly known as the “Treatment-on-Treated” (TOT)
effect, measures the average effect of treatment on schools that choose to participate in the merit
pay program. The TOT parameter can be estimated through a two-stage least squares regression
of student outcomes on participation, with original treatment assignment (Ts ) as an instrumental
variable for participation. We use the number of years a student spent in treated schools as the
actual participation variable. The first stage equations for IV estimation take the form:
incentivei,g,s,t = α3 + β3 Xi + γ3 Xs + δg + ζt + π3 Ts + εi,s,g,t ,
where π3 captures the effect of treatment assignment (Ts ) on the average number of years a student
spends in a treatment school.
The TOT is the estimated difference in outcomes between students in schools who were induced
into participating through treatment assignment and those in the control group who would have
enrolled if they had been offered the chance.

5
5.1

The Impact of Teacher Incentives
Student Achievement

Table 3 presents first-stage, ITT, and TOT estimates of the effect of teacher incentives on state
math and ELA test scores. Columns one through three report estimates from our elementary
school sample, columns four through six report estimates from middle schools, and the final three

17

columns present results for a pooled sample of elementary and middle schools. We present both
raw estimates and those that contain the parsimonious set of controls described in the previous
section. Note: the coefficients in the table are normalized so that they are in standard deviation
units and represent one year impacts.
Surprisingly, all estimates of the effect of teacher incentives on student achievement are negative
in both elementary and middle school – and statistically significant so in middle school. The ITT
effect of the teacher incentive scheme is -0.011σ (0.020) in reading and -0.015σ (0.024) in math for
elementary schools, and -0.032σ (0.011) in reading and -0.048σ (0.017) in math for middle schools.
The effect sizes in middle school are non-trivial – a student who attends a participating middle
school for three years of our experiment is expected to lose 0.096σ in reading and 0.144σ in math.
The TOT estimates are smaller than the ITT estimates, as the first stage coefficients are all larger
than one.
Table 4 presents results similar to table 3, but for high schools. High school students do not take
the New York state exams. Instead, they have to take and score 55 or above in Regents exams in
five key subject areas to graduate with a local diploma. To graduate with a Regents diploma or an
Advanced Regents diploma, students have to score 65 or above in more subject areas. For example,
students who entered high school in September 2005 had to score 65 or above in comprehensive
English, integrated algebra, global history and geography, U.S. history and government, and science
Regents exams to graduate with a Regents diploma.

14

Table 4 presents first-stage, ITT, and TOT

estimates for the impact of teacher incentives on comprehensive English, mathematics, science, U.S.
history, and global history Regents exam scores. All exam scores were standardized to have mean
zero and standard deviation one in the full city sample each academic year.
Similar to the analysis of elementary and middle schools, there is no evidence that teacher
incentives had a positive effect on achievement. Estimates of the effect of teacher incentives on
high school achievement are all small and statistically non-significant. The ITT effect on the
English Regents exam score is -0.003σ (0.044), the effect on the integrated algebra exam score is
-0.011σ (0.031), and the effect on science scores is -0.016σ (0.037). The ITT effect on U.S. history
exam score is -0.033σ (0.054) and that on global history exam score is -0.063σ (0.045). The TOT
14

Regents exams are offered in January, June, and August of each academic year in the following subject areas:
comprehensive English, algebra, geometry, trigonometry, chemistry, physics, biology, living environment, earth science, world history, U.S. history, and foreign languages. In this paper, we present results on comprehensive English,
integrated algebra, living environment, U.S. history, and global history Regents exam scores. Among mathematics
and science exam areas, integrated algebra and living environment were selected because the highest number of
students took those exams. Using other exam scores gives qualitatively similar results.

18

effect is of a comparable magnitude.
The bottom panel of table 4 reports treatment effects on four-year graduation rates. The
dependent variables are a dummy for graduating in 4 years, which takes the value one if student
graduated in 4 years and zero otherwise, and a dummy for graduating in 4 years with a Regents
diploma, which takes the value one if student graduated with a Regents diploma and zero otherwise.
Students enrolled in treatment schools were 4.4 percent less likely to graduate in four years (which
is statistically significant at 5% level) and were 7.4 percent less likely to obtain a Regent’s diploma
(statistically significant at 10% level). Note: during the period of the experiment, mean graduation
rates fluctuated between 54% and 61%.
Table 5 explores heterogeneity in treatment effects across a variety of subsamples of the data:
gender, race, free-lunch eligibility, previous years student test scores, school size, teacher valueadded, and teacher salary. The coefficients in the table are ITT estimates with our parsimonious
set of controls. All categories are mutually exclusive and collectively exhaustive. The effect of
teacher incentives on achievement does not vary systematically across the subsamples. The only
exceptions are among middle school students who are free-lunch eligible, students who are attending
larger schools, and those taught by more experienced teachers (i.e., received higher salaries), and
among high school students who are white or Asian, students who scored lower in 8th grade state
tests, and students who are attending larger schools. Students in these subsamples seem to be
affected more negatively by teacher incentives.
The estimates above use the sample of students for which I have achievement test scores. If
students in treatment and control schools have different rates of selection into this sample, my
results may be biased. A simple test for selection bias is to investigate the impact of the treatment
offer on the probability of entering the sample. The results of this test, though not shown here in
tabular form, demonstrate that the coefficient on treatment is small and statistically zero.15 This
suggests that differential attrition is not likely to be a concern in interpreting the results.

5.2

Alternative Outcomes

Thus far, we have concentrated on student progress on state assessments, the most heavily weighted
element of NYC’s incentive scheme. Now, we introduce two additional measures of student performance and three measures of school environment: grade point averages, predictive math and ELA
exams, school environment surveys, attendance and behavioral incidences. Many of these outcomes
15

Tabular results are available from the author upon request.

19

enter directly into the incentive scheme and may be affected by it.
Table 6 shows estimates of the impact of teacher incentives on this set of alternative outcomes.
Predictive assessments are highly correlated with the state exams and are administered to all public
school students in grades three through eight in October and May. The DOE gives several different
types of predictive exams, and schools can choose to use one of the options depending on their
needs. In this paper, we analyze math and ELA test scores from the spring Acuity Predictive
Assessment.16 Each student’s attendance rate is calculated as the total number of days present
in any school divided by the total number of days enrolled in any school. Attendance rate was
standardized by grade level to have mean zero and standard deviation one each academic year
across the full city sample. Grades were extracted from files containing the transcripts of all
students in the district.17 Elementary school students received letter grades, which were converted
to a 4.0 scale, and middle and high school students received numeric grades that ranged from
1 to 100. Students’ grades from each academic year were averaged to yield an annual GPA. As
with test scores, GPAs were standardized to have mean of zero and standard deviation of one
among students in the same grade with the same grade scale across the school district. Number
of behavioral incidences were pulled from behavior data, which record the date, level, location and
short description of all incidences. The total number of incidences attributed to a student in an
academic year across all schools and grades he attended was calculated, and standardized by grade
level to have mean zero and standard deviation one each academic year across the full city sample.
Results from predictive assessments provide an identical portrait to that depicted by state
test scores. The effect of the teacher incentive program on predictive ELA exams is negative and
statistically insignificant, with the ITT effect equal to -0.019σ (0.016) in the elementary school
sample and -0.022σ (0.018) in the middle school sample. The ITT effect on predictive math exams
is -0.023σ (0.020) in the elementary school sample and -0.051σ (0.022) in the middle school sample.
Note that the effect of teacher incentives on middle school students’ predictive math exam scores
is negative and statistically significant, consistent with the findings with state test scores.
Teacher incentives have a statistically insignificant effect on other alternative student outcomes.
The ITT and TOT effects on attendance rate, which enters directly in the calculation of progress
report card scores are negative across all school levels. The ITT effect is estimated to be -0.018σ
16

Eighth grade students did not take the spring predictive tests, because they did not have to take state exams in
the following year.
17
Elementary school transcripts are not available for all schools each academic year. High school transcripts were
not availble until the 2008-09 academic year.

20

(0.020) in the elementary school sample, -0.019σ (0.022) in the middle school sample, and -0.014σ
(0.050) in the high school sample. The effects on behavioral incidences and grade point averages
are similarly small and insignificant.

5.3

Teacher Behavior

In this section, we estimate the impact of the teacher incentive program on two important teacher
behaviors: absences and retention. We assign teachers to treatment or control groups if they were
assigned to a treatment or a control school, respectively, in October of 2007. We only include
teachers who were teaching at schools in the randomization sample in 2007, and ignore all who
enter the system afterwards.
We measure retention in two ways: in school and in district – both of which were constructed
using Human Resources data provided by DOE. Retention in school was constructed as a dummy
variable that takes the value one if a teacher was associated with the same school in the following
academic year, and zero otherwise. Retention in district is more complicated. Like our coding
of retention in school, we construct a dummy variable that takes the value one if a teacher was
found in the New York City school district’s Human Resources (HR) file in the following academic
year, and zero otherwise. But there are two important caveats. First, charter schools and high
schools are not included in the New York City public school district’s HR files and therefore, some
teachers who left the district may have simply moved to teach at charter schools or high schools
in the district. As the same types of teacher certificates qualify teachers to teach in both middle
and high schools, it is possible that some teachers who left the district from middle schools went
to teach at high schools. It is unlikely, however, that a significant number of elementary school
teachers obtained new certificates to qualify for teaching in middle schools. Therefore, we divided
the sample of teachers into elementary, middle and K-8 school samples and estimate the treatment
effects separately on each sample. To measure absences, we were given the number of personal
absences as of May for teachers who did not exit the system.
Table 7 presents results on the impact of teacher incentives on our measures of teacher behavior.
There is no evidence that teacher incentives affect retention in either district or school, or teacher
absences. Elementary school teachers in treatment schools were 0.2 percent more likely to stay in the
NYC school district, 0.7 percent less likely to stay at the same school in the following academic year,
and took 0.275 more days of personal absences. Middle school teachers exhibit similar patterns.
None of these effects are statistically significant, nor are they economically meaningful.
21

6

Discussion

The previous sections demonstrate that the teacher incentive scheme piloted in 200 New York City
public schools did not increase achievement. If anything, achievement may have declined as a
result of the experiment. Yet, incentive schemes in developing countries have proven successful at
increasing achievement.
In this section, we consider four explanations for these stark differences: (1) incentives may
not have been large enough; (2) the incentive scheme was too complex; (3) group-based incentives
may not be effective; and (4) teachers may not know how they can improve student performance.
Using our analysis, along with data gleaned from other experiments, we argue that the most likely
explanation is that the NYC incentive scheme, along with all other American pilot initiatives thus
far, is too complex and provides teachers with too little agency. It is important to note that we
cannot rule out the possibility that other unobservable differences between the developing countries
and America (e.g. teacher motivation) produce the differences.
Incentives Were Not Large Enough
One potential explanation for our stark results is that the incentives simply were not large
enough. There are two reasons that the incentives to increase achievement in NYC may have been
small. First, although schools had discretion over how to distribute the incentives to teachers if they
met their performance targets, an overwhelming majority of them chose to pay teachers equally.
These types of egalitarian distribution methods can induce free-riding and undercut individual
incentives to put in effort. Moreover, an overwhelming majority of teachers in schools that met
the annual target earned am amount close to $3000. This is less than 4.1 percent of the average
annual teacher salary in the sample. One might think that the bonus was simply not large enough
for teachers to put in more effort, though similar incentive schemes in India (3%) and Kenya (2%)
were relatively smaller.
Second, the measures used to calculate the progress report card scores directly influence other
accountability measures such as the AYP (Adequate Yearly Progress) that determine whether a
school will be subjected to regulations or even be closed, which results in all staff losing their jobs.
Hence, all poor performing schools, including all treatment and control schools in our experiment,
have incentives to perform well on the precise measures that were being incentivized. Thus, it is
not clear whether the teacher incentive program provides additional incentives, at the margin, for
teachers to behave differently.
22

A brief look at the results of the Project on Incentives in Teaching (POINT), a pilot initiative
in Nashville, Tennessee, suggests that a larger incentive in schools which are not under pressure
by AYP was still not any more effective. Teachers in POINT treatment schools were selected from
the entire school district and could earn up to $15,000 in a year based solely on their students’
test scores. Teachers whose performance was at lower thresholds could earn $5,000 to $10,000.
The maximum amount is roughly 22% of the average teacher salary in Nashville. Springer et al.
(2010) find that even though about half of the participating teachers could have reached the lowest
bonus threshold if their students answered on average 2 or 3 more items out of 55 items correctly,
student achievement did not increase significantly more in classrooms taught by treatment teachers.
Moreover, they report that treatment teachers did not seem to change their instructional practices
or effort level.
Incentive Scheme Was Too Complex
In our experiment it was difficult, if not impossible, for teachers to know how much effort they
should exert or how that effort influences student achievement because of the complexity of the
progress report card system used in NYC. For example, the performance score for elementary and
middle schools is calculated using the percentage of students at proficiency level and the median
proficiency rating in state tests. Recall, the performance score depends on how a school performs
compared to its peer schools that had similar student achievement level in the previous year and
compared to all schools in the district. But it is highly unlikely that teachers can predict at which
percentile their school will be placed relative to the peer group and the district in these measures of
performance if the school increased the overall student achievement by, for example, one standard
deviation.
Moreover, the POINT pilot in Tennessee, like other American school districts, contained an
incentive scheme that was dependent on the performance of others rather than simpler incentive
schemes such as those in Duflo and Hanna (2005), Glewwe et al. (2010), and Muralidharan and
Sundararaman (forthcoming). It is plausible that this ambiguity may have served to flatten the
function that maps effort into expected reward.
Group-Based Rewards Are Ineffective
Although we gave schools the flexibility to choose their own incentive schemes, the vast majority
of them settled on a group-based scheme. Group-based incentive schemes introduce the potential
for free-riding and may be ineffective under certain conditions. Yet, in some contexts, they have
23

been shown to be effective. For example, Muralidharan and Sundararaman (forthcoming) found
that the group incentive scheme in government-run schools in India had a positive and significant
effect on student achievement. However, the authors stress that 92% of treatment schools had
between two and five teachers. The average number of teachers in a treated school was 3.28.
Similar results are obtained in Glewwe et al. (2010) where the average number of teachers per
school was twelve. Provided that New York City public schools have 60 teachers on average, the
applicability of the results from these analyses is suspect. When there are only 3 (or 12) teachers
in a school, monitoring and imposing cost on those teachers who shark their responsibility is less
costly.
On the other hand, Lavy (2002) also suggests that group-based incentives may be effective in
larger schools. His non-experimental evaluation of the teacher incentives intervention in Israel, in
which teachers were incentivized on the average number of credit units per student, the proportion
of students receiving a matriculation certificate, and the dropout rate, reveals that the program
had a positive and significant impact on the average number of credits and test scores. The average
number of teachers in the treatment schools in Israel is approximately 80, closer to the average
number of teachers in a school in NYC.
Teachers are ignorant, not lazy
If teachers only have a vague idea of how they could increase student achievement, then there
may be little incentive to increase effort. The most striking evidence against the hypothesis that
our results are driven by teachers’ lack of knowledge of the production function is driving our results
is presented in table 8, which displays treatment effects on five areas of the teacher survey which
partly determined 10 percent of the school’s overall progress report score. As before, we present
first stage, ITT, and TOT estimates for each dependent variable.
The first outcome is the teachers’ response rate to the learning environment survey. The next
four outcomes are the teacher’s average responses to four areas of the survey questions: academic
expectations, communication, engagement, and safety and respect. Questions in the academic
expectations area measures how well a school develops rigorous academic goals for students. The
communication area examines how well a school communicates its academic goals and requirements
to the community. The engagement area measures the degree to which a school involves students,
parents, and educators to promote learning. Questions in the safety and respect section asks
whether a school provides a physically and emotionally secure learning environment. The scores

24

were standardized to have mean zero and standard deviation one by school level in the full city
sample.
One might predict that teachers in the incentive program would be more likely to fill out
the survey and give higher scores to their schools given that they can increase the probability
of receiving the performance bonus by doing so. This requires no knowledge of the production
function - just an understanding of the incentive scheme. Table 8 reveals that treatment teachers
were not significantly more likely to fill out school surveys. The mean response rate at treatment
schools was 64% in the 2007-2008 academic year and 76% in the 2008-2009 academic year. This
may indicate that teachers did not even put in the minimum effort of filling out teacher surveys in
order to earn the bonus.

References
[1] Aaronson, Daniel, Lisa Barrow, and William Sander. 2007. “Teachers and Student Achievement
in the Chicago Public High Schools.” Journal of Labor Economics, 25(1): 95-135.
[2] Angirst, Joshua D. and Kevin Lang. 2004. “Does School Integration Generate Peer Effects?
Evidence from Boston’s Metco Program.” American Economic Review, 94(5): 1613-1634.
[3] Baker, George. 2002. “Distortion and Risk in Optimal Incentive Contracts.” Journal of Human
Resources, 37: 728-751.
[4] Baker, George, Robert Gibbons, and Kevin J. Murphy. “Subjective Performance Measures in
Optimal Incentive Contracts.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(4): 1125-1156.
[5] Bettinger, Eric. 2010. “Paying to Learn: The Effect of Financial Incentives on Elementary
School Test Scores.” NBER Working Paper No. 16333.
[6] Borman, Geoffrey D., Gina M. Hewes, Laura T. Overman, and Shelly Brown. 2003. “Comprehensive School Reform and Achievement: A Meta-Analysis.” Review of Educational
Research, 73(2): 125-230.
[7] Borman, Geoffrey D., Robert E. Slavin, Alan C.K. Cheung, Anne M. Chamberlain, Nancy A.
Madden, and Bette Chambers. 2007. “Final Reading Outcomes of the National Randomized
Field Trial of Success for All.” American Educational Research Journal, 44(3): 701-731.
[8] Cook, Thomas D., Robert F. Murphy, and H. David Hunt. 2000. “Comer’s School Development Program in Chicago: A Theory-Based Evaluation.” American Educational Research
25

Journal, 37(2): 535-597.
[9] Corcoran, Sean P., William N. Evans, and Robert M. Schwab. 2004. “Changing Labor-Market
Opportunities for Women and the Quality of Teachers, 1957-2000.” American Economic
Review, 94(2): 230-235.
[10] Cullen, Julie B., Brian A. Jacob, and Steven D. Levitt. 2005. “The Impact of School Choice
on Student Outcomes: An Analysis of the Chicago Public Schools.” Journal of Public
Economics, 89(5-6): 729-760.
[11] Currie, Janet and Duncan Thomas. 1995. “Does Head Start Make a Difference?” American
Economic Review, 85(3): 341-364.
[12] Decker, Paul T., Daniel P. Mayer, and Steven Glazerman. 2004. “The Effects of Teach for
America on Students: Findings from a National Evaluation.” Mathematica Policy Research
Report No. 8792-750.
[13] Duflo, Esther and Rema Hanna. 2005. “Monitoring Works: Getting Teachers to Come to
School.” NBER Working Paper No. 11880.
[14] Finn, Jeremy D., and Charles M. Achilles. 1999. “Tennessee’s Class Size Study: Findings,
Implications, Misconceptions.” Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 21(2): 97-109.
[15] Firestone, William A., and James R. Pennell. 1993. “Teacher Commitment, Working Conditions, and Differential Incentive Policies.” Review of Educational Research, 63(4): 489-525.
[16] Fryer, Roland G. 2010. “Financial Incentives and Student Achievement: Evidence from Randomized Trials.” NBER Working Paper No. 15898.
[17] Glazerman, Steven, Allison McKie, and Nancy Carey. 2009. ”An Evaluation of the Teacher
Advancement Program (TAP) in Chicago: Year One Impact Report.” Mathematica Policy
Research, Inc.
[18] Glewwe, Paul, Nauman Ilias, and Michael Kremer. 2010. ”Teacher Incentives.” American
Economic Journal, 2(3): 205-227.
[19] Hanushek, Eric and Steven Rivkin. 2005. “Teachers, Schools and Academic Achievement.”
Econometrica, 73(2): 417-458.
[20] Hastings, Justine S., Thomas J. Kane, and Douglas Staiger. 2006. “Preferences and Heterogenous Treatment Effects in a Public School Choice Lottery. NBER Working Paper No.
12145.
26

[21] Holmstrom, Bengt, and Paul Milgrom. 1991. “Multitask Principal-Agent Analyses: Incentive
Contracts, Asset Ownership, and Job Design.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 7: 24-52.
[22] Hoxby, Caroline M. and Andrew Leigh. 2004. “Pulled Away or Pushed Out? Explaining the
Decline of Teacher Aptitude in the United States.” American Economic Review, 94(2):
236-240.
[23] Jacob, Brian A., and Lars Lefgren. 2004. “Remedial Education and Student Achievement:
A Regression-Discontinuity Analysis.”’ The Review of Economics and Statistics, 86(1):
226-244.
[24] Jacob, Brian A., and Steven D. Levitt. 2003. “Rotten Apples: An Investigation of the Prevalence and Predictors of Teacher Cheating.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(3): 843877.
[25] Jepsen, Christopher, and Steven G. Rivkin. 2002. “What is the Tradeoff between Smaller
Classes and Teacher Quality?” NBER Working Paper No. 9205.
[26] Jonson, Susan M. 1984. “Merit Pay for Teachers: A Poor Prescription for Reform.” Harvard
Education Review, 54(2): 175-185.
[27] Kane, Thomas J., and Douglas O. Staiger. 2008. “Estimating Teacher Impacts on Student
Achievement: An Experimental Validation.” NBER Working Paper No. 14607.
[28] Kane, Thomas J., Jonah E. Rockoff, and Douglas O. Staiger. 2008. “What Does Certification Tell Us about Teacher Effectiveness? Evidence from New York City.” Economics of
Education Review, 27(6): 615-631.
[29] Krueger, Alan B. 1999. “Experimental Estimates of Education Production Functions.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(2): 497-532.
[30] Krueger, Alan B., and Diane M. Whitmore. 2001. “The Effect of Attending a Small Class
in Early Grades on College-test Taking and Middle School Test Results: Evidence from
Project Star.” Economic Journal, 111(468): 1-28.
[31] Krueger, Alan B., and Pei Zhu. 2004. “Another Look at the New York City School Voucher
Experiment.” American Behavioral Scientist, 47(5): 658-698.
[32] Lauer, Patricia A., Motoko Akiba, Stephanie B. Wilkerson, Helen S. Apthorp, David Snow, and
Mya L. Martin-Glenn. 2006. “Out-of-School-Time Programs: A Meta-Analysis of Effects
27

for At-Risk Students.” Review of Educational Research, 76(2): 275-313.
[33] Lavy, Victor. 2002. “Evaluating the Effect of Teachers’ Group Performance Incentives on Pupil
Achievement.” The Journal of Political Economy, 110(6): 1286-1317.
[34] Lavy, Victor. 2009. “Performance Pay and Teachers’ Effort, Productivity, and Grading Ethics.”
American Economic Review, 99(5): 1979-2021.
[35] Muralidharan, Karthik and Venkatesh Sundararaman. 2011. “Teacher Performance Pay: Experimental Evidence from India.” Journal of Political Economy (forthcoming).
[36] Neal, Derek 2011. “The Design of Performance Pay Systems in Education.” NBER Working
Paper No. 16710.
[37] Nye, Barbara, B. DeWayne Fulton, Jayne Boyd-Zaharias, and Van A.Cain. 1995. “The Lasting
Benefits Study, Eighth Grade Technical Report.” Nashville, TN: Center for Excellence for
Research in Basic Skills, Tennessee State University.
[38] Olds, David L. 2006. “The Nure-family Partnership: An Evidence-based Preventive Intervention.” Infant Mental Health Journal, 27(1): 5-25.
[39] Redd, Zakia, Stephanie Cochran, Elizabeth Hair, and Kristin Moore. 2002. Academic Achievement Programs and Youth Development: A Synthesis. Washington, DC: Child Trends.
[40] Rivkin, Steven G., Eric A. Hanushek, and John F. Kain. 2005. “Teachers, Schools, and Academic Achievement.” Econometrica, 73(2): 417-458.
[41] Rockoff, Jonah E. 2004. “The Impact of Individual Teachers on Student Achievement: Evidence from Panel Data.” American Economic Review, 94(2): 247-252.
[42] Rockoff, Jonah E., Brian A. Jacob, Thomas J. Kane, and Douglas O. Staiger. 2008. “Can You
Recognize An Effective Teacher When You Recruit One?” NBER Working Paper 14485.
[43] Rouse, Cecilia E. 1998. “Private School Vouchers and Student Achievement: An Evaluation of
the Milwaukee Parental Choice Program.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(2): 553602.
[44] Snyder, Thomas D., and Sally A. Dillow. 2010. Digest of Education Statistics 2009 (NCES
2010-013). National Center for Education Statistics, Institute of Education Sciences, U.S.
Department of Education. Washington, DC.
[45] Springer, Matthew G., Dale Ballou, Laura S. Hamilton, Vi-Nhuan Le, J.R. Lockwood, Daniel
F. McCaffrey, Matthew Pepper, and Brian M. Stecher. 2010. “Teacher Pay for Performance:
28

Experimental Evidence from the Project on Incentives in Teaching.” Conference paper,
National Center on Performance Incentives.
[46] Vigdor, Jacob L. 2008. “Teacher Salary Bonuses in North Carolina.” Conference paper, National Center on Performance Incentives.

29

NOT FOR PUBLICATION

7

Online Data Appendix

7.1

Student Level Variables

Assignment to School and Grade
A non-negligible number of students attended more than one schools and grades in each academic year. In order to ensure that results are not driven by students’ self-selection into treatment
schools, we assigned students to the first school and grade they were present in each academic year.
If there are multiple schools and grades with the same attendance patterns, we assigned students
to the school with the lowest alphanumeric order dbn and the the lowest grade.

Assignment to Treatment or Control
Students were assigned to treatment and control group if they attended treatment or control
school, respectively, in the 2007-08 academic year. If students did not attend any school in New
York City in September, they were not included in the sample. If there were more than one schools
with the same attendance patterns, students were dropped from the sample.

Treatment Variable in TOT regressions
The fraction of an academic year spent in any treated school was calculated for each student,
by taking the number of days spent in treated schools and dividing the number by the maximum
number of days student could be present at a school. The treatment variable in TOT regressions
was constructed by taking the cumulative years spent in treated schools. For example, if a student
spent 0.9 year in treated schools in year 1, 0.8 in year 2, and 0.5 in year 3, his treatment variable
would be 0.9 in year 1, 1.7 in year 2, and 2.2 in year 3.

Demographic Variables
DOE provided Edlabs with enrollment files that contained student sex, race, free lunch status, English language learner status, and special education status for academic years 2003-04 to
2009-10. Demographic variables that should be constant over time, such as sex and race, were
constructed by taking the most recent non-missing records from the enrollment files. Other student
characteristics - free lunch eligibility status, English language learner status, and special education
30

status - were constructed from each year’s enrollment file. All demographic variables were coded
as dummy variables that take the value one if student belongs to the demographic group and zero
otherwise.

State Test Scores
NYC DOE administers state ELA and math assessment tests in January and March of each
academic year to students in grades three through eight. All students in public schools must take
the tests unless they are medically excused or have severe disabilities. Students with limited English
proficiency or mild disabilities have to take the tests, but are granted special accomodations. ELA
and math assessments are developed by McGraw-Hill and include multiple-choice sessions and
short and extended response questions, as well as editing tasks in ELA in some grade levels. ELA
assessments ask students to draw conclusions, compare and contrast information and ideas, interpret
meaning and explain cause-and-effect relationships. Math assessments ask students to demonstrate
the knowledge of and apply facts and definitions, read and interpret graphs and tables, and represent
concepts with mathematical signs and symbols. Students in the third, fifth, and seventh grades
must score proficient or above to advance to the next grade.
NYC DOE provided test score data that contained grade level, proficiency level, and scale test
scores for each subject for academic years 2006-07 to 2009-10. We standardized scale scores to
have mean zero and standard deviation one by grade level and by academic year over the full city
sample. The 2006-07 academic year’s ELA and math scale scores were included as control variables
in all raw regressions, and the squared 2006-07 ELA and math scale scores were used in addition in all control regressions on the elementary and the middle school samples. The most recent
8th grade ELA and Math test scores taken before the 2007-08 academic year were constructed for
high school students and similarly used as control variables in regressions on the high school sample.

Regents Exam Scores
New York State Department of Education requires high school students to pass a certain number of Regents examinations in core subjects to graduate and awards different levels of diplomas
depending on the number of exams passed. For example, in order to earn a local diploma, a student
who entered high school in 2007 would have to obtain 55 points or above in comprehensive English,
mathematics, global history, U.S. history, and science Regents exams. To earn a Regents diploma,
he would have to obtain 65 points or above in all subject areas mentioned above.
31

Regents exams are administered in five subject areas - ELA, math, science, foreign language,
and social studies - three times every year in January, June, and August. Students can choose when
to take each subject exam, and they can also choose to satisfy regents requirements with approved
alternative assessments such as the SAT subject tests.
DOE provided Regents exam data for academic years 2007-08 to 2009-10. Each data file contained Regents exam codes and scores. There are multiple exams offered under each subject area.
We restricted our attention to one exam per subject areas taken by the highest number of students.
For example, we used integrated algebra scores among mathematics exams and living environment
exam scores among science exams. We standardized exam scores to have mean zero and standard
deviation one by exam codes over the full city sample. We calculated the average of all standardized
scores of regents exams taken in the subject in a given academic year, and used the resulting value
as the standardized Regents score.
In this paper, we use comprehensive English, mathematics, science, U.S. history, and global
history Regents exam scores as high school outcome variables.

Predictive Exam Scores
Every NYC school uses periodic assessment to monitor students’ progress towards the state
learning standards. DOE provides several options including Acuity Predictive Assessments, Acuity
Instructionally Targeted Assessments, Performance Series Computer Adaptive Assessments, etc.
Schools choose from these options depending on their needs.
Of these period assessments, DOE provided Acuity Predictive Assessment results for all students who took the exams in 2007-08 and 2008-09. Acuity Predictive Assessments closely mirror
state tests, and are designed to predict student performance level at state tests so that students and
teachers can learn how much work is needed and where they should focus in order to pass the state
learning standards. Acuity Predictive Assessments are administered to students in grades three
through eight once in the fall, and once in the spring. Predictive ELA exams were administered in
late October and late May and predictive math exams were administered in January and late May
in the 2007-08 and 2008-09 academic years. We took percentage points from the data files, and
standardized the scores by grade and by the test period to have mean zero and standard deviation
one over the full city sample of students with valid scores.

Attendance Rate
32

DOE provided monthly attendance data files that record the number of days present and the
number of days absent in each school and grade students were enrolled in. Attendance rate was
calculated by first taking the sum of the number of days present across all schools and grades
students attended in a year and dividing the number by the total number of days students were
enrolled in any school and grade. Then, attendance rate was standardized by the assigned grade
level to have mean zero and standard deviation one over the full city sample.

Behavioral Incidences
DOE provided incidence-level behavioral records of students for academic years 2006-07 to
2009-10. Records included information on the place, time and the severity level of incidences. We
assumed that students who attended school in NYC in the academic year and were not found in the
behavioral files did not have any behavioral incidence that year. We calculated the total number of
behavioral incidences at all levels attributed to students each year. We standardized the number
of incidences by assigned grade to have mean zero and standard deviation one over the full city
sample.
We also constructed school-level total number of behavioral incidences as the total number of
incidences committed at school each academic year. If school was open in the academic year and
was not found in the behavioral files, it was assumed that there was no behavioral incidence in that
school.

GPA
GPA was constructed from course grade data files that contained the grades received in all
courses taken in each academic year. Elementary and middle school grades were available for all
academic years from 2006-07 to 2009-10, and high school grades were available from 2008-09. Elementary school grades were calculated in the 1-4 scale, and middle and high school grades were
calculated in the 1-100 scale. I dropped duplicate records that have the same course code and grade
within an academic year, and calculated the yearly GPA as an average grade across all the courses
taken that year. GPA was standardized to have mean zero and standard deviation one by grade
and by academic year over the full city sample.

Graduation
DOE provided four-year graduation results for cohorts who entered high school in 2004 and
33

2005. Graduation status is coded as a dummy variable that takes the value one if student graduted
in four years, and zero otherwise. We also constructed dummy variables for graduating with Regents
diploma or higher for students who graduated high school in four years.

7.2

Teacher Level Variables

Demographic Variables
DOE provided Human Resources data, which contained teacher sex, race, date of birth, experience, and salary step, from academic years 2004-05 to 2009-10. Demographic variables, such
as sex and race, were constructed and coded in the same way as student demographic variables.
Teacher salary and years of teaching experience before the 2007-08 academic year were taken from
the Human Resources data, and used as control variables in teacher level regressions, along with
gender and race dummies.

Teacher Value Added
DOE provided multi-year teacher value added data, which contained TVA measured in standard deviation units in every classroom. Teacher value added measures the changes in student
achievement attributable to classrooms controlling for a large set of student and classroom level
variables18 . We dropped TVA values in classrooms taught by more than one teachers or by teachers
with blank IDs. TVA measures were standardized to have mean zero and standard deviation one
by grade level over all classrooms in the city. If teachers taught multiple classrooms, the average of
standardized teacher value added measures was taken across all classrooms taught in the academic
year. The 2006-07 ELA and Math TVA values were used as control variables in all teacher level
regressions.

Teacher Absences
DOE provided a supplement to teacher value added data containing teacher identifier, demographic characteristics such as gender, race, experience, and salary step, and personal or DOErelated cumulative absences in May of the academic year. We took the cumulative number of
personal absences in May for 2007-08 and 2008-09 academic years. Teachers who left the system
before May were set to have missing absences.
18

For a detailed description of the model used to calculate teacher value added, please visit the NYC DOE’s
website.

34

7.3

School Level Variables

Student Characteristics
We constructed school-level measures of student characteristics by taking the average of student demographic dummy variables and test scores over students assigned to each school by the
rule described previously. Among the variables constructed, the percentages of blacks, Hispanics,
special education students, limited English proficiency students, and free-lunch eligible students
were included in the parsimonious set of controls in student-level control regressions. The percentages of blacks, Hispanics, Asians, other race students, males, free-lunch eligible students, special
education students, English language learners, and students missing information on gender, race,
free-lunch eligibility or special education status in the enrollment data were used as control variables in school-level regressions, along with average 2006-07 ELA and math state test scores for
elementary or middle schools and average 8th grade ELA and math test scores for high schools.

Teacher Characteristics
School-level measures of teacher characteristics are constructed similarly, by taking the average
of teacher demographic dummy variables and standardized value-added measures over teachers who
were at each school in October of the academic year.

Progress Report
Progress Report overall scores and sub-scores were obtained from the data files released on the
DOE website. The overall scores and sub-scores were standardized by school type - Elementary,
Middle, and High School - to have mean zero and standard deviation one each academic year. The
progress report overall score and the squared overall score from the 2006-07 academic year was used
as a control variable in all school-level regressions.

Survey Results
DOE posts school-level summary results for teacher, parent, and student learning environment
surveys on its website. We took teacher survey response rates and subscores in the areas of academic expectations, communication, engagement, and safety and respect from the data files. The
subscores were standardized by school level and by academic year to have mean zero and standard
deviation one.

35

Figure 1: NAEP Achievement Scores, 19782004

Figure 2: Progress Report Card Metrics

Appendix Figure 1: A Map of Treatment and Control Schools

Table 1: Sample Accounting
Number of
Number of Observations
Schools
Elementary Middle
High
Met the eligibility criteria
Barred by the UFT
Special district schools

438
34
8

Experimental sample
Treatment group
Control group

396
233
163

Offered treatment in year 1
Treated in year 1
Offered treatment in year 2
Treated in year 2
Offered treatment in year 3
Treated in year 3

233
198
195
191
191
189

Valid
Valid
Valid
Valid
Valid
Valid
Valid

state ELA exam scores
state math exam scores
Regents English exam scores
Regents math exam scores
Regents science exam scores
Regents U.S. history exam scores
Regents global history exam scores

177,861
104,823
73,038

157,616
93,472
64,144

207,741
115,518
92,223

172,660
173,170

151,059
151,446

55,754
53,657
56,789
50,160
61,881

-

NOTES: The number of observations is defined as the number of records of student and academic
year pairs in the sample. The rows denoted valid state or Regents exam scores report the number
of observations with non-missing state or Regents exam scores, respectively, and non-missing grade
levels.

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.70
0.58
0.00
0.00
0.26
0.67
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.13
0.00
0.00
0.67
0.52
0.35
0.73
0.17

P-value
Balance
(1) & (2)

0.51
0.76
0.69
0.72
0.98
0.65
0.65
0.92
0.31
0.71
0.50
0.36
0.86
0.86
0.44
0.50
0.32
0.49
0.57
0.46
0.46
0.03
0.14
0.89
0.02
0.92
0.67
0.85
0.65
0.04
0.70
0.34
0.95

P-value
Balance
(3) & (4)

NOTES: Each column reports summary statistics from different samples, as indicated in the column header. All variables are school level
measures or averages. Teacher value added was standardized to have mean zero and standard deviation one by test grade level in the full city
sample before the school average was taken. The mean and the standard deviation of the variables indicated in the far left column are reported
in the table. The p-value of the difference between samples are reported in the last two columns. The number of observations in each sample
is reported at the bottom of the table.

% White
% Black
% Hispanic
% Asian
% Other Race
% Male
% Female
% Free Lunch Eligible
% Special Education
% English Language Learner
2006-07 ELA Score
2006-07 Math Score
% Missing 06-07 ELA Score
% Missing 06-07 Math Score
8th Grade ELA Score
8th Grade Math Score
% Missing 8th Grade ELA Score
% Missing 8th Grade Math Score
School Size ÷ 100
% Female Teachers
% Male Teachers
% White Teachers
% Black Teachers
% Hispanic Teachers
% Asian Teachers
% Other Race Teachers
Teacher Salary ÷ 1000
Teacher Experience
2006-07 ELA TVA
2006-07 Math TVA
% Missing 06-07 ELA TVA
% Missing 06-07 Math TVA
Number of Teachers in School
N

Table 2: Descriptive Statistics and Covariate Balance
NYC
Experimental
Treatment
Control
District
Sample
Group
Group
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.119 (0.192)
0.014 (0.022)
0.013 (0.017)
0.015 (0.027)
0.365 (0.291)
0.411 (0.265)
0.407 (0.266)
0.415 (0.265)
0.405 (0.256)
0.552 (0.266)
0.557 (0.267)
0.546 (0.265)
0.105 (0.162)
0.018 (0.031)
0.018 (0.025)
0.019 (0.039)
0.006 (0.007)
0.005 (0.005)
0.005 (0.005)
0.005 (0.005)
0.502 (0.080)
0.515 (0.071)
0.514 (0.080)
0.517 (0.056)
0.498 (0.080)
0.485 (0.071)
0.486 (0.080)
0.483 (0.056)
0.858 (0.181)
0.959 (0.038)
0.960 (0.040)
0.959 (0.036)
0.083 (0.056)
0.110 (0.051)
0.108 (0.050)
0.113 (0.052)
0.135 (0.143)
0.191 (0.149)
0.189 (0.143)
0.195 (0.158)
652.950 (17.201) 639.315 (9.070)
639.602 (9.220)
638.906 (8.869)
671.321 (20.417) 657.173 (14.880) 657.806 (15.029) 656.269 (14.675)
0.506 (0.262)
0.501 (0.257)
0.503 (0.259)
0.498 (0.256)
0.496 (0.267)
0.489 (0.264)
0.491 (0.266)
0.486 (0.263)
661.061 (20.446) 646.488 (12.854) 647.425 (9.554) 645.142 (16.574)
672.029 (21.222) 655.688 (6.750)
656.127 (6.314)
655.076 (7.372)
0.262 (0.173)
0.280 (0.201)
0.261 (0.187)
0.306 (0.220)
0.218 (0.147)
0.223 (0.183)
0.211 (0.163)
0.240 (0.208)
6.832 (5.738)
6.357 (4.118)
6.258 (4.071)
6.499 (4.192)
0.822 (0.128)
0.810 (0.101)
0.813 (0.103)
0.805 (0.100)
0.178 (0.128)
0.190 (0.101)
0.187 (0.103)
0.195 (0.100)
0.566 (0.257)
0.378 (0.176)
0.396 (0.186)
0.351 (0.158)
0.231 (0.232)
0.337 (0.226)
0.321 (0.225)
0.360 (0.226)
0.154 (0.155)
0.246 (0.169)
0.247 (0.175)
0.245 (0.161)
0.044 (0.073)
0.034 (0.030)
0.030 (0.027)
0.038 (0.033)
0.002 (0.007)
0.003 (0.007)
0.003 (0.008)
0.003 (0.007)
68.048 (7.397)
66.512 (4.043)
66.430 (4.035)
66.628 (4.067)
8.300 (2.600)
7.900 (2.109)
7.919 (2.136)
7.873 (2.078)
0.044 (0.557)
0.055 (0.528)
0.067 (0.543)
0.038 (0.508)
0.024 (0.560)
0.041 (0.590)
0.097 (0.602)
-0.040 (0.565)
0.875 (0.060)
0.878 (0.057)
0.877 (0.056)
0.880 (0.059)
0.871 (0.058)
0.872 (0.052)
0.870 (0.053)
0.876 (0.049)
57.276 (27.485)
59.061 (21.618)
59.130 (21.768)
58.961 (21.486)
1417
396
233
163

Table 3: The Impact of Teacher Incentives
Elementary
First
ITT
TOT
Stage
ELA: Raw
1.319** -0.010
-0.008
(0.052) (0.022) (0.017)
N
172660 172660 172660
ELA: Controls
N
Math: Raw
N
Math: Controls
N

on Student Achievement, Elementary and
Middle
First
First
ITT
TOT
Stage
Stage
1.139** -0.033** -0.029** 1.236**
(0.042)
(0.012)
(0.011)
(0.036)
151059
151059
151059
323719

Middle School
Pooled
ITT

TOT

-0.020
(0.014)
323719

-0.017
(0.011)
323719

1.323**
(0.050)
172660

-0.011
(0.020)
172660

-0.008
(0.015)
172660

1.140**
(0.043)
151059

-0.032**
(0.011)
151059

-0.028**
(0.010)
151059

1.236**
(0.035)
323719

-0.020
(0.013)
323719

-0.016
(0.010)
323719

1.318**
(0.052)
173170

-0.017
(0.025)
173170

-0.013
(0.019)
173170

1.138**
(0.042)
151446

-0.053**
(0.018)
151446

-0.047**
(0.016)
151446

1.235**
(0.036)
324616

-0.033*
(0.017)
324616

-0.027*
(0.014)
324616

1.321**
(0.050)
173170

-0.015
(0.024)
173170

-0.012
(0.018)
173170

1.139**
(0.043)
151446

-0.048**
(0.017)
151446

-0.042**
(0.015)
151446

1.235**
(0.035)
324616

-0.031*
(0.016)
324616

-0.025*
(0.013)
324616

NOTES: Each column reports results from separate regressions. The first three columns report results on the sample
with test grade levels 3 to 5 and the next three columns on the sample with grade levels 6 to 8. The last three columns
report results on the pooled sample. The dependent variables are the state ELA and math scores standardized to have
mean zero and standard deviation one by grade level each academic year in the full city sample. Scores from all three
years of implementation are used. First-stage regression uses the number of years that student received treatment as the
outcome variable and reports the coefficient on the dummy variable for being randomized into the treatment group. The
Intent-to-Treat estimates report the effect of being assigned to the treatment group. The Treatment-on-Treated estimates
report the effect of spending time in treated schools, using the random assignment into the treatment group as the
instrument. Raw regressions control for 2006-07 state test scores, test grade level dummies, and year fixed effects. Control
regressions include student demographic variables and school characteristics as additional control variables. Standard
errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered at school level. The number of observations, denoted N and defined in Table
1, is also reported. * denotes significance at 10% level and ** at 5% level.

-0.003
(0.044)
55754

-0.003
(0.041)
55754

1.076**
(0.053)
53657

-0.011
(0.031)
53657

-0.010
(0.029)
53657

0.830**
(0.070)
27995

-0.044**
(0.021)
27995

-0.053**
(0.026)
27995

0.985**
(0.078)
15803

-0.074*
(0.042)
15803

-0.075*
(0.044)
15803

Panel B: 4-year Graduation
Graduated
Regents Diploma
First
First
ITT
TOT
ITT
TOT
Stage
Stage
0.840** -0.056** -0.066** 0.996** -0.077* -0.078*
(0.075)
(0.023)
(0.029)
(0.083) (0.044) (0.046)
27995
27995
27995
15803
15803
15803

1.069**
(0.086)
55754

0.009
(0.051)
55754

ITT

English

1.020**
(0.062)
56789

-0.016
(0.037)
56789

-0.015
(0.036)
56789

1.088**
(0.086)
50160

-0.033
(0.054)
50160

-0.030
(0.050)
50160

0.987**
(0.080)
61881

-0.063
(0.045)
61881

-0.064
(0.045)
61881

Global History
First
ITT
TOT
Stage
1.008** -0.058
-0.057
(0.079) (0.045) (0.045)
61881
61881
61881

NOTES: Each column reports results from separate regressions. The dependent variables are Regents exam scores in comprehensive English, mathematics (integrated algebra),
science (living environment), U.S. history, and global history, and graduation outcomes. Regents exam scores are standardized by exam type each academic year to have mean
zero and standard deviation one in the full city sample. Graduation outcome is coded as dummy variables that take the value one if student graduated, or if student graduated
with Regents diploma, respectively, and zero otherwise. First-stage uses the number of years that student received treatment as the outcome variable and reports the coefficient
on the dummy variable for being in the treatment group. The Intent-to-Treat estimates report the effect of being assigned to the treatment group. The Treatment-on-Treated
estimates report the effect of spending time in treated schools, using the random assignment into the treatment group as the instrument. Raw regressions control for 8th grade
ELA and math state test scores, grade fixed effects, and year fixed effects. Control regressions control for student demographics and school characteristics in addition. Standard
errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered at school level. The number of observations, denoted N and defined in Table1, is also reported. * denotes significance at 10% level
and ** at 5% level.

N

Controls

N

Raw

N

Controls

N

Raw

First
Stage
1.082**
(0.090)
55754

Table 4: The Impact of Teacher Incentives on Student Achievement, High School
Panel A: Regents Exam Scores
Mathematics
Science
U.S. History
First
First
First
TOT
ITT
TOT
ITT
TOT
ITT
TOT
Stage
Stage
Stage
0.009
1.087** -0.011
-0.010 1.035** -0.018
-0.017 1.106** -0.028
-0.025
(0.047)
(0.051) (0.028) (0.026) (0.061) (0.037) (0.036) (0.089) (0.061) (0.055)
55754
53657
53657
53657
56789
56789
56789
50160
50160
50160

-0.011
(0.031)
53657
-0.016
(0.037)
56789
-0.033
(0.054)
50160
-0.063
(0.045)
61881

Mathematics

Science

U.S. History

Global History

-0.059
(0.051)
31585

-0.023
(0.058)
25536

-0.019
(0.041)
28007

-0.012
(0.032)
27706

-0.017
(0.048)
28708

-0.048∗∗
(0.017)
78327

-0.048∗∗
(0.017)
151446

Math

-0.003
(0.044)
55754

-0.035∗∗
(0.012)
78093

-0.032∗∗
(0.011)
151059

ELA

English

-0.018
(0.024)
87887

-0.009
(0.020)
87599

-0.065
(0.042)
30283

-0.040
(0.053)
24608

-0.012
(0.038)
28771

-0.010
(0.032)
25946

0.012
(0.042)
27021

-0.048∗∗
(0.018)
73097

-0.028∗∗
(0.012)
72932

-0.013
(0.024)
85254

-0.013
(0.020)
85024

0.010
(0.028)
23933
0.038
(0.042)
23865
-0.020
(0.043)
21285
-0.031
(0.044)
26574

-0.199∗∗
(0.067)
1041
-0.211∗∗
(0.089)
1051
-0.264∗∗
(0.074)
1234

-0.014
(0.039)
22702

-0.053∗∗
(0.020)
62095

-0.029∗∗
(0.012)
62201

-0.030
(0.028)
65877

-0.019
(0.023)
65898

-0.056
(0.061)
910

-0.101
(0.082)
1155

-0.035
(0.045)
1736

-0.077∗
(0.045)
1697

0.120
(0.094)
1706

0.061
(0.077)
1690

Table 5: An Analysis of Subsamples
Male
Female
White
Black

-0.015
(0.024)
173170

Math

Subject
ELA

Full
Sample
-0.011
(0.020)
172660

-0.062
(0.046)
31649

-0.029
(0.062)
25615

-0.029
(0.034)
29581

-0.016
(0.035)
27121

0.010
(0.052)
29330

-0.042∗∗
(0.020)
83969

-0.030∗∗
(0.013)
83553

-0.006
(0.026)
102222

-0.006
(0.022)
101722

Hispanic

-0.157∗∗
(0.068)
2049

-0.082
(0.066)
1874

-0.153∗∗
(0.072)
1963

-0.109
(0.070)
1363

0.019
(0.083)
2215

-0.063
(0.051)
2978

-0.050
(0.038)
2926

-0.065
(0.076)
2658

0.003
(0.055)
2637

Asian

-0.039
(0.040)
43310

-0.014
(0.055)
34331

0.002
(0.036)
41251

-0.007
(0.026)
40537

0.019
(0.046)
38284

-0.043∗∗
(0.017)
126065

-0.030∗∗
(0.011)
125371

-0.011
(0.024)
147768

Free
Lunch
-0.009
(0.020)
147003

-0.056
(0.051)
3827

-0.040
(0.055)
3188

0.066
(0.051)
3473

0.005
(0.039)
3259

-0.019
(0.061)
3471

0.002
(0.024)
6170

0.004
(0.020)
6135

-0.007
(0.040)
5537

No Free
Lunch
0.032
(0.033)
5513

NOTES: Each column reports regression results on the subsample indicated on the column header. The dependent variables are standardized
state or Regents exam scores, as denoted in the far left column. Estimation is done using the same regression specifications as Tables 3 and 4.
From each regression, the ITT estimate is reported with standard errors in parentheses. The number of observations, defined in Table 1, is also
reported. * denotes significance at 10% level and ** at 5% level.

High

Middle

School
Level
Elementary

-0.011
(0.031)
53657
-0.016
(0.037)
56789
-0.033
(0.054)
50160
-0.063
(0.045)
61881

Mathematics

Science

U.S. History

Global History

-0.018
(0.049)
17155
-0.036
(0.048)
19757

-0.088∗
(0.052)
19899

0.033
(0.045)
14615

0.007
(0.052)
12648

0.019
(0.039)
18952

-0.053∗∗
(0.019)
69607

-0.034∗∗
(0.012)
69798

-0.009
(0.021)
29422

0.033
(0.044)
31590

0.023
(0.054)
25275

0.048
(0.045)
28516

0.020
(0.024)
27087

-0.002
(0.049)
28406

-0.013
(0.019)
76063

-0.012
(0.013)
75830

0.008
(0.032)
86980

-0.138∗∗
(0.061)
30291

-0.074
(0.066)
24885

-0.089∗∗
(0.044)
28273

-0.046
(0.046)
26570

-0.007
(0.047)
27348

-0.091∗∗
(0.026)
75314

-0.055∗∗
(0.015)
75175

-0.050
(0.031)
86074

-0.045∗∗
(0.022)
36271

-0.045∗∗
(0.014)
32963

-0.020
(0.027)
28865

Analysis of Subsamples (Continued)
Score
Schl Size Schl Size
TVA
High
Low
High
Low
0.003
0.021
-0.053∗∗
0.006
(0.019)
(0.027)
(0.026)
(0.023)
29487
86779
85788
26605

-0.018
(0.062)
17429

0.014
(0.050)
14894

0.022
(0.039)
13043

-0.023
(0.049)
19261

-0.049∗∗
(0.017)
70844

-0.048∗∗
(0.017)
151446

Math

-0.003
(0.044)
55754

-0.030∗∗
(0.011)
71093

-0.032∗∗
(0.011)
151059

ELA

English

-0.022
(0.021)
29978

Table 5: An
Score
Low
-0.014
(0.018)
30075

-0.015
(0.024)
173170

Math

Subject
ELA

Full
Sample
-0.011
(0.020)
172660

-0.079∗∗
(0.026)
36239

-0.024
(0.022)
60712

-0.028∗∗
(0.012)
58479

0.005
(0.028)
72555

-0.052∗
(0.031)
28816
-0.043∗∗
(0.021)
32782

T. Salary
Low
0.003
(0.024)
72664

TVA
High
-0.025
(0.031)
26583

-0.063∗∗
(0.019)
57406

-0.036∗∗
(0.015)
58014

-0.034
(0.027)
70730

T. Salary
High
-0.029
(0.023)
70377

NOTES: The same condition as described in the previous page applies. For the second and the third columns, the experimental sample was
divided into two subsamples – elementary or middle (high) school students with 2006-07 average state test scores (8th grade test scores) above
the median and below the median, and the ITT effect was estimated in each subsample. The same procedure was done using school size, and
the 2006-07 teacher value added and the salary in 2007 of the teacher who taught student each year. Information on teacher value added and
salary was available only for elementary and middle school students.

High

Middle

School
Level
Elementary

1.395**
(0.084)
44454
1.069**
(0.040)
106382
1.063**
(0.040)
105968

GPA

Predictive ELA

Predictive Math

-0.023
(0.020)
105968

-0.019
(0.016)
106382

-0.001
(0.040)
44454

-0.000
(0.017)
177861

-0.022
(0.019)
105968

-0.018
(0.015)
106382

-0.000
(0.029)
44454

-0.000
(0.013)
177861

0.956**
(0.040)
50915

0.955**
(0.040)
51272

1.152**
(0.047)
129759

1.125**
(0.042)
157616

-0.051**
(0.022)
50915

-0.022
(0.018)
51272

0.001
(0.031)
129759

0.012
(0.020)
157616

-0.054**
(0.023)
50915

-0.023
(0.019)
51272

0.001
(0.027)
129759

0.011
(0.018)
157616
1.161**
(0.075)
123441

0.915**
(0.063)
207741
-0.004
(0.029)
123441

0.061*
(0.033)
207741

-0.014
(0.050)
207741

ITT

High

-0.003
(0.025)
123441

0.066*
(0.037)
207741

-0.016
(0.055)
207741

TOT

NOTES: Each column reports results from separate regressions. The dependent variables are attendance rate, the number of
behavioral problems, annual GPA, and spring predictive state exam scores from each academic year. All outcome variables are
standardized by grade level each academic year to have mean zero and standard deviation one in the full city sample. The first
three columns report results on the sample of students in grade levels 3 to 5, the next three grade levels 6 to 8, and the last
three grade levels 9 to 12. The regression specifications used are the same as in Tables 3 and 4. Standard errors, reported in
parentheses, are clustered at school level. The number of observations, denoted N and defined in Table 1, is also reported. *
denotes significance at 10% level and ** at 5% level.

N

N

N

N

1.308**
(0.049)
177861

Behavior Problems

N

Attendance Rate

Table 6: The Impact of Teacher Incentives on Alternative Outcomes
Elementary
Middle
First
First
First
ITT
TOT
ITT
TOT
Stage
Stage
Stage
1.308** -0.018
-0.013 1.125**
-0.019
-0.017
0.915**
(0.049) (0.020) (0.015) (0.042)
(0.022)
(0.020)
(0.063)
177861 177861 177861 157616
157616
157616
207741

1.220**
(0.053)
18543

Personal Absences

0.275
(0.212)
18543

-0.007
(0.012)
21700
0.225
(0.174)
18543

-0.005
(0.010)
21700
1.225**
(0.083)
6727

1.233**
(0.082)
8289
-0.440
(0.403)
6727

-0.027
(0.017)
8289
-0.359
(0.325)
6727

-0.022
(0.014)
8289
1.290**
(0.091)
3977

1.290**
(0.091)
4693
0.613
(0.496)
3977

-0.000
(0.027)
4693
0.475
(0.382)
3977

-0.000
(0.021)
4693

0.007
(0.010)
4693

TOT

NOTES: Each column reports results from separate regressions. The dependent variables are retention in district and in
school and personal absences in an academic year. Retention in district is coded as a dummy variable that takes the value
one if teacher stays in the New York City public school district in the next academic year and zero otherwise. Retention
in school is coded similarly, as a dummy variable that takes the value one if teacher stayed in the same school the next
academic year. Teacher absences is the number of days teacher was absent from school for personal reasons in an academic year. Outcome variables from the first two years of implementation are used. First-stage uses the number of years
that teacher received treatment as the outcome variable and reports the coefficient on the dummy variable for being in the
treatment group. The Intent-to-Treat estimates report the effect of being assigned to the treatment group. The Treatmenton-Treated estimates report the effect of teaching at treated schools, using the random assignment into the treatment group
as the instrument. Teacher demogrpaphic variables and the 2006-07 teacher value added are included as controls. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered at school level. The number of observations, denoted N and defined as
the number of records at teacher-academic year level, is also reported. * denotes significance at 10% level and ** at 5% level.

N

N

1.224**
(0.052)
21700

Retention in School

Table 7: The Impact of Teacher Incentives on Teacher Behavior
Elementary School
Middle School
K-8 School
First
First
First
ITT
TOT
ITT
TOT
ITT
Stage
Stage
Stage
Retention in District 1.224**
0.002
0.002
1.233** -0.006
-0.005 1.290**
0.010
(0.052) (0.006) (0.005) (0.082) (0.011) (0.009) (0.091) (0.013)
N
21700
21700
21700
8289
8289
8289
4693
4693

1.667**
(0.074)
557
1.667**
(0.074)
557
1.667**
(0.074)
557

Communication

Engagement

Academic Expectations

-0.007
(0.129)
557

0.045
(0.129)
557

0.070
(0.133)
557

-0.089
(0.126)
557

-0.004
(0.076)
557

0.027
(0.076)
557

0.042
(0.078)
557

-0.053
(0.075)
557

1.714**
(0.107)
240

1.714**
(0.107)
240

1.714**
(0.107)
240

1.714**
(0.107)
240

0.035
(0.185)
240

0.068
(0.182)
240

0.035
(0.194)
240

0.167
(0.164)
240

0.020
(0.103)
240

0.039
(0.101)
240

0.020
(0.108)
240

0.098
(0.090)
240

1.640**
(0.129)
217

1.640**
(0.129)
217

1.640**
(0.129)
217

1.640**
(0.129)
217

0.093
(0.173)
217

0.035
(0.175)
217

0.003
(0.188)
217

0.093
(0.170)
217

0.034
(0.030)
219

ITT

High

0.057
(0.099)
217

0.022
(0.100)
217

0.002
(0.108)
217

0.057
(0.098)
217

0.021
(0.017)
219

TOT

NOTES: Each column reports results from separate regressions. The dependent variables are teacher survey response rates
and subscores, standardized by school level (Elementary, Middle, and High) to have mean zero and standard deviation one.
First-stage uses the number of years that school received treatment as the outcome variable and reports the coefficient on
the dummy variable for being in the treatment group. The Intent-to-Treat estimates report the effect of being assigned to the
treatment group. The Treatment-on-Treated estimates report the effect of receiving treatment, with the random assignment into
the treatment group as the instrument. All regressions control for student demographics and previous achievement measures.
Standard errors are reported in parentheses. The number of observations, denoted N and defined as the number of records at
school-academic year level, is also reported. * denotes significance at 10% level and ** at 5% level.

N

N

N

N

1.667**
(0.074)
557

Safety/Respect

N

Response Rate

Table 8: The Impact of Teacher Incentives on Teacher Survey Results
Elementary
Middle
First
First
First
ITT
TOT
ITT
TOT
Stage
Stage
Stage
1.667**
0.017
0.010
1.714**
0.009
0.005
1.640**
(0.074) (0.023) (0.013) (0.107) (0.043) (0.024) (0.129)
557
557
557
240
240
240
219

