                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




DOES INPUT QUALITY DRIVE MEASURED DIFFERENCES IN FIRM PRODUCTIVITY?

                                            Jeremy T. Fox
                                            Valérie Smeets

                                         Working Paper 16853
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16853


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2011




Fox thanks the National Science Foundation, the NET Institute, the Olin Foundation, and the Stigler
Center for generous funding. Smeets gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Danish Council
for Independent Research in Social Sciences and the Marie Curie Program of the European Commission
(MEIF-2003-501280). Thanks to helpful discussions with Daniel Ackerberg, Allan Collard-Wexler,
Ulrich Doraszelski, Tor Eriksson, Jan de Loecker, Amil Petrin, Chad Syverson, Johannes Van Biesebroeck,
and Frédéric Warzynski. We appreciate remarks by seminar participants at Aarhus University, CAED,
the Econometric Society, IIOC, Jornadas de Economia Industrial, NYU Stern and Texas A&M. Thanks
to the professional staff at the Center for Corporate Performance for hospitality and for help integrating
the KØB and IDA datasets. Our email addresses are jtfox@umich.edu and vas@asb.dk. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Jeremy T. Fox and Valérie Smeets. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Does Input Quality Drive Measured Differences in Firm Productivity?
Jeremy T. Fox and Valérie Smeets
NBER Working Paper No. 16853
March 2011
JEL No. J21,J23,L11,L23

                                              ABSTRACT

Firms in the same industry can differ in measured productivity by multiples of 3. Griliches (1957)
suggests one explanation: the quality of inputs differs across firms. We add labor market history variables
such as experience and firm and industry tenure, as well as general human capital measures such as
schooling and sex. We also use the wage bill and worker fixed effects. We show adding human capital
variables and the wage bill decreases the ratio of the 90th to 10th productivity quantiles from 3.27
to 2.68 across eight Danish manufacturing and service industries. The productivity dispersion decrease
is roughly of the same order of magnitude as some competitive effects found in the literature, but input
quality measures do not explain most productivity dispersion, despite economically large production
function coefficients. We find that the wage bill explains as much dispersion as human capital measures.


Jeremy T. Fox
Economics Department
University of Michigan
238 Lorch Hall
611 Tappan St.
Ann Arbor, MI 48104
and NBER
jeremyfox@gmail.com

Valérie Smeets
Aarhus University
Hermodsvej 22
8230 Århus
Denmark
vas@asb.dk
1    Introduction

Measured differences in productivity across plants in the same industry are usually large. Bartelsman and Doms
(2000) survey the literature and find many instances where the highest productivity firm has more than twice
the measured productivity of the lowest productivity firm. Dhrymes (1995) studies American manufacturing
and finds that the ratio of total factor productivity (TFP) of plants in the ninth decile to the TFP of plants in
the second decile is 2.75. We find that the ratio of the 90th quantile of productivity to the 10th quantile of
productivity is a mean of 3.27 across eight Danish manufacturing and service industries. For the same inputs,
a firm at the 90th quantile of TFP produces 3.27 times the output of a firm at the 10th quantile of TFP.

These huge differences in cross-sectional, measured productivities have spawned a literature investigating why
productivity differences are so large. One explanation is simply measurement error in output. However, mea-
sured productivity dispersion is similar in developed and developing countries, whereas measurement error
might be expected to be larger in developing country datasets (Bartelsman and Doms, 2000). Also, productiv-
ity at the firm or plant level is persistent across time, meaning all components of measured productivity cannot
be transient (Baily, Hulten and Campbell, 1992). Further, productivity dispersion decreases with competition,
as theory predicts (Olley and Pakes, 1996; Syverson, 2004; Bloom and Van Reenen, 2007). The literature
shows measured productivity predicts firm growth and firm exit (Baldwin, 1995), export success (Bernard
and Jensen, 1995), and even transfers of plants between conglomerate firms (Maksimovic and Phillips, 2001;
Schoar, 2002). Foster, Haltiwanger and Syverson (2008) use physical output instead of sales as the measure
of output, and show that technological productivity dispersion is often even higher than revenue productivity
dispersion. Further, both types of productivity are correlated with firm outcomes such as growth and exit. The
consensus in the literature is that productivity dispersion is a real phenomenon with important consequences
for economic efficiency and our understanding of how markets with heterogeneous producers operate.

This paper investigates whether failing to account for input quality drives productivity residuals. Economists
since at least Griliches (1957) have argued that productivity dispersion reflects the quality of inputs across
firms. Economists working with US manufacturing plant data typically measure inputs as the dollar value of
physical capital and the number of workers at a firm. Sometimes, employees are separated into production and
nonproduction workers. Not surprisingly, labor and capital vary in much greater detail. Two types of machines
may have different uses and may not be perfect substitutes and two types of workers may not have the same
contributions to firm output.

Input quality seems to us like a fundamentally different explanation for productivity dispersion than some
other explanations, such as management competence, economic incentives, business strategy or other difficult-
to-measure firm characteristics. Any firm can buy a higher quality machine or hire an abler worker simply by
paying more money for the higher quality inputs. If input quality is the reason for productivity, then productivity
is really an artifact of a measurement problem. Input markets can be used to reallocate “productivity” across
firms: higher quality workers will switch to the firms that pay them the most, for example. Thus, there is no
sense that the firm as an organization is playing an important role in productivity dispersion. If some mostly
fixed firm characteristic such as business strategy explains productivity, then input markets will be less effective
at reallocating or increasing productivity. Instead, a Schumpeterian process of creative destruction, where high
productivity firms grow more quickly, may be needed to raise the economy’s aggregate productivity. Measuring
the role of input quality for productivity dispersion is essential precisely because the optimal policy responses
differ depending on whether productivity dispersion is due to input quality or some fixed firm characteristic.

As physical capital is measured in monetary units rather than the number of machines, the quality of capital
is likely somewhat better measured than the quality of workers in a typical production function regression,
although we discuss literatures on capacity utilization and vintage capital below that provide caveats suggesting
that even physical capital has important measurement issues. Because physical capital is measured in a more
informative unit than the number of machines, our contribution is to disaggregate the labor input. We use
matched employer-employee panel data from Denmark to precisely measure many characteristics of workers
at a firm. We merge individual-level data on all Danish residents with firm-level data on value added and
physical capital. We then construct firm-level statistics about worker characteristics.

We present productivity regressions with increasingly detailed input quality measures. First, we investigate a
simple adjustment where we follow the literature on income inequality and disaggregate the labor inputs into
“skilled” (college) and “unskilled” (noncollege) workers. Next, we include two regressions with much more
detailed input quality measures. Schooling, sex, total experience and industry tenure proxy for general- or
occupation-specific human capital. Tenure at a worker’s current firm proxies for firm-specific human capital.
Our production function includes a quality-weighting function that transforms firm-level measures of individual
worker characteristics into efficiency units of labor. This labor quality function is embedded in the estimation of
an otherwise standard Cobb-Douglas production function. The residual from this production function estimate
is a firm’s total factor productivity (TFP). We examine whether adjusting for labor input quality reduces the
measured within-industry dispersion in TFP. We use two different functional forms for labor quality. One
specification follows Griliches (1957) and multiplies the contribution of different worker characteristics. The
second specification follows Welch (1969) and adds the contribution of each labor quality measure.

The human capital measures that we use may not capture all aspects of worker quality. One approach is to
estimate the abilities of workers using wage data. We use panel data on worker wage histories to estimate time
invariant worker fixed effects as proxies for worker abilities. We then include these worker fixed effects in
production functions as alternative measures of labor quality.

Most researchers do not have access to detailed worker panel data to construct labor market histories or to
estimate fixed effects. Therefore, we also investigate using proxies for labor quality that can be obtained from
accounting data, such as the wage bill of the firm. We present two specifications with wages: the total wage
bill instead of the number of workers, and the fraction of the wage bill spent for various human capital bins.
We show that the wage bill reduces productivity dispersion as much as our detailed human capital measures.
Including the wage bill is also interesting because human capital characteristics tend to have low explanatory
power in wage regressions. Here we show that the wage bill does a little better at predicting output than our
human capital measures do; the wage bill may be picking up some unobserved (in our data) input quality.

We present our results separately for two different production functions: Cobb-Douglas and the translog. As
firms in different industries use different technologies, we present separate results for eight industries. Also,
we present a benchmark for any decline in measured productivity dispersion: the decline in dispersion from
adding past employment growth as a control. The previous empirical literature has emphasized that growth is
correlated with productivity. Another benchmark compares our productivity declines from adjusting for input
quality to the productivity declines from local product-market competition in Syverson (2004).

Our main empirical finding is that our detailed input quality measures, among the best one can hope to ob-
tain, do reduce measured productivity dispersion somewhat, but there is still a large amount of productivity
dispersion remaining after controlling for input quality. Averaging across our eight industries, the ratio of the
outputs of the firm in the 90th quantile of TFP to the firm in the 10th quantile of TFP is 3.27. This declines
to 2.68 with human capital and wage bill controls. 2.68 is 82% of 3.27, meaning that the 90/10 ratio of TFP
quantiles declines by 18% from adding the most detailed human capital and wage bill controls. Labor input
quality contributes to typical measures of TFP dispersion and explains about 18% of the dispersion.

Our finding of a 18% decline in productivity dispersion is not because human capital measures are unimportant
in production. Indeed, for each industry we estimate usually economically large and sometimes statistically
precise coefficients on the human capital measures. Rather, our finding is that the reason some firms are
dramatically more productive than others is not only a simple failure to account for input quality. While
many factors probably contribute to productivity dispersion and input quality is among them, adjusting for
input quality does not explain most productivity dispersion. As stated above, any firm could hire, say, more
college-educated workers simply by paying the market wage for workers with college degrees. Combining our
empirical result with some of the findings from the literature mentioned earlier, the remaining explanations for
the unexplained portion of firm productivity dispersion appear to reflect attributes that are hard to buy and sell
in input markets. Explanations include managerial competence, business strategy, or some legally protected
competitive advantage. Whatever the true relative importances of the various explanations, which the literature
is slowly measuring, many of the attributes that determine productivity seems to be hard to define and perhaps
hard to buy in a market. While discussing optimal policy is well beyond the scope of our paper, this does
suggest product-market competition, rather than relying only on input markets, may be an essential force in
raising aggregate productivity.1

Most of the productivity literature studies manufacturing industries, perhaps because of data availability. We
compare our results for three traditional manufacturing industries (machinery, food and furniture) to three skill-
intensive service industries: accounting, advertising and computer services, one less skill-intensive service
industry, hotels, and one industry, publishing and printing, which is a hybrid of manufacturing and services.
    1 It is puzzling how low-productivity firms can remain in business at all. One explanation is product differentiation: each firm sells a

slightly different product and so heterogeneous consumer demand supports a variety of firms.
Overall, we find declines in productivity dispersion from adjusting for labor input quality that are twice as high
in services (and publishing and printing) as in manufacturing, although there is heterogeneity across industries,
particularly within the services sector.


1.1    Literature comparison

Several recent papers use both worker data and firm output data, either to compare production and wage regres-
sion coefficients (Hellerstein and Neumark, 1999; Hellerstein, Neumark and Troske, 1999; Van Biesebroeck,
2007) or to control for worker ability in wage regressions (Frazer, 2006). We study productivity dispersion and
do not compare our production function estimates to wages. Likewise, Haltiwanger, Lane and Spletzer (2007)
regress TFP residuals on worker-quality controls using US unemployment-insurance data. They focus on the
coefficients on labor quality rather than whether productivity dispersion can be explained by input quality.

Hellerstein and Neumark (2006) do remark on R2 as a measure of productivity dispersion in one sentence in
their paper. In their Table 6, they show that R2 in a Cobb-Douglas production function estimate without labor
quality measures is 0.938 while the R2 with labor quality controls is 0.940. The base R2 in their paper is
higher than in our results because their dependent variable is total sales and not value added, and they include
materials as a separate input. However, the change in R2 is close to zero in the results of Hellerstein and
Neumark. We will find more substantial decreases in productivity dispersion, perhaps because of our richer
and more appropriate input quality measures, as we now discuss.

Compared to our data, the controls for labor quality in Hellerstein and Neumark are coarser: they use only the
fractions of workers in a high and a low schooling group as well as the fractions assigned to four occupational
categories. We use more detailed measures of schooling and use worker panel data to construct measures of
human capital based on labor market histories, such as firm and industry tenure and total experience. Indeed,
our 21 year worker panel on all citizens in Denmark is a major data advantage. Unlike Hellerstein and Neumark,
we do not look at the assignment of workers to occupations within the firm, as we feel that job assignment is
an intermediate decision (how to use inputs) rather than a characteristic of the labor inputs. The production
function itself models how well firms make intermediate decisions, including job assignment. Finally, we
explore alternative measures of labor quality such as using the wage bill and using worker fixed effects from
wage regressions, which Hellerstein and Neumark do not consider.

Hellerstein and Neumark study only manufacturing and assume that firms in all industries use the same pro-
duction function. We estimate production functions separately for each industry and consider industries in both
manufacturing and services. Finally, we look at productivity dispersion after correcting for simultaneity and
selection bias using the estimator of Olley and Pakes (1996), which Hellerstein and Neumark do partially (they
do not control for selection bias) when investigating some issues other than productivity dispersion, which
again is not the focus of their paper.
Denison (1962) and Jorgenson, Gollop and Fraumeni (1987) account for demographic change (age, race, sex,
schooling) and labor quality (they weight demographic groups by wage rates) when decomposing aggregate
productivity growth.2 This pioneering work contrasts with newer empirical work using firm- or plant-level
data, which usually does not control for worker quality.

We investigate whether using the wage bill as a measure of quality-adjusted labor reduces productivity disper-
sion as much as using detailed human capital measures. This is important in part for data availability reasons,
as the total wage bill may be found in plant- or firm-level datasets while detailed human capital measures often
are not. The wage bill has been used as the labor input in a number of other studies. For a recent example,
see Collard-Wexler (2010). These studies do not compare the use of the wage bill to the use of human capital
measures.

We focus on labor input quality, while others have focused on related questions for materials and physical
capital. The materials input is typically measured as the monetary value of that input. Ornaghi (2006) suggests
that the cost of materials varies across firms and that failing to adjust for heterogeneous input costs will cause
measurement error in the materials input (Berndt and Hesse, 1986). If not all measured inputs are being used,
then production function estimates will be biased. Yet another literature focuses on the fact that pieces of capital
equipment are of different vintages (Whelan, 2002). Machines lose their value due to technological progress.
Researchers typically measure physical capital as the monetary value of installed capital. If the monetary value
is not accurately adjusted for technological obsolescence, the measure of physical capital will be inadequate.



2     Production, input quality and productivity dispersion

2.1     Production functions

Differences in output across firms can be decomposed into differences in measured inputs, differences in resid-
uals and differences in production technologies. Using data from a single industry and assuming a common
technology for all firms, the literature typically estimates the Cobb-Douglas production function

                                              log y = β0 + βl log l + βk log k + e,                                                (1)

where y is value added, l is the number of workers, k is the monetary value of physical capital, and e is the
residual. βl and βk are the input elasticities of labor and capital. Between two firms with the same inputs l and
k, the firm with the higher output y is said to have a higher measured total factor productivity (TFP), which
is exp (β0 + e) above. Our measure of output is a firm’s value added, which is just total sales minus materials
   2 A related literature studies the dollar value of accumulated human capital in, for example, US states (Mulligan and Sala-I-Martin,

2000).
and other outsourced inputs, such as consulting services.3 We focus on e, the productivity residual. We call e
productivity throughout the paper.4

We also report separate results for the translog production function

                  log y = β0 + βl log l + βk log k + βl,2 (log l)2 + βk,2 (log k)2 + βl,k (log l) (log k) + e,                          (2)

where the second-order terms and the interaction add approximation flexibility (Christensen, Jorgenson and
Lau, 1973). While not reported, our conclusions about TFP dispersion are robust to estimating a constant-
elasticity-of-substitution (CES) production function.


2.2     Labor quality

2.2.1    College and noncollege workers

There is only limited work on adding input quality measures to firm- and plant-level production functions.
Therefore, there is no consensus in the literature in how to incorporate input quality measures. One way
is to define new inputs. The empirical literature on income inequality often focuses on “skilled” (workers
with a college degree) and “unskilled” (all others) workers. We break the number of workers, l, into l =
lcollege + lnoncollege , where, for example, lcollege is the number of college-educated workers at a particular firm.
We then estimate the Cobb-Douglas production function

                          log y = β0 + βcollege log lcollege + βnoncollege log lnoncollege + βk log k + e.

There is a similar generalization of the translog production function to the case of college and noncollege
workers,


   log y = β0 + βc log lc + βn log ln + βk log k + βc,2 (log lc )2 + βn,2 (log ln )2 + βk,2 (log k)2 +
                                                       βc,k (log lc ) (log k) + βn,k (log ln ) (log k) + βc,n (log lc ) (log ln ) + e,
    3 Consistent with much of the literature, our production functions model the relationship between output and primary inputs like labor

and physical capital. We do not have data on intermediate decisions, such as the use of a performance pay scheme for the workforce.
These schemes may indeed raise output, but in production function language they are intermediate decisions that are concentrated out of
the production function. The production function gives output conditional on a firm making appropriate choices for intermediate inputs.
As we will find a large remaining productivity dispersion when adjusting for labor quality, our results will be consistent with a hypothesis
that firms who choose good management practices are more productive.
    4 Like most other papers on productivity, for reasons of data availability the dependent variable y is measured in monetary units.

Therefore, it incorporates an unmodeled pricing decision. Foster, Haltiwanger and Syverson (2008) do have price data for a set of industries
with homogeneous products and show that dispersion in technological productivity is actually higher than dispersion in the revenue-
productivity measures we work with. Katayama, Lu and Tybout (2009) suggest that supply-and-demand analysis may be more appropriate
than productivity analysis when a pricing decision affects the dependent variable.
where c and n stand for college and noncollege, respectively.5


2.2.2    Human capital measures

Almost every firm in our data has at least one worker with a college degree and one without a college degree.
But if there was a firm with no college workers, then lcollege = 0, log lcollege = −∞ and the firm would produce
no output. In a Cobb-Douglas specification, all inputs are essential for production. However, the data show that
many firms lack, say, a worker with 3–5 years of tenure at the firm. This means defining lfirmtenure,3−5 as the
number of workers with 3–5 years of tenure and including lfirmtenure,3−5 as a separate input in a Cobb-Douglas
production function contradicts the evidence. Many other types of labor can substitute for those with 3–5 years
of tenure; it is not an essential input.

We take several approaches to incorporating more detailed measures of labor quality into the production func-
tion. The first approach follows a classic suggestion of Griliches (1957), who in a survey paper put forth
mismeasured input quality as a major explanation for productivity dispersion. This approach views the total
labor input as the number of workers times labor quality. Each worker is a bundle of measured characteristics.
We unbundle workers so that labor quality is a function of the fraction of workers in a firm with each charac-
teristic.6 In a firm with 100 workers, hiring 1 more woman with a college degree will increase the fraction of
workers who are women by 1% and the fraction of workers with college degrees by 1%. Let xfemale = lfemale /l
be the fraction of workers who are women, and xcollege = lcollege /l the fraction with a college degree. Total
labor quality has the multiplicative functional form

                                    qmult
                                                                                            
                                     θ    (x) = (1 + θfemale xfemale ) 1 + θcollege xcollege .                                      (3)

Here, efficiency units of labor are the relative productivity compared to a male high-school graduate, say.
θfemale is how much more productive a woman is than man, and θcollege is how much more productive a college-
educated worker is than a worker who did not attend college. A firm of all men where 100% of its workers
attended college will have a per-worker quality of 1 + θcollege .7

Labor quality is not additively separable across workers. For example, expanding the specification of qθ (x)
above produces the interaction term θfemale xfemale θcollege xcollege . If the θ ’s are positive, adding a male college
graduate will produce a greater increase in labor quality at a firm with more women. By contrast, Welch (1969)
emphasizes a production technology where human capital attributes are additive. Therefore, our next functional
   5 In a Cobb-Douglas production function, college and non-college workers are complementary inputs: production cannot take place

without both inputs. However, there is not a formal model of hierarchical or team production, where perhaps college workers supervise
noncollege workers. The flexible translog specification may provide a better approximation to a hierarchical production function.
   6 An exception is total labor market experience, which enters the labor quality function as a continuous variable: the mean level of

experience in the firm. The data appendix discusses some topcoding reasons why some other variables enter as fractions of the workforce.
There is nothing about our production functions that prevents us from choosing continuous or discrete variables, as appropriate.
   7 A multiplicative labor-quality measure is also used in Hellerstein and Neumark (2006) and Van Biesebroeck (2007).
form for labor quality takes an additive functional form

                                     qadd
                                      θ (x) = 1 + θfemale xfemale + θcollege xcollege .                                   (4)

Our results about productivity dispersion will be relatively consistent across qmult
                                                                                θ    (x) and qadd
                                                                                              θ (x).

Let the total number of workers at a firm be l. The total labor input is then l · qθ (x). Substituting this expression
for labor in the Cobb-Douglas production function (1) gives the estimating equation

                                     log y = β0 + βl log (l · qθ (x)) + βk log k + e.                                     (5)

The parameters θ in the labor quality function enter this equation nonlinearly, so estimation is by nonlinear
least squares. This requires using a numerical optimization procedure to minimize the least squares objective
function, as there is no closed-form solution for the least squares estimator of θ . We also estimate a version
of the translog production function, (2), with quality-adjusted labor l · qθ (x) replacing the total number of
workers, l, as in

log y = β0 + βl log (l · qθ (x)) + βk log k + βl,2 (log (l · qθ (x)))2 + βk,2 (log k)2 + βl,k (log (l · qθ (x))) (log k) + e.
                                                                                                                          (6)
The same parameters θ appear in multiple places in the production function.


2.2.3   Wage bill as a proxy for labor quality

Another approach to adjusting for labor quality is to use the wage bill as a measure of the quality of the
workforce. Wages will reflect marginal products in a competitive labor market. Even if the labor market is
not perfectly competitive, wages are still likely highly correlated with worker ability. Just as physical capital is
measured in terms of monetary units to at least partially reflect the quality of the machinery employed, labor
can be measured in terms of its expense in order to reflect its quality. Using the wage bill instead of the number
of workers thus makes the methods of measuring physical capital and human capital more symmetric.

The wage bill may also be more commonly found in the type of data used in firm- and plant-level productivity
studies. The total wage bill may be part of some accounting-based firm-level datasets where data on the
characteristics of the workers are not available. If results from using the wage bill as the labor input are similar
to those using detailed labor characteristics, then it will ease the burden of data collection for those wanting to
control for labor quality.

The wage bill specification is also attractive because the explanatory power of human capital variables in wage
regressions can be low, suggesting unmeasured worker characteristics are also important determinants of labor
quality. Further, the wage bill using monthly salaries better weights the contributions of part-time and full-time
workers than do measures like the number of workers.
Our production function with the wage bill is

                                              log y = β0 + βl log w + βk log k + e,

where the wage bill w = ∑li=1 wi is the total of the monthly salaries paid to all workers. We also estimate a
translog production function, with the wage bill w replacing the number of workers l in (2).8

Even if the choice of human capital inputs is randomly assigned to firms with heterogeneous productivities,
adding the wage bill could introduce an endogeneity problem if more productive firms pay higher salaries for
any of several reasons, including profit sharing. We address simultaneity bias in section 2.5.


2.2.4   Combining the wage bill and the human capital measures

We also combine the wage bill and human capital variables to attempt to account for input quality in as detailed
a manner as possible. We use the wage bill w instead of the number of workers l as our base labor input.
Then we construct a labor quality adjustment that uses, in part, the human capital measures. Keeping the same
human capital categories as before, we calculate the total of the monthly wages for workers in each bin and
then normalize by the total wage bill of the firm. For example, w̃female = (w)−1 ∑i=1
                                                                                   female          l
                                                                                          wi,female is the fraction
of the firm’s wage bill that is paid to women. This is a similar measure to xfemale above, as it represents the
fraction of firm labor inputs coming from women. The difference with xfemale is that the base unit for counting
labor inputs is the total of the monthly wages, rather than the number of workers. We then adapt the Griliches
(1957) multiplicative-quality-adjustment term, (5), to give

                                 mult,wage                                                        
                               qθ            (w̃) = (1 + θfemale w̃female ) 1 + θcollege w̃college ,                           (7)

where w̃ is the vector of wage bill fractions for the different human capital categories. We then estimate (5)
                                                                       mult,wage
using nonlinear least squares, with the labor quality term qθ                      (w̃) multiplying the total wage bill w. The
regression equation is                                                    
                                                             mult,wage
                                    log y = β0 + βl log w · qθ         (w̃) + βk log k + e.

There is also a translog specification equivalent to (6).


2.2.5   Worker fixed effects from wage regressions

Our detailed human capital measures and the wage bill are measured in the data. Both measures have potential
drawbacks. Human capital measures such as experience and schooling may do a poor job of accounting for
skills such as innate ability, the ability to work as part of a team and leadership skills. Likewise, the wage
   8 Value added may be formed from sales by subtracting materials costs but not the wage bill. Thus, the wage bill does not, in an

accounting sense, enter the calculation of value added.
bill reflects not only labor input quality but also the compensation policy of each firm. The wage bill can vary
across firms for reasons not related to input quality, including efficiency wages, rent sharing, and workers’
bargaining power.

We turn to worker panel data in order to address unmeasured (in the case of human capital measures) and
improperly measured (in the case of the wage bill) input qualities. In our panel data on all Danish citizen, we
observe the same worker over many years and potentially many employers. Under the key assumption that
worker ability αi is time invariant, we estimate a worker i fixed effect αi using the panel data wage regression

                                                                       0
                                                      log wi,t = αi + xi,t γ + εi,t ,

where t indexes years, xi,t includes the time varying human capital measures of industry tenure, firm tenure,
total labor market experience and worker age, γ is a vector of estimated slope parameters on the human capital
measures in xi,t , and εi,t is an time- and worker-specific wage disturbance. We use worker data from all workers
employed in the private sector for the years 1992–2001.9 We estimate the parameters γ using the well known
within estimator, and then use the estimated coefficients to back out the implied estimates for the worker fixed
effects αi . The estimates of γ are consistent as the number of workers grows large, while the estimates of
each αi are consistent as the number of years recorded for each worker grows large. We use data on 2 million
workers who are observed an average of 6.4 years. We do not use wage observations for years in which the
worker is employed in the public sector. A mean of 6.4 observations per worker may be low, but we mainly
use firm-level averages of the un-logged exp (αi ), in which estimation error at the worker level averages out to
some degree. The sum of exp (αi ) at the firm level (for those workers at the firm in year t) is our main measure
for the labor input that adjusts for unobserved characteristics of workers.

If the true wage model has a fixed effect φ j(i,t) for the employer j (i,t) of worker i in year t, our estimate is
consistent if there is no correlation between αi and φ j(i,t) . The typical result in the literature that estimates
both worker and firm fixed effects is that the correlation between αi and φ j(i,t) is indeed close to zero (Abowd,
Kramarz and Margolis, 1999). If, as expected based on prior empirical evidence from a variety of countries,
the correlation between αi and φ j(i,t) is close to 0 in Denmark, then we lose little by not including firm fixed
effects.10

We also estimate a production function where we combine human capital and wage fixed effect data, as
in specification (7) for the wage bill. Return to the example of gender. Instead of calculating w̃female =
(w)−1 ∑i=1
          l
        female
               wi,female as the fraction of the firm’s wage bill that is paid to women, we now work with α̃female =
  l
                −1 lfemale
 ∑i=1 exp (αi )     ∑i=1 exp (αi,female ) as the percentage of total firm worker fixed effects that are paid to
    9 We do not use the full worker panel because of the limitations on the hardware and software available in the protected data servers at

Statistics Denmark.
   10 The economic assumptions motivating wage regressions with both worker and firm fixed effects have been challenged using both

frictionless and search theoretic models of matching and wage formation (Dupuy, 2010; Eeckhout and Kircher, 2009; Lise, Meghir and
Robin, 2010; Lopes de Melo, 2009). Our use of worker fixed effects is just one exercise out of many and we do not want to defend it
against these theoretical critiques.
women as a measure of the labor intensity and quality of women.


2.2.6      Within-firm human capital dispersion as in Iranzo et al. (2008)

Iranzo, Schivardi and Tosetti (2008) estimate a production function where an additional input is the standard
deviation of some measure of human capital. The idea is that the standard deviation is part of an approximation
to a production function where workers of higher ability supervise workers of lower ability. Iranzo et al. use
Italian data and find that the standard deviation of worker wage fixed effects αi , at the firm level, contributes
positively to firm output. We have estimated production functions using the within-firm dispersion in standard
deviation of various labor quality measures as inputs. Our focus is not on the input elasticities of these within-
firm dispersion measures but on how much adding them reduces measured across-firm productivity dispersion.
We used both the standard deviation of wage levels and the standard deviation of wage fixed effects, for all of
our industries. We find that the increase in R2 (reduction in productivity dispersion) from adding within-firm
labor quality dispersion as an additional input is always well less than 0.01. For this reason, we do not further
report the estimates for the production function specifications inspired by Iranzo et al..


2.3        Productivity dispersion

Although we do discuss estimates of production function parameters such as β0 , βl , βk and θ , our primary
focus is on total factor productivity, or the residual e in (1). The parameters such as θ can be economically
large and statistically significant despite the dispersion in e, the key puzzle to understand about productivity,
remaining large. We focus on several related measures of the dispersion of e.
                                                           Var(e)
Productivity dispersion is intimately related to R2 = 1 − Var(log                  2
                                                                  y) . Maximizing R is the least-squares criterion.
One attempt to explain productivity dispersion is to add observables to the model to see how much residual
productivity dispersion declines. If a new variable reduces productivity dispersion, it will also increase the
statistical fit of the regression. The change in statistical fit, R2 , from adding a single new regressor z to the
production function (1) estimated by ordinary least squares is
                                                 
                                  ∆R2 = 1 − R2base (partialcorr (log y, z | log l, log k))2 ,                                    (8)

where partialcorr (log y, z | log l, log k) is the partial correlation between output log y and the new input z once the
non-quality adjusted inputs, log l and log k, are controlled for. To compute a partial correlation, one separately
regresses log y and z on log l and log k and then forms the simple correlation of the residuals from the log y and
z regressions. Equation (8) indicates that a variable will add a lot of explanatory power to a regression if it is
correlated with the dependent variable but is not so correlated with the other independent variables.11
  11 The   R2 from nonlinear least squares (NLS) is not guaranteed to be between 0 and 1 (the derivation for OLS uses the first order
To examine the units of productivity rather than a statistical fit criterion, we also report the standard deviation
of e, which enters the numerator of R2 . Both the standard deviation of e and R2 use the logged instead of the
unlogged levels of productivity. Our preferred measure of productivity dispersion in unlogged levels is q90 /q10 ,
where q90 is the 90th quantile of TFP in levels exp (e) and, likewise, q10 is the 10th quantile of exp (e). q90 /q10
is the ratio of outputs for the 90th quantile and 10th quantile firms, if those firms had used the same inputs. We
also report the ratio q75 /q25 , which is less sensitive to outliers than q90 /q10 . Keep in mind that a productivity
quantile such as q90 does not necessarily move monotonically with a moment such as the standard deviation of
e.


2.4     Productivity dispersion decline benchmarks

There is no absolute metric for whether any given decline in productivity dispersion is large or small. First, we
benchmark the productivity declines from adding human capital measures against the decline in productivity
dispersion from adding firm growth. Baldwin (1995) and others show that firms that are more productive will
on average have higher rates of employment growth.12 Because of the prior literature relating productivity
to employment growth, there are a priori reasons to suspect that including employment growth will decrease
productivity dispersion substantially.

We add firm growth as an observed components of productivity, as in

                                   log y = β0 + βl log l + βk log k + βDHgrowth rDHgrowth + e.

We use the Davis and Haltiwanger (1992) measure of firm-employment growth, which ranges from -2 to 2,
instead of -1 to 1, in order to account for firm entry and exit. We see how much residual productivity dispersion
declines after accounting for growth. This decline provides a benchmark for the decline in dispersion from
controlling for input quality.

Another approach for benchmarking compares our decline in productivity dispersion to another decline that
has shown to be important in the literature. Syverson (2004) regresses productivity dispersion (the interquartile
range) in a local geographic market on a measure of the demand density (a proxy for product market com-
petition) in that market. He finds that a “one-standard-deviation increase in logged demand density implies a
decrease in expected productivity dispersion by approximately 0.042 log points—roughly one-seventh of the
mean dispersion and over one-fourth of its standard deviation.” Syverson’s measure of productivity dispersion
is the interquartile range of log TFP. We will compare our productivity dispersion declines from adjusting for
input quality to those from Syverson from varying local product-market competition.
conditions of OLS to set the sample covariance of the residual and the predicted dependent variable to 0.) We define R2 for NLS to be
      Var(e)
1 − Var(log y) .
  12 In various specifications we control for firm age. Cabral and Mata (2003) and others show that older firms tend to be more productive.

We use the log of firm age as firm age can have some extreme outliers (hundreds of years old) in Denmark.
2.5      Simultaneity and selection bias

Marschak and Andrews (1944) introduce the endogeneity concern that more productive firms may use more
inputs, leading to overestimating the input elasticities. Griliches and Mairesse (1998) argue that traditional
methods of correcting regressions for endogeneity, panel data and instrumental variables, work poorly for
production function estimation because of measurement error (panel data) and data availability (instruments).
Following the recent literature, we use investment to correct for input endogeneity using the Olley and Pakes
(1996) estimator. The Olley and Pakes estimator also corrects for selection bias, the problem that low produc-
tivity firms may exit the sample using an exit rule where included right-hand side regressors (state variables in
a dynamic program) such as physical capital and firm age are taken into account. This endogenous exit induces
correlation between physical capital and productivity as well as firm age and productivity among the remaining
firms.

We present production function estimates using the Olley and Pakes estimator because this is the most com-
monly used procedure in the recent literature, in part because the estimates of input elasticities from this pro-
cedure often appear more a priori plausible than those from alternatives, such as the dynamic panel methods in
Arellano and Bond (1991) and Blundell and Bond (2000). For example, Ornaghi (2006) uses a dynamic panel
estimator for manufacturing industries and finds negative coefficients on physical capital. One concern is that
dynamic panel methods difference or quasi-difference the data across time, which magnifies the statistical bias
from the transient components of measurement error. As our paper emphasizes that typical measurements of
inputs may be flawed, we do not wish to use a dynamic panel method that magnifies the bias from transient
measurement error.

The Olley and Pakes model theoretically decomposes e into true productivity ω and measurement error η.
When we refer to the Olley and Pakes productivity term, we refer to the sum e and not either ω or η separately,
which follows the practice in the original Olley and Pakes paper on the telecommunications equipment industry.
The dispersion in e from the Olley and Pakes estimator will often be higher than the dispersion in e from least
squares. The Olley and Pakes estimator allows ω to be correlated with the inputs l and k, to address simultaneity
bias and selection bias.13 A common empirical result is that some of the explanatory power of the measured
inputs l and k found using a least squares estimator is transferred to the ω term in the Olley and Pakes estimator.
More dispersion in ω increases the dispersion of e relative to the least squares case if the dispersion of ω is not
completely offset with a decline in the dispersion of η. When we report R2 for the Olley and Pakes estimator,
               Var(e)
we report 1 − Var(log y) , where again e = η + ω.

A key assumption we make in order to use the Olley and Pakes estimator is that, following the original paper,
the choice of labor inputs is static, i.e. last period’s labor choices are not a state variable in the dynamic
investment decision. In general, treating labor as a static input may be implausible if there are any hiring or
  13 The Olley and Pakes estimator addresses only correlation of inputs and firm age with ω, not η. To the extent our empirical results

using overidentification tests in Fox and Smeets (2010) suggest that the method does not accurately decompose e into true productivity ω
and measurement error η, the Olley and Pakes estimator will still be biased, although perhaps less biased than least squares.
firing costs. Modeling labor as static is particularly worrisome in our investigation, as we use labor market
history variables such as firm tenure that explicitly have dynamic components to them. Ackerberg, Caves and
Frazer (2007b) introduce a new estimator that may be consistent when the labor variable is a dynamic input.
We have experimented with the first stage of the Ackerberg et al. estimator for the simple specification of using
the log of the number of college and the log of the number of non-college workers as separate, dynamic inputs.
The first stage identifies the transient productivity component η and we find that the dispersion in η is nearly
identical to the estimates from the first stage of the Olley and Pakes estimator. This leads us to believe that
the dispersion in η will be relatively constant even if labor is modeled as a dynamic input. We do not use the
Ackerberg et al. estimator in our reported results because, like Olley and Pakes, the method requires estimating
a nonparametric function of as many arguments as the number of dynamic state variables. For our detailed
human capital specifications, we would estimate a nonparametric function of 17 inputs. High levels of bias and
variance will then arise from the well-known curse of dimensionality in the estimates of infinite-dimensional
objects such as functions. High bias and variance would occur in any dataset normally used in productivity
analysis and especially our relatively small Danish industries.

Even our input quality measures are imperfect. A standard matching model suggests that inputs and firms
should assortatively match, if firm productivity and input quality are complements. High ability workers should
be at firms with high productivities. If so, a standard omitted variable bias story suggests that the parameter es-
timates on the human capital variables should be biased upwards: there is a positive correlation between human
capital and the true error term, productivity. Recall that equation (8) suggests that the decline in productivity
dispersion from adding a variable to a regression involves the partial correlation of the new regressor with the
dependent variable. If assortative matching between firms and workers increases this partial correlation, the
decline in productivity dispersion from adding human capital variables will be overstated. Therefore, this bias
in the parameter estimates works against finding that the decline in productivity dispersion is large. We will
not emphasize that our empirical findings of declines in productivity dispersion are especially large.



3    Data overview

We start with detailed panel data on all Danish citizens for 1980–2001. These data provide us general human
capital (experience, schooling), firm-specific and industry-specific human capital (firm tenure, industry tenure)
as well as the monthly salary for each worker. We are careful with measuring firm tenure because of changes
in firm identification codes. The underlying data for these variables come from government records and not
subjective self-reports, like in US publicly available microdata. Thus, we feel that our data on worker charac-
teristics are of higher quality than any found in the United States. We aggregate our human capital measures to
the firm level to construct our labor quality measures, as in (3) and (7). We also compute the total number of
workers as well as several wage bill measures. We estimate worker wage fixed effects and aggregate those to
the firm level as well.
We then merge the firm-level human capital measures with data on value added, physical capital and invest-
ment.14 These data come from a credit rating agency, for the years 1992–2001. To use the Olley and Pakes
(1996) estimator, we need data on firms with investment data for two consecutive years, which causes a lot of
particularly small firms to be dropped. More details on the data are found in the appendix.

Denmark is a small open economy, so there are not many distinct firms in narrowly defined industries. We
strive to balance the competing needs to have more observations for precise statistical inference and to allow
heterogeneity in the production functions for firms in different industries. We consider a medium level of ag-
gregation because we include many detailed measures of human capital variables and therefore need a lot of
observations per regression. We perform separate regressions for eight industries: machinery, food and bever-
ages, furniture, publishing and printing, hotels and restaurants, accounting, computer services and advertising.
To alleviate some forms of within-sector heterogeneity, we include fixed effects at the five digit industry level
in each regression.

Table 1 lists summary statistics for four of our eight industries: those with production function estimates in
Tables 2–5. Value added and inputs vary a lot across firms. Importantly, the human capital measures vary a
lot across firms. As there is variation across firms in the sample, equation (8) suggests it is a priori possible
that adding human capital quality measures to a production function will increase the R2 and hence reduce the
dispersion in measured productivity.



4           Production function estimates

The paper’s focus is on productivity dispersion, which arises from the dispersion of the residuals from produc-
tion function regressions. Before discussing productivity dispersion in detail, we will describe the production
function estimates in order to provide context. As a warning, we do not feel that the production function param-
eter estimates are robust empirical findings. Our results on productivity dispersion are robust across functional
form choices. In this section, we report only results from the Olley and Pakes (1996) estimator that controls for
simultaneity bias and selection bias.15

Tables 2–5 report estimates of production functions for four industries. Table 2 covers the food and beverages
industry. Column 1 is a base specification, with just the number of workers for the labor input. The coefficient
on labor is 0.69 and the coefficient on physical capital is 0.18, resulting in an estimate of a decreasing return to
    14 Wedo not observe measures of inputs other than labor and physical capital and we do not observe sales for many firms.
    15 In
        the first stage of Olley and Pakes (1996), we allow for a third-order polynomial, including interactions, in investment, physical
capital, and firm age. All terms are specific to the individual years of firm-level data, 1992–2001. Our survival equation is a probit with
a third-order polynomial, including interactions, in investment, physical capital, and firm age. Our second stage involves a third-order
polynomial, including interactions, in the survival probability and the model’s predicted productivity level for the previous time period.
See the original Olley and Pakes article or Ackerberg, Benkard, Berry and Pakes (2007a) for explanations of the various steps. All of our
standard errors allow for heteroskedasticity and use clustering to allow for autocorrelation at the firm level.
scale.16 The R2 from the base regression is 0.801.17

In Column 2, we begin to account for labor quality. Column 2 uses the numbers of college and non-college
workers as separate inputs. The coefficient on the number of skilled workers is 0.20, and the coefficient on
the unskilled workers is 0.54. The coefficient on physical capital declines to 0.14. R2 increases by only 0.006,
from 0.801 to 0.807.

Column 3 shows the estimates from (5) with the multiplicative / Griliches (1957) labor quality term, (3). The
coefficient on female is -0.343, which can be interpreted as saying that a firm with 10% more of its workforce
being women will have 1−0.343·0.10 = 0.966 or 97% of the total labor inputs l ·qθ (x) as another firm with the
same number of workers, l. Schooling is one of our main measures of general human capital. The coefficient of
1.48 on the fraction of college-educated workers says that a firm with 10% higher fraction of college-educated
workers (as opposed to the excluded category, workers who completed high school or below) will have 15%
more labor inputs. The coefficient is marginally statistically significant at conventional sizes. The coefficients
on the fraction of workers with community college and vocational degrees are not statistically distinct from 0,
although both point estimates are economically large. The estimates show that a firm with 10% more workers
with community college degrees will have 7% more labor inputs.

One of our data advantages is that we can construct detailed labor history measures using our worker panel
data. Total experience in the labor market is exactly computed at the worker level from government records
(since 1964). With little concern about topcoding for experience, we enter experience as the mean level of
experience of workers at the firm, mostly to save space in the tables. A firm whose workforce has an extra 10
years of labor-market experience will have 45% more labor inputs.

We next look at firm tenure and industry tenure in column 3. The tenure measures approximate firm- and
occupational-specific human capital. The measures are the percentage of workers in each tenure bin, and all
coefficients should be evaluated relative to the residual category, newcomers with 0 years of tenure. We find
a firm with 10% more workers with 1–2 years of tenure instead of newcomers has 0.10 · 0.938 = 9.4% more
labor inputs, a potentially large effect. All four firm tenure categories have positive coefficients. Because
of the large standard errors, the coefficients for the firm tenure categories are mostly consistent with a large,
one-time training cost for newcomers.18 Two of the four industry tenure coefficients are negative, and one of
those is statistically distinct from 0 at the 90% level. The R2 from the multiplicative-labor-quality specification
   16 As the dependent variable is sales and not physical output, Klette and Griliches (1996) suggest that the returns to scale will be biased

downwards. This bias could be offset by other biases such as the usual bias that more productive firms use more inputs, which tends to
bias the returns to scale upwards.
   17 The Olley and Pakes productivity components η and ω have standard deviations of 0.48 and 0.40, respectively. Under the interpre-

tation from Olley and Pakes’s model, the dispersion in measurement error η is larger than the dispersion in ω. We will not discuss the
decomposition of e into η and ω further, although Tables 2–5 list such figures for those interested in the decomposition.
   18 A potential “training cost” pattern of coefficients may also reflect a measurement issue: workers hired during the year at a growing

firm who are mistakenly counted as working the entire year. This is an issue for growing firms and not firms with simply higher levels
of turnover. We reran the labor quality specification by adding the past 5-year firm employment growth using the Davis and Haltiwanger
(1992) measure and the extra regressor increases the magnitude of the firm tenure coefficients, which goes against the growing firms
explanation.
is 0.818. Overall, we have a couple of statistically significant coefficients and many coefficients with eco-
nomically large magnitudes. Our finding of a relatively small decrease in productivity dispersion from labor
quality controls will not be due to economically small or statistically insignificant estimates of human capital
production function parameters.

Column 4 of Table 2 uses the Welch (1969) additive labor quality function. While the coefficients are not
directly comparable in magnitude to those using the multiplicative specification in column 4, several of the
coefficients do change sign. For example, one of the industry tenure coefficients changes from negative to
positive. Because the estimated signs of the labor quality coefficients are sensitive to the functional form for
the labor quality function, which occurs in more industries than just food, we do not view the signs of the point
estimates of the labor quality terms as robust findings. Interpretations of the parameters require a convincing
argument that the labor inputs are uncorrelated with the true error term, productivity. Studies that do not correct
for endogeneity argue that more productive firms employ higher-quality workers (Haltiwanger et al., 2007).
Despite adopting the advice of Griliches and Mairesse (1998) to use the Olley and Pakes (1996) estimator, we
do not take a strong stand that our estimates of the human capital parameters are causal production function
estimates. Our main focus is on the dispersion of the productivity residual e, which from experimentation we
believe is relatively robust to reasonable biases on the production function parameters.

The R2 from the additive labor specification in column 4 is 0.800. This is smaller than the R2 of 0.815 from
the multiplicative specification. The difference in R2 is an artifact of the Olley and Pakes procedure, where the
explanatory power of the ω term often varies across specifications. The standard deviation of the η term is
nearly identical across columns 3 and 4; only the ω term’s standard deviation changes. Using nonlinear least
squares and not Olley and Pakes, the R2 from the multiplicative and additive labor quality specifications are
often nearly identical, as Tables 6 and 7 will show.

Column 5 attempts to adjust for the quality of the workforce by using the wage bill. The coefficient on the total
wage bill at 0.83 is higher than the corresponding input elasticity when the number of workers is used instead,
in column 1. The coefficient on physical capital decreases. The R2 increases to 0.848, which is higher than the
R2 for the specifications with the detailed human capital measures.

Column 6 uses the specification that combines human capital and wage bill data, (7). Labor quality uses the
multiplicative form. The R2 increases to 0.870, which is to be expected for the specification using the most
data. Most of the coefficients are not statistically distinct from 0 at the 95% level.

Column 7 uses the sum of the (unlogged) worker-specific wage fixed effects αi as the labor input. This measure
accounts for both the unmeasured aspects of human capital and the removes some of the influence of firm-
specific compensation schemes that may be present in the wage bill. The coefficient on labor drops and the
coefficient on physical capital increases. Explanations could include properly accounting for labor quality and
adding measurement error to labor quality because of statistical sampling error in the estimated fixed effects.
We use a mean of 6.4 observations per worker, so sampling error in the individual fixed effects could be an
issue, although we hope aggregating to the firm level ameliorates the estimation error to some degree. R2 drops
noticeably, to 0.772. Worker fixed effects by themselves explain less output variation across firms than does
the number of workers.

Column 8 combines the worker-specific wage fixed effects and the detailed human capital measures, where,
                                       −1 lfemale
for example, α̃female = ∑li=1 exp (αi )   ∑i=1 exp (αi,female ) replaces w̃female in (7). The R2 of 0.772 from
column 7 increases to 0.795. With our data, worker fixed effects do not seem to predict variation in output
across firms as well as other methods do.

Column 9 is a benchmark regression. Some of the productivity literature finds that firms that are older and that
firms that have recently grown quickly are more productive. We have a direct measure of firm age, although
it is included in all specifications following Olley and Pakes, and can construct the past five years of firm
employment growth, using the Davis and Haltiwanger (1992) measure. We include the growth measure as an
extra regressor in a standard Cobb-Douglas regression, (1). In column 9, we find that past firm growth is not
very predictive of firm output in the food and beverages industry. The R2 does not detectably increase over the
base case in column 1 and the coefficient on firm growth is not statistically distinct from 0.

Table 3 reports the same set of nine production function estimates for the furniture industry. Column 1 shows
that the furniture sector is labor intensive with a labor input elasticity of 0.82 and a capital coefficient of 0.10.
The R2 with no labor-quality measures is 0.727, which increases to 0.736 by adding college and non-college
workers as separate inputs. The R2 with the multiplicative labor quality function is 0.748 and the additive labor
quality function has an R2 of 0.747. In this instance, the Olley and Pakes R2 is robust across the choice of labor
quality functional forms. The R2 of the pure wage bill specification is 0.785, higher than the R2 from the human
capital specifications. The specification in column 6 that combines wage bill and human capital data has an
R2 of 0.799. The worker-specific wage fixed effects give an R2 of 0.701 in column 7 and 0.762 in column 8,
again showing the weakness of estimated fixed effects in predicting firm output. The R2 of the firm growth
benchmark is column 9 is quite low, at 0.727.

Table 4 looks at the publishing and printing industry. For publishing, column 1 finds an estimate of a small
increasing returns to scale. The R2 from the baseline specification in column 1 of 0.810 increases to 0.865 with
the specification with both human capital and wage bill measures in column 6. The sum of the input elasticities
also increases. The coefficients on schooling in the human capital specification in column 3 show that college
and community college degrees in particular raise firm-level output in publishing.

Table 5 looks at a skill-intensive, service-sector industry, advertising.19 Column 1 shows that the input elasticity
on the number of workers is 0.94 while the input elasticity on physical capital is -0.07, although it is not
statistically distinct from 0. It is unsurprising that labor is the dominant input in advertising, although the
   19 Following Olley and Pakes (1996), in most industries we include the logarithm of firm age as a shifter of firm productivity and a state

variable in the investment and exit decision rules. We did so initially in advertising as well. However, the coefficient on firm age was
estimated to be so large that R2 was estimated to be negative. Given the a priori implausible parameter estimates, we dropped the state
variable firm age for advertising under the Olley and Pakes estimator. We also drop firm age for accounting and hotels when using Olley
and Pakes.
negative point estimate for the input elasticity for physical capital appears anomalous. We say advertising is
skill-intensive in part because the coefficient on college schooling in column 3 is a large 2.1. The coefficient
on college schooling is also a large 33.6 in the additive labor quality specification in column 4. The R2 from
column 1 is a relatively small 0.567 and it increases to 0.825 with the column 6 specification that combines
human capital and wage bill data. This increase in statistical fit exceeds that in the other industries we have
looked at, which is a point we will return to.

For conciseness, we do not report the parameter estimates for the translog production functions or for the other
four industries. Nor do we report point estimates for the specifications using least squares and not Olley and
Pakes.



5    Productivity dispersion and input quality

Tables 6–8 are the main results of the paper. The tables report the R2 ; the standard deviation of log TFP, e; our
measure of productivity dispersion in levels of output instead of logs, q90 /q10 ; and the similar ratio q75 /q25 ,
which is less sensitive to outliers. For each of our eight industries, the first row is a baseline specification
with the usual measure of labor, the number of workers. The second row uses simple labor quality measures
previously found in the literature: the (log) number of workers with college degrees and the (log) number
of workers without college degrees, as separate inputs. The third row presents the estimates of (5) using the
detailed measures of general and specific human capital. The fourth row tests the robustness of the findings on
productivity to the choice of functional forms for labor quality by using an additive instead of a multiplicative
specification.

The fifth row replaces the number of workers with the wage bill. Wages may proxy for worker labor quality in a
competitive labor market. The sixth row uses both the wage bill and human capital measures. This specification
typically is the one that maximizes statistical fit and hence minimizes productivity dispersion.

The seventh row uses the worker-specific wage fixed effects as the measure of labor quality. The eighth speci-
fication combines the worker fixed effects with human capital measures. Finally, the ninth row is a benchmark,
where we use data on recent growth in firm employment. All specifications include fixed effects for five digit
sub-industries and for years.

Tables 6 shows linear and nonlinear least squares estimates of productivity dispersion measures for the Cobb-
Douglas production function without the Olley and Pakes (1996) correction. Table 7 reports linear and nonlin-
ear least squares estimates of the translog production function without the Olley and Pakes correction. Table 8
reports estimates for the Cobb-Douglas production function using the Olley and Pakes correction. We discuss
the Olley and Pakes results last because some of the results are slightly unintuitive as explanatory power is
shifted from the measured inputs l and k to the ω component of total productivity e. The ω component of e
is allowed to be correlated with the inputs l and k, something that is ruled out by assumption in least squares
estimators that try only to maximize statistical fit.

Table 6A contains the least squares estimates of productivity dispersion measures for the Cobb-Douglas pro-
duction function for the four manufacturing industries. Consider machinery. Including only the number of
workers gives a R2 from (1) of 0.834. Using our preferred measure, the ratio of the 90th quantile of exp (e) to
the 10th quantile of unlogged TFP is 3.02. A firm at the 90th quantile produces 3.02 times the output as a firm
at the 10th quantile, for the same inputs. We also report the ratio q75 /q25 in the table, which is less sensitive to
outliers, although for conciseness we do not discuss the q75 /q25 measure in the text. We also will not discuss
R2 or the standard deviation of e, again for conciseness.

Continuing with the machinery industry, we now explore the reductions in productivity dispersion from in-
cluding input quality measures. Disaggregating workers into separate college and noncollege inputs, as is
sometimes done in the literature, actually increases q90 /q10 slightly. Our most important specifications are the
ones that use the detailed human capital measures. q90 /q10 is 2.90 for the multiplicative labor quality func-
tional form and a similar 2.91 for the additive functional form. An alternative to using human capital measures
is to use the wage bill. With the wage bill, q90 /q10 is 2.83. The wage bill gives lower productivity dispersion
than the human capital measures. q90 /q10 is 2.77 with both the wage bill and human capital measures, the
specification that typically minimizes productivity dispersion. 2.77 represents an 8% decline from the baseline
of 3.02. The worker fixed effects specification has a q90 /q10 of 3.25, repeating the earlier finding that fixed
effects do not explain as much variation in firm output as other labor input measures. Combining worker fixed
effects with detailed human capital measures gives a q90 /q10 of 2.88. Finally, the benchmark of firm growth
and firm age increases q90 /q10 from the baseline specification by 0.02 to give a q90 /q10 of 3.04. Any of the
specifications using the detailed human capital measures or the wage bill do a better job at reducing dispersion
than does firm growth.

We also estimated all nine specifications using a translog production function. Table 7A lists these results
for machinery. Remarkably, the estimates of productivity dispersion as measured by sd (e) are quite similar
whether the production function is a Cobb-Douglas or a translog. Adding additional nonlinear terms to a
Cobb-Douglas can only weakly increase R2 and hence will often decrease productivity dispersion measures
such as sd (e) and q90 /q10 . The measure q90 /q10 is more sensitive to the functional form for the production
function; it tends to be slightly higher for the Cobb-Douglas. Overall, though, the translog results in Table 7
closely track those for the Cobb-Douglas in Table 6.

Table 8A lists the estimates for the machinery industry of productivity dispersion using the Cobb-Douglas
production function and the Olley and Pakes estimator. The q90 /q10 ratios in Table 8A are higher than in Tables
6A and 7A because the Olley and Pakes estimator transfers some of the explanatory power of the measured
inputs l and k found using least squares to the ω component of productivity e. The inputs are allowed to be
correlated with ω to address simultaneity and selection biases. As an example, the q90 /q10 from the baseline
specification for the machinery industry is 3.42 for Olley and Pakes in Table 8 and 3.02 for least squares in
Table 6. Despite the higher levels of productivity dispersion, the Olley and Pakes estimates follow the same
qualitative pattern that productivity dispersion decreases with richer input quality measures.

There are seven other industries listed in Tables 6–8. First consider the three other manufacturing industries
of food and beverages, furniture, and publishing and printing in Tables 6A, 7A and 8A. For conciseness, we
discuss the least squares estimates using Cobb-Douglas in Table 6A. For food, the q90 /q10 drops from 3.24
in the baseline row one to 2.85 in the richest specification in row six. That is a 12% drop. For furniture,
the decrease in q90 /q10 productivity dispersion from 3.40 to 2.99 is also a percentage decrease of 12%. For
publishing and printing, a hybrid between a service and a manufacturing industry, the decrease in q90 /q10 is
19%, the largest in the so-called manufacturing sector.

Table 6B reports productivity dispersion estimates for hotels and restaurants, a non-skill-intensive service in-
dustry as well as three presumably skill intensive industries: accounting, advertising and computer services.
The percentage q90 /q10 productivity dispersion decline ranges from row one (baseline) to row six (wage bill
and human capital measures) is 20% for hotels and restaurants, a small 2.2% for accounting, a large 46% for
advertising, and 21% for computer activities.

The manufacturing industries excluding publishing and printing (machinery, food and furniture) have an av-
erage drop from the baseline specification to the specification with both the wage bill and the human capital
measures, row six, of (0.08 + 0.12 + 0.12) /3 = 11%. Publishing and printing, which shares aspects between
manufacturing and services, has a drop of 19%. The four service industries have a productivity dispersion
decline from including input quality measures of (0.20 + 0.022 + 0.46 + 0.21) /4 = 22%, which is twice the
magnitude of the effect for the three pure manufacturing industries and about the same magnitude of the effect
for the hybrid industry of publishing and printing. Overall then, the role of labor input quality in productivity
dispersion is twice as important by this measure in services as in manufacturing. This is reasonable: the input
elasticities of labor in some of these service industries are close to 1, as Table 5 shows for advertising. Another
possibility for the larger decline in services is that the production technology is more heterogeneous in the
service sector, and the human capital and wage bill measures pick up heterogeneity across firms in the pro-
duction function. This is somewhat consistent with findings from other data that service industries have higher
overall dispersion (Oulton, 1998). On the other hand, every industry is different and there was no reduction in
productivity dispersion from adding measures of labor input quality in accounting.

The qualitative pattern of productivity dispersion levels is the same in seven of the eight industries we looked at,
with accounting being different. For most industries, adding college and noncollege workers as separate inputs
decreases dispersion only a little. Adding detailed human capital controls decreases productivity dispersion by
more. In all industries, the productivity dispersion is roughly invariant to whether a multiplicative or additive
labor quality functional form is used. The wage bill is potentially a more accurate measure of input quality
than the detailed human capital measures. Indeed, the wage bill specification usually gives less dispersion than
the human capital specifications. Unsurprisingly, the specification with both wage bill and human capital data
decreases dispersion the most.
In unreported results, we have shown that the main results about productivity hold when using a CES production
function. Altogether, our results about productivity dispersion are mostly invariant to the functional form of the
production function as well as the functional form of the labor quality function. This finding about productivity
dispersion contrasts with the signs of the parameter estimates of the production functions, which we argued
above are sometimes but not always robustly estimated across functional forms.

Based on prior research, we used each firm’s employment growth over the last five years as a benchmark for
productivity dispersion decline. Firm growth did decrease productivity dispersion in most but not all of the
eight industries, but never by a particularly large amount compared to the drops for labor quality measures.
Syverson (2004) studied local demand density (a proxy for competition) and productivity dispersion and found
that a one-standard deviation increase in demand density lowered the interquartile range of e by -0.042 log
points. For machinery, the interquartile range of productivity e is 0.545 for the base case without labor quality
adjustment and 0.483 for the specification with both wage bill and human capital data. Syverson (2004) studied
narrow geographic markets for a homogeneous product, concrete. It is not surprising that the mean level of
productivity dispersion of 0.275 in his paper is roughly half of our base value of 0.545. Starting from a
higher base dispersion, the decrease in productivity dispersion from adding human capital and wage bill data is
0.545−0.483 = 0.06 log points, or the equivalent of a one standard-deviation increase in demand density across
local markets in the concrete industry. For advertising, the industry with the highest decline in productivity
dispersion from adding input quality, the decline in the interquartile range is 0.658 − 0.348 = 0.31 log points,
or the equivalent of a seven standard deviation increase in concrete demand densities. Our interpretation is
that adding human capital variables produces productivity dispersion declines roughly on the same order of
magnitude as within-sample changes in concrete demand densities, particularly in manufacturing.



6    Conclusions

Since at least Griliches (1957), economists have speculated that productivity dispersion may arise because
firms use inputs of varying qualities. We study labor inputs in part because physical capital is already quality
adjusted (up to the caveats about vintage capital and capacity utilization mentioned earlier), as physical capital
is usually measured in monetary units. By contrast, researchers often use the number of workers for the labor
input. We use detailed data on all Danish citizens to construct human capital measures at the firm level. Human
capital inputs do vary across companies in Denmark and our production function parameter estimates show
human capital inputs raise firm output considerably. For some industries, the human capital coefficients are
statistically precisely estimated.

Adding these quality-adjusted inputs decreases within-industry productivity dispersion. Averaging across
the three manufacturing industries of machinery, food and furniture, productivity dispersion as measured by
q90 /q10 declines by 11%. For the hybrid industry of publishing and printing, the ratio q90 /q10 declines by
19%. For the four service industries, the q90 /q10 ratio declines by an average of 22%, although this effect
averages out the large decrease in advertising and the small decrease in accounting. Overall, it seems like input
quality plays a greater role in explaining productivity dispersion in services than in manufacturing, although it
certainly plays a measurable role in most industries.

The decline in productivity dispersion from adding controls for firm growth, a measure emphasized in the liter-
ature, was noticeably less than the decline in productivity dispersion from adding controls for input quality. The
decline in productivity dispersion from input quality is roughly the same order of magnitude as the competitive
effects studied in local geographic markets by Syverson (2004).

Input quality is one of perhaps many factors that contribute to productivity dispersion. However, labor quality
does not explain most productivity dispersion. Returning to an issue we raised in the introduction, our results
suggest that productivity mostly represents some attribute of a firm that cannot easily be bought and sold
on the market for inputs. Possibilities include management quality, business strategy, the appropriate use of
new technologies and heterogeneous production technologies. If a large portion of productivity cannot be
traded, then the performance of product markets may be as important for economic efficiency and aggregate
productivity growth as the performance of input markets.



A      Danish labor and accounting data

We use accounting data for capital, value added and investment. The accounting data come from Købman-
standens Oplysningsbureau (KØB), a Danish credit-rating agency. The accounting data are an unbalanced
panel that roughly covers the period 1992–2001 and uses each firm’s proprietary accounting period. We rescale
the accounting variables to a twelve-month, calendar-year basis.

We use value added as a measure of output and our measure of physical capital is tangible assets net of depreci-
ation. Value added is reported for many more firms than total sales, perhaps because of the role of value added
in value added taxes. We disregard firms that lack rescaled accounting information on valued added and fixed
assets for a twelve-month period. For the labor input, we count the total number of workers in IDA, which is
described below. Firm age is directly reported in the accounting data. We include the log of firm age in some
specifications.20

To construct labor quality variables, we use the Danish Integrated Database for Labor Market Research (IDA),
one of the central registers of Statistics Denmark. IDA combines several types of data. One dataset provides
information at the individual level on demographics (age, sex, marital status, family status) and schooling for
  20 We  construct investment from the accounting data in order to control for the endogeneity of the labor input using the Olley and Pakes
(1996) approach. Investment is computed using the formula it = kt+1 − kt + δt+1 , where δt is the total amount of depreciation and t is the
year. Investment cannot be missing. The accounting data report the total depreciation δt+1 . We use the same sample for Olley and Pakes
estimates as for the pure least squares estimates. Therefore, we drop firms with missing it or it−1 . The timing assumption is that investment
in year t, it , is made in year t, so it informs us about year t’s productivity.
all Danish citizens for 1980–2001. Each individual is given a unique identification number that can be further
used for matching with the other datasets of IDA. Another IDA dataset’s unit of observation is an individual’s
job. It contains information on individual labor earnings, some other variables and the number of years of labor
market experience. Labor market experience is computed since 1964 by Statistics Denmark.

Both full- and part-time jobs are included, but in the rare case of a worker with three or more jobs, only the
primary and secondary jobs are reported. The data also contain a unique identification number for each job’s
establishment. IDA’s establishment dataset provides a firm identification number that can be use for matching
with other firm-level data.

We use IDA for 1980–2001 to compute labor-market-history variables such as firm tenure and industry tenure.
We compute firm tenure as the number of years a worker has been attached to a given firm. As we are con-
cerned with spurious changes in firm identification codes, a worker’s tenure is reset to zero only if both his
firm and establishment identifiers change at the same time. We construct industry tenure using the following
eight broad sectors: (1) agriculture and mining, (2) manufacturing, (3) construction and transport, (4) retail,
hotels and restaurants, (5) finance, real estate and R&D activities, (6) public sector, (7) private households and
extraterritorial activities and (8) others. These sectors encompass all Danish firms and are not equivalent to the
industries for our estimation sample.

Industry is recorded at the establishment level. For our regressions, a multi-establishment firm’s industry is the
weighted (by number of workers) modal establishment industry.

All inputs are constructed at the firm level. We construct firm-level fractions of workers who have a given
characteristic, say a college degree or 6–9 years of firm tenure. The intervals are simple to interpret as each
measure is a fraction between 0 and 1. The intervals allow us to examine nonlinearities, and they handle
topcoding from not observing firm and industry tenure for spells starting before 1980.

We estimated production functions for two samples: all firms with nonmissing variables and a sample with
outliers removed. We are worried about possibly non-classical measurement error in the accounting data, so
we removed the firms in the top and bottom 1% of the ratios of output to labor and also physical capital to
labor. Removing these outliers increases the base R2 ’s substantially, but does not change the ∆R2 ’s from adding
labor quality much. We report specifications with the outliers removed, but our main conclusions about ∆R2 ’s
are similar if we include the outliers.



References
Abowd, J.M., F. Kramarz, and D.N. Margolis, “High wage workers and high wage firms,” Econometrica,
  1999, 67 (2), 251–333.
Ackerberg, Daniel, C. Lanier Benkard, Steven Berry, and Ariel Pakes, “Econometric Tools for Analyzing
  Market Outcomes.,” in James J. Heckman and Edward E. Leamer, eds., Handbook of Econometrics, Vol. 6A,
  Elsevier, 2007.

  , Kevin Caves, and Garth Frazer, “Structural Estimation of Production Functions,” 2007. working paper.

Arellano, M. and S. Bond, “Some tests of specification for panel data: Monte Carlo evidence and an applica-
  tion to employment equations,” The Review of Economic Studies, 1991, 58 (2), 277–297.

Baily, Martin Neil, Charles Hulten, and David Campbell, “Productivity Dynamics in Manufacturing Plants,”
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics, 1992.

Baldwin, John R., The Dynamics of Industrial Competition: A North American Perspective, Cambridge Uni-
  versity Press, 1995.

Bartelsman, Eric J. and Mark Doms, “Understanding Productivity: Lessons from Longitudinal Microdata,”
  Journal of Economic Literature, September 2000, 38 (3), 569–594.

Bernard, A.B. and J.B. Jensen, “Exporters, Jobs, and Wages in US, Manufacturing: 1976-1987,” Brookings
  Papers on Economic Activity: Macroeconomics, 1995.

Berndt, E.R. and D.M. Hesse, “Measuring and assessing capacity utilization in the manufacturing sectors of
  nine OECD countries,” European Economic Review, 1986, 30 (5), 961–989.

Bloom, Nick and John Van Reenen, “Measuring and Explaining Management Practices Across Firms and
  Countries,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 2007.

Blundell, R. and S. Bond, “GMM Estimation with persistent panel data: an application to production func-
  tions,” Econometric Reviews, 2000, 19 (3), 321–340.

Cabral, Luis M. B. and José Mata, “On the Evolution of the Firm Size Distribution: Facts and Theory,”
  American Economic Review, November 2003, 93 (4), 1075–1090.

Christensen, Laurits R., Dale W. Jorgenson, and Lawrence J. Lau, “Transcendental Logarithmic Produc-
  tion Functions,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, February 1973, 55 (1), 28–45.

Collard-Wexler, Allan, “Productivity Dispersion and Plant Selection in the Ready-Mix Concrete Industry,”
  2010. working paper.

Davis, Steven J. and John C. Haltiwanger, “Gross Job Creation, Gross Job Destruction, and Employment
  Reallocation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 1992, 107 (3), 819–863.

Denison, Edward Fulton, The Sources of Economic Growth in the United States and the Alternatives Before
  Us, Committee for Economic Development, 1962.
Dhrymes, Phoebus, The Structure of Production Technology: Productivity and Aggregation Effects, Edward
  Elgar, 1995.

Dupuy, Arnaud, “Sorting on Skills and Preferences: Tinbergen Meets Sattinger,” February 2010. Maastricht
  University working paper.

Eeckhout, Jan and Philipp Kircher, “Identifying Sorting – In Theory,” 2009. University Pompeu Fabra
  working paper.

Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and Chad Syverson, “Reallocation, Firm Turnover, and Efficiency: Selec-
  tion on Productivity or Profitability?,” American Economic Review, March 2008, 98 (1), 394–425.

Fox, Jeremy T. and Valérie Smeets, “Three Empirical Checks for the Validity of Olley and Pakes Productivity
  Estimators,” 2010. University of Michigan working paper.

Frazer, Garth, “Heterogeneous Labour in Firms and Returns to Education in Ghana,” 2006. University of
  Toronto working paper.

Griliches, Zvi, “Specification Bias in Estimates of Production Functions,” Journal of Farm Economics, Febru-
  ary 1957, 39 (1), 8–20.

   and Jacques Mairesse, “Production Functions: The Search for Identification,” in S. Strøm, ed., Economet-
  rics and Economic Theory in the Twentieth Century: The Ragnar Frisch Centennial Symposium, Cambridge
  University Press, 1998.

Haltiwanger, John, Julia Lane, and James Spletzer, “Wages, Productivity, and the Dynamic Interaction of
  Businesses and Workers,” Labour Economics, 2007, 14, 575–602.

Hellerstein, J.K. and D. Neumark, “Sex, wages, and productivity: An empirical analysis of Israeli firm-level
  data,” International Economic Review, 1999, 40 (1), 95–123.

  ,   , and K.R. Troske, “Wages, productivity, and worker characteristics: Evidence from plant-level produc-
  tion functions and wage equations,” Journal of Labor Economics, 1999, 17 (3), 409–446.

Hellerstein, Judith and David Neumark, “Production Function and Wage Equation Estimation with Hetero-
  geneous Labor: Evidence from a New Matched Employer-Employee Data Set,” in “Hard to Measure Goods
  and Services: Essays in Honor of Zvi Griliches,” University of Chicago, 2006.

Iranzo, S., F. Schivardi, and E. Tosetti, “Skill dispersion and firm productivity: an analysis with employer-
  employee matched data,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2008, 26 (2), 247–285.

Jorgenson, D.W., F.M. Gollop, and B. Fraumeni, Productivity and US Economic Growth, Harvard University
  Press, 1987.
Katayama, Hajime, Shihua Lu, and James R. Tybout, “Firm-Level Productivity Studies: Illusions and a
  Solution,” International Journal of Industrial Organization, 2009, 27, 403–413.

Klette, Tor Jakob and Zvi Griliches, “The Inconsistency of Common Scale Estimators when Output Prices
  are Unobserved and Endogenous,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 1996, 11, 343–361.

Lise, Jeremy, Costas Meghir, and Jean-Marc Robin, “Matching, Sorting and Wages,” 2010. University
  College London working paper.

Lopes de Melo, Rafael, “Sorting in the Labor Market: Theory and Measurement,” December 2009. University
  of Chicago working paper.

Maksimovic, V. and G. Phillips, “The Market for Corporate Assets: Who Engages in Mergers and Asset Sales
  and Are There Efficiency Gains?,” The Journal of Finance, 2001, 56 (6), 2019–2065.

Marschak, Jacob and William H. Andrews, “Random Simultaneous Equations and the Theory of Produc-
  tion,” Econometrica, July-October 1944, 12 (3/4), 143–205.

Mulligan, C.B. and X. Sala-I-Martin, “Measuring Aggregate Human Capital,” Journal of Economic Growth,
  2000, 5 (3), 215–252.

Olley, G. Steven and Ariel Pakes, “The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommunications Equipment
  Industry,” Econometrica, November 1996, 64 (6), 1263–1297.

Ornaghi, C., “Assessing the effects of measurement errors on the estimation of production functions,” Journal
  of Applied Econometrics, 2006, 21 (6), 879–891.

Oulton, N., “Competition and the dispersion of labour productivity amongst UK companies,” Oxford Economic
  Papers, 1998, 50 (1), 23–38.

Schoar, A., “Effects of Corporate Diversification on Productivity,” The Journal of Finance, 2002, 57 (6),
  2379–2403.

Syverson, Chad, “Market Structure and Productivity: A Concrete Example,” Journal of Political Economy,
  2004, 112, 1181–1222.

Van Biesebroeck, Johannes, “Wages Equal Productivity: Fact or Fiction?,” June 2007. NBER working paper
  No. 10174.

Welch, Finis, “Linear Synthesis of Skill Distribution,” The Journal of Human Resources, Summer 1969, 4 (3),
  311–327.

Whelan, K., “Computers, obsolescence, and productivity,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2002, 84 (3),
  445–461.
                                        TABLE 1 - Summary Statistics by 2-digit Industries†


                                        Food and Beverages                  Furniture            Publishing and Printing           Advertising
Variables
                                        mean          std. dev.     mean             std. dev.    mean             std. dev.   mean           std. dev.

Value added                            65,841         155,667       25,799           80,759       35,445           91,845      14,417         15,625

Log value added                        10.077          1.356        9.351             1.118       9.472             1.203      9.173           0.878

Capital                               100,230         286,247       25,272           89,224       30,788           77,168      5,906          13,325

Labor                                    171            531           82                242         81               163        31               29

Wage bill (logs)                        9.499          1.250        9.062             0.955       9.119             1.072      8.678           0.769

Wage fixed effect sum (logs)            4.748          1.174        4.321             0.945       4.415             1.063      4.011           0.779

Firm age                                20.18          19.56        15.74             10.92       17.25             15.72      11.95           10.31

DH Growth 1996-2001                     0.47            0.77         0.47               0.78       0.47              0.75       0.79            0.85

Experience                              13.67           4.52        14.43               3.48      14.43              4.14      11.10            3.96

Female                                  0.431          0.203        0.294             0.175       0.397             0.156      0.476           0.144

College & master                        0.062          0.060        0.052             0.051       0.124             0.126      0.205           0.140

Community college                       0.052          0.051        0.041             0.040       0.029             0.040      0.081           0.070

Vocational                              0.428          0.121        0.485             0.127       0.594             0.161      0.501           0.142

Firm tenure 1 to 2 years                0.255          0.120        0.250             0.127       0.261             0.140      0.309           0.144

Firm tenure 3 to 5 years                0.181          0.106        0.197             0.113       0.176             0.118      0.173           0.117

Firm tenure 6 to 9 years                0.171          0.121        0.179             0.117       0.179             0.132      0.135           0.115

Firm tenure 10 years and up             0.168          0.148        0.196             0.150       0.188             0.165      0.095           0.116

Industry tenure 1 to 2 years            0.240          0.122        0.242             0.154       0.210             0.132      0.272           0.143

Industry tenure 3 to 5 years            0.178          0.103        0.203             0.134       0.170             0.115      0.195           0.125

Industry tenure 6 to 9 years            0.176          0.111        0.196             0.133       0.186             0.116      0.181           0.125

Industry tenure 10 years and up         0.213          0.157        0.221             0.174       0.300             0.185      0.164           0.150

# firms                                         288                           339                          359                          194
# observations                                  933                          1,122                         1,095                        546


† Food and beverages and furniture are a subset of manufacturing
Publishing and printing is a hybrid of a manufacturing and a service industry
Advertising is a service industry
                                                                       TABLE 2: Labor Quality Augmented Cobb Douglas Production Function
                                                                                               for the Food and Beverage Industry



                                                                                   (3) Detailed human      (4) Detailed human                            (6) Detailed human                            (8) Detailed human
                                       (1) Number of         (2) College/non-                                                                                                    (7) Worker fixed                              (9) Benchmark: firm
                                                                                    capital measures -      capital measures -       (5) Wage bill        capital measures -                            capital measures -
                                           workers                college                                                                                                             effect                                         growth
                                                                                   multiplicative form        additive form                                   wage bill                                worker fixed effect
Dep. variable: Log Value Added


                                      coef.     robust SE    coef.     robust SE     coef.     robust SE    coef.     robust SE    coef.     robust SE    coef.     robust SE    coef.     robust SE     coef.     robust SE     coef.    robust SE


Log number of workers (# or wages)   0.690***    0.052                             0.787***     0.056      0.796***    0.057      0.825***    0.049      0.819***    0.050      0.568***    0.048      0.770***     0.054      0.691***    0.052


Log college workers                                         0.195***     0.043


Log non-college workers                                     0.537***     0.051


Log physical capital                 0.178***    0.035      0.142***     0.035     0.204***     0.040      0.200**     0.041      0.066**     0.031      0.115***    0.035      0.252***    0.046      0.179***     0.036      0.179***    0.034


Firm age (log)                        0.037      0.050       0.039       0.049     -0.426***    0.162      -0.485**    0.191       -0.023     0.036       -0.066     0.058       -0.077     0.076      -0.493***    0.154       0.031      0.050


DH growth 5 years                                                                                                                                                                                                               -0.037     0.045


Female                                                                             -0.343**     0.161       -1.692     1.182                              -0.148     0.197                              -0.081      0.197


College & master                                                                    1.478*      0.782       7.444      9.055                              0.653      0.470                             2.347***     0.838


Community college                                                                   0.745       0.901       5.044      7.623                              0.525      0.734                              0.416       0.774


Vocational                                                                          0.686       0.517       2.258      3.082                              0.212      0.332                              0.170       0.310


Experience                                                                          0.045       0.031       0.104      0.149                              -0.006     0.010                              0.510       0.389


Firm tenure 1 to 2 years                                                            0.938*      0.491       2.200      2.639                              -0.010     0.199                              0.844*      0.438


Firm tenure 3 to 5 years                                                           1.220**      0.578       3.572      4.371                              0.222      0.316                             1.180**      0.605


Firm tenure 6 to 9 years                                                            0.303       0.447       -0.324     1.986                              -0.095     0.262                              0.352       0.494


Firm tenure 10 years and up                                                        1.957**      0.861       6.095      7.232                              0.543      0.458                             2.886**      1.223
Industry tenure 1 to 2 years                                                                  0.242           0.235   0.019           1.171                     0.161           0.228              -0.308          0.211


Industry tenure 3 to 5 years                                                                 -0.507*          0.263   -1.389          2.372                     -0.108          0.310             -0.727***        0.240


Industry tenure 6 to 9 years                                                                  0.370           0.452   3.483           4.346                     0.374           0.354              0.205           0.454


Industry tenure 10 years and up                                                               -0.393          0.356   0.920           2.681                     0.438           0.423              -0.557          0.422


SD (ω)                                               0.398                  0.386                     0.394                   0.431                0.316                0.253           0.442              0.449           0.398


SD (η)                                               0.476                  0.471                     0.445                   0.448                0.436                0.428           0.495              0.444           0.476


SD (e)                                               0.605                  0.595                     0.579                   0.606                0.529                0.488           0.648              0.614           0.605


Industry effects                                    5-digit                 5-digit                5-digit                 5-digit                 5-digit           5-digit            5-digit         5-digit            5-digit


R-squared                                            0.801                  0.807                     0.818                   0.800                0.848                0.870           0.772              0.795           0.801


# observations                                        933                    933                       933                     933                  933                  933             933                933             933



All estimates use the Olley and Pakes procedure, which corrects for both simultaneity bias and selection bias
A constant term, year fixed effects and sub-industry indicators (at the five-digit level) are included in all regressions, outside any labor quality function
The standard errors account for heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation at the firm level. ***/**/* reports significance at 1/5/10%.
(1) Cobb Douglas using the number of workers
(2) Cobb Douglas with the number of workers broken down into college and non-college workers, as separate inputs
(3) Nonlinear estimation of a multiplicative labor quality augmented Cobb Douglas production function
(4) Nonlinear estimation of an additive labor quality augmented Cobb Douglas production function
(5) Cobb Douglas using a firm's monthly wage bill as the labor input
(6) Nonlinear estimation of a multiplicative labor quality augmented Cobb Douglas production function, using the fraction of wage expenditure in each human capital category
(7) Cobb Douglas using a firm's sum of worker fixed effects
(8) Nonlinear estimation of a multiplicative labor quality augmented Cobb Douglas production function, using the fraction of fixed effects in each human capital category
(9) Cobb Douglas with firm employment growth over the last 5 years using the Davis and Haltiwanger (1992) measure: (xt-xt-5)/( (xt+xt-5)/2
                                                                       TABLE 3: Labor Quality Augmented Cobb Douglas Production Function
                                                                                                    for the Furniture Industry



                                                                                   (3) Detailed human     (4) Detailed human                            (6) Detailed human                            (8) Detailed human
                                       (1) Number of         (2) College/non-                                                                                                   (7) Worker fixed                             (9) Benchmark: firm
                                                                                    capital measures -     capital measures -       (5) Wage bill        capital measures -                            capital measures -
                                           workers                college                                                                                                            effect                                        growth
                                                                                   multiplicative form       additive form                                   wage bill                                worker fixed effect
Dep. variable: Log Value Added


                                      coef.     robust SE    coef.     robust SE    coef.     robust SE    coef.     robust SE    coef.     robust SE    coef.     robust SE    coef.     robust SE    coef.     robust SE     coef.    robust SE


Log number of workers (# or wages)   0.818***    0.055                             0.862***    0.057      0.865***    0.056      0.843***    0.048      0.870***    0.051      0.728***    0.052      0.798***    0.054      0.816***    0.055


Log college workers                                         0.198***     0.037


Log non-college workers                                     0.661***     0.059


Log physical capital                 0.096***    0.033      0.079**      0.038      0.064      0.040       0.067*     0.039      0.078***    0.027       0.054      0.035      0.100**     0.047      0.078***    0.033      0.098***    0.032


Firm age (log)                        -0.079     0.127       -0.138      0.144      -0.077     0.148       -0.082     0.146       -0.047     0.104       0.014      0.137       -0.084     0.196       -0.042     0.118       -0.081     0.126


DH growth 5 years                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.028      0.042


Female                                                                              0.024      0.201       0.056      0.572                              0.327      0.247                              0.388      0.268


College & master                                                                    1.777*     0.937       3.972      3.703                              0.768      0.522                              1.681*     0.979


Community college                                                                  2.775***    0.904       7.003      4.733                             1.205**     0.590                             2.020**     0.786


Vocational                                                                          0.536      0.407       1.071      1.140                              0.183      0.282                              0.550      0.366


Experience                                                                          0.011      0.016       0.023      0.042                              -0.008     0.007                              0.082      0.059


Firm tenure 1 to 2 years                                                           0.594**     0.278       1.369      0.952                              -0.182     0.164                              0.421*     0.249


Firm tenure 3 to 5 years                                                           0.603**     0.258       1.497      1.106                              -0.073     0.169                             0.672**     0.300


Firm tenure 6 to 9 years                                                            0.585*     0.336       1.685      1.181                              -0.075     0.196                              0.552      0.394


Firm tenure 10 years and up                                                         0.311      0.435       1.206      1.251                              -0.371     0.227                              0.424      0.573
Industry tenure 1 to 2 years                                                                  -0.169        0.126    -0.524         0.493                       -0.039          0.115             -0.258**      0.129


Industry tenure 3 to 5 years                                                                  -0.155        0.135    -0.424         0.486                       -0.031          0.111             -0.272*       0.150


Industry tenure 6 to 9 years                                                                  -0.105        0.210    -0.464         0.739                       0.025           0.163              -0.081       0.250


Industry tenure 10 years and up                                                               -0.350        0.259    -1.323         1.205                       -0.118          0.208              -0.186       0.363


SD (ω)                                               0.319                  0.314                   0.297                   0.298                  0.235                0.218           0.361           0.269           0.320


SD (η)                                               0.480                  0.472                   0.469                   0.470                  0.452                0.444           0.489           0.468           0.480


SD (e)                                               0.584                  0.575                   0.561                   0.562                  0.518                0.502           0.612           0.546           0.584


Industry effects                                    5-digit                 5-digit                5-digit                 5-digit                 5-digit           5-digit            5-digit         5-digit         5-digit


R-squared                                            0.727                  0.736                   0.748                   0.747                  0.785                0.799           0.701           0.762           0.727


# observations                                       1,122                  1,122                   1,122                   1,122                  1,122                1,122           1,122           1,122           1,122



All estimates use the Olley and Pakes procedure, which corrects for both simultaneity bias and selection bias
A constant term, year fixed effects and sub-industry indicators (at the five-digit level) are included in all regressions, outside any labor quality function
The standard errors account for heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation at the firm level. ***/**/* reports significance at 1/5/10%.
(1) Cobb Douglas using the number of workers
(2) Cobb Douglas with the number of workers broken down into college and non-college workers, as separate inputs
(3) Nonlinear estimation of a multiplicative labor quality augmented Cobb Douglas production function
(4) Nonlinear estimation of an additive labor quality augmented Cobb Douglas production function
(5) Cobb Douglas using a firm's monthly wage bill as the labor input
(6) Nonlinear estimation of a multiplicative labor quality augmented Cobb Douglas production function, using the fraction of wage expenditure in each human capital category
(7) Cobb Douglas using a firm's sum of worker fixed effects
(8) Nonlinear estimation of a multiplicative labor quality augmented Cobb Douglas production function, using the fraction of fixed effects in each human capital category
(9) Cobb Douglas with firm employment growth over the last 5 years using the Davis and Haltiwanger (1992) measure: (xt-xt-5)/( (xt+xt-5)/2
                                                                         TABLE 4: Labor Quality Augmented Cobb Douglas Production Function
                                                                                               for the Publishing and Printing Industry



                                                                                     (3) Detailed human      (4) Detailed human                              (6) Detailed human                              (8) Detailed human
                                        (1) Number of          (2) College/non-                                                                                                        (7) Worker fixed                             (9) Benchmark: firm
                                                                                      capital measures -      capital measures -        (5) Wage bill         capital measures -                              capital measures -
                                            workers                 college                                                                                                                 effect                                        growth
                                                                                     multiplicative form        additive form                                     wage bill                                  worker fixed effect
Dep. variable: Log Value Added


                                       coef.     robust SE     coef.     robust SE     coef.     robust SE     coef.     robust SE     coef.     robust SE     coef.     robust SE     coef.     robust SE    coef.     robust SE     coef.     robust SE


Log number of workers (# or wages)   0.888***     0.051                              0.974***     0.045      0.971***     0.045      0.976***     0.048      0.958***     0.046      0.708***     0.051      0.948***    0.047      0.891***     0.051


Log college workers                                          0.273***      0.039


Log non-college workers                                      0.619***      0.049


Log physical capital                 0.138***     0.025      0.141***      0.026     0.137***     0.022      0.138***     0.022      0.106***     0.029      0.109***     0.025      0.200***     0.024      0.126***    0.028      0.136***     0.025


Firm age (log)                       -0.168***    0.046      -0.217***     0.059     -0.197***    0.071      -0.197***    0.073      -0.208***    0.075      -0.127***    0.061      -0.104***    0.039      -0.152**    0.070      -0.167***    0.047


DH growth 5 years                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -0.028      0.036


Female                                                                                -0.088      0.158       -1.032      1.320                               0.025       0.190                               0.084      0.165


College & master                                                                     1.609***     0.508       10.721      10.518                              0.317       0.340                              1.580***    0.487


Community college                                                                    1.502**      0.675       11.550      12.598                              1.141*      0.648                              2.378***    0.781


Vocational                                                                            0.519*      0.309       2.858       3.128                               -0.019      0.227                               0.353      0.230


Experience                                                                           0.136**      0.061       0.459       0.430                                0.011      0.009                               1.256      1.840


Firm tenure 1 to 2 years                                                             0.261**      0.133       2.729       2.587                               -0.048      0.099                               0.180      0.145


Firm tenure 3 to 5 years                                                              -0.030      0.131       -1.008      1.614                              -0.238**     0.113                              -0.235*     0.134


Firm tenure 6 to 9 years                                                              0.0003      0.167       0.408       1.742                               -0.125      0.123                               0.242      0.193


Firm tenure 10 years and up                                                           -0.314      0.198       -3.433      4.275                               -0.288*     0.165                               0.234      0.293
Industry tenure 1 to 2 years                                                                  -0.117          0.124   -2.291          2.136                     -0.050          0.107             -0.136          0.146


Industry tenure 3 to 5 years                                                                  0.043           0.147   0.553           1.574                     0.039           0.153             0.062           0.141


Industry tenure 6 to 9 years                                                                  0.199           0.203   2.255           2.796                     0.060           0.166             -0.042          0.172


Industry tenure 10 years and up                                                               -0.051          0.196   -1.636          2.369                     -0.086          0.151             -0.114          0.204


SD (ω)                                               0.278                  0.265                     0.235                   0.238                0.251                0.211           0.314             0.224           0.278


SD (η)                                               0.449                  0.445                     0.399                   0.398                0.393                0.389           0.501             0.403           0.449


SD (e)                                               0.525                  0.515                     0.461                   0.462                0.465                0.441           0.586             0.457           0.524


Industry effects                                    5-digit                 5-digit                5-digit                 5-digit                 5-digit           5-digit            5-digit        5-digit            5-digit


R-squared                                            0.810                  0.817                     0.853                   0.853                0.851                0.865           0.763             0.856           0.810


# observations                                       1,095                  1,095                     1,095                   1,095                1,095                1,095           1,095             1,095           1,095



All estimates use the Olley and Pakes procedure, which corrects for both simultaneity bias and selection bias
A constant term, year fixed effects and sub-industry indicators (at the five-digit level) are included in all regressions, outside any labor quality function
The standard errors account for heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation at the firm level. ***/**/* reports significance at 1/5/10%.
(1) Cobb Douglas using the number of workers
(2) Cobb Douglas with the number of workers broken down into college and non-college workers, as separate inputs
(3) Nonlinear estimation of a multiplicative labor quality augmented Cobb Douglas production function
(4) Nonlinear estimation of an additive labor quality augmented Cobb Douglas production function
(5) Cobb Douglas using a firm's monthly wage bill as the labor input
(6) Nonlinear estimation of a multiplicative labor quality augmented Cobb Douglas production function, using the fraction of wage expenditure in each human capital category
(7) Cobb Douglas using a firm's sum of worker fixed effects
(8) Nonlinear estimation of a multiplicative labor quality augmented Cobb Douglas production function, using the fraction of fixed effects in each human capital category
(9) Cobb Douglas with firm employment growth over the last 5 years using the Davis and Haltiwanger (1992) measure: (xt-xt-5)/( (xt+xt-5)/2
                                                                       TABLE 5: Labor Quality Augmented Cobb Douglas Production Function
                                                                                                   for the Advertising Industry



                                                                                   (3) Detailed human     (4) Detailed human                            (6) Detailed human                            (8) Detailed human
                                       (1) Number of         (2) College/non-                                                                                                   (7) Worker fixed                             (9) Benchmark: firm
                                                                                    capital measures -     capital measures -       (5) Wage bill        capital measures -                            capital measures -
                                           workers                college                                                                                                            effect                                        growth
                                                                                   multiplicative form       additive form                                   wage bill                                worker fixed effect
Dep. variable: Log Value Added


                                      coef.     robust SE    coef.     robust SE    coef.     robust SE    coef.     robust SE    coef.     robust SE    coef.     robust SE    coef.     robust SE    coef.     robust SE     coef.    robust SE


Log number of workers (# or wages)   0.935***    0.086                             0.983***    0.066      1.000***    0.065      1.007***    0.055      0.955***    0.060      0.755***    0.074      0.940***    0.062      0.936***    0.086


Log college workers                                         0.471***     0.038


Log non-college workers                                     0.418***     0.078


Log physical capital                  -0.072     0.066       -0.060      0.058      -0.046     0.046       -0.050     0.049       -0.037     0.044       -0.008     0.036       -0.070     0.078       -0.026     0.040       -0.071     0.066


DH growth 5 years                                                                                                                                                                                                             -0.005     0.043


Female                                                                              -0.057     0.217       0.633      6.502                              0.248      0.274                              -0.023     0.174


College & master                                                                   2.132***    0.556       33.608     86.223                             0.500*     0.263                             1.548***    0.413


Community college                                                                   0.791*     0.469       11.772     37.308                             0.176      0.312                              0.354      0.396


Vocational                                                                          0.335      0.332       -1.376     4.794                              0.044      0.250                              0.001      0.213


Experience                                                                         0.081***    0.030       1.141      2.761                              -0.005     0.006                             0.382***    0.141


Firm tenure 1 to 2 years                                                           0.771**     0.324       19.127     47.972                             0.267      0.274                             0.527**     0.254


Firm tenure 3 to 5 years                                                            0.189      0.256       7.656      21.103                             0.028      0.218                              0.122      0.244


Firm tenure 6 to 9 years                                                           -0.503*     0.271      -17.157     40.916                             -0.188     0.183                              -0.196     0.306


Firm tenure 10 years and up                                                         -0.221     0.262       -6.230     16.609                             0.220      0.262                              0.403      0.397


Industry tenure 1 to 2 years                                                        0.119      0.207       -0.666     5.753                              -0.230     0.128                              -0.045     0.153
Industry tenure 3 to 5 years                                                                 0.422*         0.259    10.022         25.268                      0.026           0.158             0.291           0.227


Industry tenure 6 to 9 years                                                                0.958***        0.304    20.691         51.691                      0.112           0.192             0.476           0.290


Industry tenure 10 years and up                                                              0.790**        0.379    16.569         41.096                      -0.069          0.191             0.159           0.311


SD (ω)                                               0.255                  0.234                   0.175                   0.181                  0.153                0.139           0.295             0.148           0.255


SD (η)                                               0.510                  0.470                   0.403                   0.413                  0.353                0.348           0.510             0.377           0.510


SD (e)                                               0.577                  0.526                   0.438                   0.450                  0.378                0.367           0.594             0.400           0.577


Industry effects                                    5-digit                 5-digit                5-digit                 5-digit                 5-digit           5-digit            5-digit       5-digit             5-digit


R-squared                                            0.567                  0.640                   0.751                   0.737                  0.814                0.825           0.543             0.792           0.567


# observations                                        546                    546                      546                     546                   546                  546             546              546              546



All estimates use the Olley and Pakes procedure, which corrects for both simultaneity bias and selection bias
A constant term, year fixed effects and sub-industry indicators (at the five-digit level) are included in all regressions, outside any labor quality function
The standard errors account for heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation at the firm level. ***/**/* reports significance at 1/5/10%.
(1) Cobb Douglas using the number of workers
(2) Cobb Douglas with the number of workers broken down into college and non-college workers, as separate inputs
(3) Nonlinear estimation of a multiplicative labor quality augmented Cobb Douglas production function
(4) Nonlinear estimation of an additive labor quality augmented Cobb Douglas production function
(5) Cobb Douglas using a firm's monthly wage bill as the labor input
(6) Nonlinear estimation of a multiplicative labor quality augmented Cobb Douglas production function, using the fraction of wage expenditure in each human capital category
(7) Cobb Douglas using a firm's sum of worker fixed effects
(8) Nonlinear estimation of a multiplicative labor quality augmented Cobb Douglas production function, using the fraction of fixed effects in each human capital category
(9) Cobb Douglas with firm employment growth over the last 5 years using the Davis and Haltiwanger (1992) measure: (xt-xt-5)/( (xt+xt-5)/2
                                                                          TABLE 6A - Productivity Dispersion with Labor Quality Controls for Four Manufacturing Industries
                                                                                                                           Cobb Douglas - Least Squares


                                                                                  Machinery                                       Food and Beverages                             Furniture                             Publishing and Printing


                                                                 R²          SD(e)       q_90/q_10     q_75/q_25           R²      SD(e)     q_90/q_10   q_75/q_25    R²     SD(e)     q_90/q_10   q_75/q_25    R²       SD(e)     q_90/q_10     q_75/q_25


(1) Number of workers                                          0.834          0.45          3.02          1.67            0.862     0.50         3.24      1.81      0.782   0.52           3.40     1.79      0.840     0.48           3.39       1.71

(2) College/non-college (numbers of workers)                   0.834          0.45          3.06          1.68            0.865     0.50         3.13      1.87      0.788   0.51           3.30     1.81      0.844     0.47           3.41       1.70

(3) Detailed human capital measures - Multiplicative           0.841          0.44          2.90          1.66            0.880     0.47         3.02      1.69      0.797   0.50           3.29     1.76      0.874     0.43           2.95       1.60

(4) Detailed human capital measures - Additive                 0.841          0.44          2.91          1.65            0.879     0.47         3.05      1.70      0.796   0.50           3.22     1.75      0.874     0.43           2.92       1.60

(5) Wage bill                                                  0.849          0.43          2.83          1.57            0.884     0.46         2.81      1.66      0.809   0.49           3.20     1.61      0.875     0.43           2.79       1.52

(6) Detailed human capital measures + Wage bill                0.853          0.42          2.77          1.58            0.890     0.45         2.85      1.61      0.820   0.47           2.99     1.64      0.881     0.42           2.76       1.53

(7) Fixed effects                                              0.810          0.48          3.25          1.77            0.848     0.53         3.53      1.90      0.774   0.53           3.44     1.80      0.805     0.53           3.70       1.81

(8) Detailed human capital measures + Fixed effects            0.839          0.44          2.88          1.68            0.882     0.47         3.02      1.68      0.798   0.50           3.10     1.76      0.873     0.43           2.89       1.63

(9) Benchmark: firm employment growth                          0.834          0.45          3.04          1.67            0.862     0.50         3.20      1.81      0.782   0.52           3.40     1.79      0.841     0.48           3.37       1.70

# firms                                                                              710                                                   288                                       339                                         359

# firm-years                                                                         2389                                                  933                                       1122                                        1095


The unit of observation is a firm in 1992-2001 in the listed industries
The measure q_90/q_10 is the ratio of the 90th to 10th TFP quantiles, the measure q_75/q_25 the ratio of the 75th to 25th TFP quantiles.
Sub-industry indicators (at the five-digit level) are included in all regressions (outside the labor quality function).
Firm employment growth is calculated using the Davis and Haltiwanger (1992) measure: (xt-xt-5)/( (xt +xt-5)/2)
R2 is 1 - Var(e)/Var(log y) for nonlinear specifications
                                                                          TABLE 6B - Productivity Dispersion with Labor Quality Controls for Four Manufacturing Industries
                                                                                                                           Cobb Douglas - Least Squares


                                                                           Hotels and Restaurants                                     Accounting                                Advertising                            Computer Activities


                                                                 R²          SD(e)       q_90/q_10     q_75/q_25           R²      SD(e)     q_90/q_10   q_75/q_25    R²     SD(e)     q_90/q_10   q_75/q_25    R²     SD(e)     q_90/q_10   q_75/q_25


(1) Number of workers                                          0.789          0.51          3.24          1.89            0.502     0.51         3.10      1.47      0.628   0.54          3.62      1.86      0.770    0.49         3.11      1.64

(2) College/non-college (numbers of workers)                   0.793          0.51          3.33          1.89            0.499     0.51         3.31      1.43      0.688   0.49          2.98      1.72      0.757    0.50         3.29      1.66

(3) Detailed human capital measures - Multiplicative           0.817          0.48          3.07          1.71            0.561     0.48         2.77      1.56      0.776   0.42          2.45      1.59      0.792    0.46         2.86      1.60

(4) Detailed human capital measures - Additive                 0.816          0.48          3.03          1.72            0.574     0.47         2.74      1.60      0.765   0.43          2.59      1.58      0.792    0.46         2.86      1.62

(5) Wage bill                                                  0.828          0.46          2.71          1.66            0.529     0.49         3.33      1.36      0.823   0.37          2.07      1.44      0.823    0.43         2.49      1.47

(6) Detailed human capital measures + Wage bill                0.841          0.45          2.58          1.60            0.575     0.47         3.03      1.48      0.834   0.36          1.96      1.40      0.827    0.42         2.47      1.47

(7) Fixed effects                                              0.748          0.56          3.98          1.95            0.488     0.52         3.06      1.51      0.627   0.54          3.80      1.91      0.747    0.51         3.28      1.71

(8) Detailed human capital measures + Fixed effects            0.809          0.49          3.15          1.69            0.565     0.48         2.98      1.46      0.805   0.39          2.23      1.49      0.810    0.44         2.67      1.55

(9) Benchmark: firm employment growth                          0.789          0.51          3.24          1.89            0.502     0.51         3.10      1.47      0.628   0.54          3.62      1.86      0.771    0.49         3.00      1.64

# firms                                                                              370                                                   113                                       194                                       295

# observations (firms)                                                               884                                                   330                                       546                                       756


The unit of observation is a firm in 1992-2001 in the listed industries
The measure q_90/q_10 is the ratio of the 90th to 10th TFP quantiles, the measure q_75/q_25 the ratio of the 75th to 25th TFP quantiles.
Sub-industry indicators (at the five-digit level) are included in all regressions (outside the labor quality function).
Firm employment growth is calculated using the Davis and Haltiwanger (1992) measure: (xt-xt-5)/( (xt +xt-5)/2)
R2 is 1 - Var(e)/Var(log y) for nonlinear specifications
                                                                          TABLE 7A - Productivity Dispersion with Labor Quality Controls for Four Manufacturing Industries
                                                                                                                                Translog - Least Squares


                                                                                  Machinery                                          Food and Beverages                             Furniture                             Publishing and Printing


                                                                 R²          SD(e)       q_90/q_10     q_75/q_25           R²         SD(e)     q_90/q_10   q_75/q_25    R²     SD(e)     q_90/q_10   q_75/q_25    R²       SD(e)     q_90/q_10     q_75/q_25


(1) Number of workers                                          0.838          0.45          2.93          1.68            0.863       0.50          3.13      1.78      0.785   0.52           3.39     1.79      0.841     0.48           3.39       1.39

(2) College/non-college (numbers of workers)                   0.841          0.44          2.91          1.66            0.867       0.49          3.11      1.80      0.795   0.51           3.25     1.80      0.855     0.46           3.22       1.67

(3) Detailed human capital measures - Multiplicative           0.845          0.44          2.84          1.65            0.881       0.47          3.02      1.68      0.802   0.50           3.27     1.72      0.876     0.42           2.85       1.58

(4) Detailed human capital measures - Additive                 0.845          0.44          2.87          1.64            0.880       0.47          3.03      1.68      0.801   0.50           3.24     1.74      0.877     0.42           2.83       1.59

(5) Wage bill                                                  0.851          0.43          2.77          1.56            0.885       0.46          2.82      1.65      0.812   0.49           3.14     1.64      0.877     0.42           2.72       1.52

(6) Detailed human capital measures + Wage bill                0.855          0.42          2.74          1.59            0.890       0.45          2.84      1.61      0.823   0.47           2.96     1.65      0.883     0.41           2.68       1.55

(7) Fixed effects                                              0.813          0.48          3.30          1.76            0.849       0.53          3.53      1.89      0.779   0.53           3.58     1.80      0.811     0.52           3.66       1.76

(8) Detailed human capital measures + Fixed effects            0.840          0.44          2.90          1.67            0.883       0.46          3.00      1.67      0.802   0.50.          3.12     1.70      0.876     0.42           2.82       1.63

(9) Benchmark: firm employment growth                          0.838          0.45          2.91          1.67            0.864       0.50          3.11      1.78      0.786   0.52           3.37     1.79      0.842     0.48           3.38       1.69

# firms                                                                              710                                                      288                                       339                                         359

# firm-years                                                                         2389                                                     933                                       1122                                        1095


The unit of observation is a firm in 1992-2001 in the listed industries
The measure q_90/q_10 is the ratio of the 90th to 10th TFP quantiles, the measure q_75/q_25 the ratio of the 75th to 25th TFP quantiles.
Sub-industry indicators (at the five-digit level) are included in all regressions (outside the labor quality function).
Firm employment growth is calculated using the Davis and Haltiwanger (1992) measure: (xt-xt-5)/( (xt +xt-5)/2)
R2 is 1 - Var(e)/Var(log y) for nonlinear specifications
                                                                          TABLE 7B - Productivity Dispersion with Labor Quality Controls for Four Manufacturing Industries
                                                                                                                                Translog - Least Squares


                                                                           Hotels and Restaurants                                        Accounting                                Advertising                            Computer Activities


                                                                 R²          SD(e)       q_90/q_10     q_75/q_25           R²         SD(e)     q_90/q_10   q_75/q_25    R²     SD(e)     q_90/q_10   q_75/q_25    R²     SD(e)     q_90/q_10   q_75/q_25


(1) Number of workers                                          0.797          0.50          3.22          1.88            0.514       0.50          3.18      1.53      0.648   0.52          3.41      1.91      0.770    0.49         3.05      1.64

(2) College/non-college (numbers of workers)                   0.802          0.50          3.28          1.86            0.526       0.50          3.17      1.50      0.714   0.47          2.84      1.70      0.772    0.49         3.08      1.63

(3) Detailed human capital measures - Multiplicative           0.822          0.47          2.93          1.70            0.569       0.47          2.83      1.54      0.779   0.41          2.44      1.60      0.793    0.46         2.88      1.60

(4) Detailed human capital measures - Additive                 0.821          0.47          2.94          1.74            0.596       0.46          2.81      1.58      0.767   0.42          2.54      1.58      0.792    0.46         2.91      1.62

(5) Wage bill                                                  0.837          0.45          2.94          1.65            0.542       0.49          3.31      1.39      0.827   0.36          2.06      1.42      0.825    0.42         2.46      1.48

(6) Detailed human capital measures + Wage bill                0.850          0.43          2.55          1.61            0.584       0.46          2.86      1.49      0.836   0.36          1.98      1.42      0.828    0.42         2.46      1.47

(7) Fixed effects                                              0.772          0.53          3.59          1.96            0.510       0.50          3.07      1.55      0.634   0.53          3.66      1.92      0.753    0.50         3.20      1.70

(8) Detailed human capital measures + Fixed effects            0.822          0.47          2.25          1.66            0.578       0.47          2.94      1.43      0.806   0.39          2.19      1.48      0.811    0.44         2.69      1.54

(9) Benchmark: firm employment growth                          0.797          0.50          3.22          1.89            0.514       0.50          3.21      1.54      0.648   0.52          3.41      1.91      0.773    0.48         2.97      1.63

# firms                                                                              370                                                      113                                       194                                       295

# observations (firms)                                                               884                                                      330                                       546                                       756


The unit of observation is a firm in 1992-2001 in the listed industries
The measure q_90/q_10 is the ratio of the 90th to 10th TFP quantiles, the measure q_75/q_25 the ratio of the 75th to 25th TFP quantiles.
Sub-industry indicators (at the five-digit level) are included in all regressions (outside the labor quality function).
Firm employment growth is calculated using the Davis and Haltiwanger (1992) measure: (xt-xt-5)/( (xt +xt-5)/2)
R2 is 1 - Var(e)/Var(log y) for nonlinear specifications
                                                                          TABLE 8A - Productivity Dispersion with Labor Quality Controls for Four Manufacturing Industries
                                                                                                                 Cobb Douglas - Olley and Pakes Method


                                                                                  Machinery                                       Food and Beverages                            Furniture                             Publishing and Printing


                                                                 R²          SD(e)       q_90/q_10     q_75/q_25           R²     SD(e)     q_90/q_10   q_75/q_25    R²     SD(e)     q_90/q_10   q_75/q_25    R²       SD(e)     q_90/q_10     q_75/q_25


(1) Number of workers                                          0.795          0.50          3.42          1.83            0.801    0.61         4.46      2.23      0.727   0.58           3.84     1.89      0.810     0.52           3.67       1.79

(2) College/non-college (numbers of workers)                   0.794          0.50          3.47          1.85            0.807    0.60         4.41      2.22      0.730   0.58           3.70     1.89      0.817     0.51           3.62       1.85

(3) Detailed human capital measures - Multiplicative           0.809          0.48          3.27          1.78            0.808    0.58         4.30      2.12      0.748   0.56           3.60     1.85      0.853     0.46           3.12       1.69

(4) Detailed human capital measures - Additive                 0.809          0.48          3.24          1.79            0.800    0.61         4.65      2.23      0.747   0.56           3.59     1.86      0.853     0.46           3.10       1.66

(5) Wage bill                                                  0.827          0.46          3.06          1.61            0.848    0.53         3.40      1.91      0.785   0.52           3.26     1.59      0.851     0.47           3.16       1.60

(6) Detailed human capital measures + Wage bill                0.832          0.45          3.03          1.64            0.870    0.49         3.17      1.74      0.799   0.50           3.08     1.67      0.865     0.44           2.98       1.59

(7) Fixed effects                                              0.767          0.53          3.72          1.92            0.772    0.65         5.39      2.31      0.701   0.61           4.15     2.04      0.763     0.59           4.33       1.91

(8) Detailed human capital measures + Fixed effects            0.814          0.48          3.22          1.74            0.795    0.61         4.79      2.27      0.762   0.55           3.52     1.77      0.856     0.46           3.09       1.61

(9) Benchmark: firm employment growth                          0.796          0.50          3.42          1.83            0.801    0.61         4.49      2.23      0.727   0.58           3.84     1.88      0.810     0.52           3.65       1.79

# firms                                                                              710                                                  288                                       339                                         359

# observations (firms)                                                               2389                                                 933                                       1122                                        1095


The unit of observation is a firm in 1992-2001 in the listed industries
The measure q_90/q_10 is the ratio of the 90th to 10th TFP quantiles, the measure q_75/q_25 the ratio of the 75th to 25th TFP quantiles.
Sub-industry indicators (at the five-digit level) are included in all regressions (outside the labor quality function).
Firm employment growth is calculated using the Davis and Haltiwanger (1992) measure: (xt-xt-5)/( (xt +xt-5)/2)
R2 is 1 - Var(e)/Var(log y) for nonlinear specifications
                                                                       TABLE 8B - Productivity Dispersion with Labor Quality Controls for Four Non Manufacturing Industries
                                                                                                                 Cobb Douglas - Olley and Pakes Method


                                                                           Hotels and Restaurants*                                  Accounting*                               Advertising*                            Computer Activities


                                                                 R²          SD(e)       q_90/q_10     q_75/q_25           R²     SD(e)     q_90/q_10   q_75/q_25    R²     SD(e)     q_90/q_10   q_75/q_25    R²     SD(e)     q_90/q_10   q_75/q_25


(1) Number of workers                                          0.733          0.58          3.95          2.06            0.438   0.54          3.15      1.55      0.567   0.58          3.82      2.02      0.739    0.52         3.32      1.70

(2) College/non-college (numbers of workers)                   0.735          0.58          4.04          2.04            0.429   0.54          3.29      1.55      0.640   0.53          3.40      1.83      0.722    0.54         3.54      1.76

(3) Detailed human capital measures - Multiplicative           0.780          0.52          3.38          1.87            0.467   0.53          3.12      1.58      0.751   0.44          2.74      1.69      0.747    0.51         3.25      1.75

(4) Detailed human capital measures - Additive                 0.778          0.53          3.44          1.87            0.482   0.52          2.83      1.56      0.737   0.45          2.73      1.69      0.748    0.51         3.24      1.74

(5) Wage bill                                                  0.795          0.51          3.22          1.81            0.489   0.52          3.28      1.40      0.814   0.38          2.10      1.50      0.799    0.46         2.60      1.55

(6) Detailed human capital measures + Wage bill                0.801          0.50          3.15          1.76            0.510   0.50          3.11      1.48      0.825   0.37          2.09      1.47      0.798    0.46         2.63      1.54

(7) Fixed effects                                              0.669          0.65          4.99          2.22            0.432   0.54          3.04      1.59      0.543   0.59          4.35      1.98      0.692    0.56         3.63      1.88

(8) Detailed human capital measures + Fixed effects            0.787          0.52          3.41          1.79            0.502   0.51          2.97      1.49      0.792   0.40          2.30      1.53      0.768    0.49         2.91      1.70

(9) Benchmark: firm employment growth                          0.735          0.58          3.96          2.06            0.440   0.54          3.15      1.53      0.567   0.58          3.83      2.02      0.741    0.52         3.29      1.69

# firms                                                                              370                                                  113                                       194                                       295

# observations (firms)                                                               884                                                  330                                       546                                       756


The unit of observation is a firm in 1992-2001 in the listed industries
The measure q_90/q_10 is the ratio of the 90th to 10th TFP quantiles, the measure q_75/q_25 the ratio of the 75th to 25th TFP quantiles.
Sub-industry indicators (at the five-digit level) are included in all regressions (outside the labor quality function).
Firm employment growth is calculated using the Davis and Haltiwanger (1992) measure: (xt-xt-5)/( (xt +xt-5)/2)
R2 is 1 - Var(e)/Var(log y) for nonlinear specifications
