NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DOES AGGREGATED RETURNS DISCLOSURE INCREASE PORTFOLIO RISK-TAKING?
John Beshears
James J. Choi
David Laibson
Brigitte C. Madrian
Working Paper 16868
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16868
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2011

This paper was formerly titled "Can psychological aggregation manipulations affect portfolio risk-taking?
Evidence from a framed field experiment." This research was made possible by generous grants from
the FINRA Investor Education Foundation, the National Institute on Aging (grant P01-AG005842),
the Pershing Square Fund for Research in the Foundations of Human Behavior, and the Social Security
Administration (grant 10-P-98363-1-05 to the National Bureau of Economic Research as part of the
SSA Retirement Research Consortium). We are grateful for the research assistance of Chris Clayton,
Ben Hebert, Nathan Hipsman, Josh Hurwitz, Brendan Price, Gwendolyn Reynolds, Sean Wang, and
Eric Zwick. We have benefited from the comments of Shlomo Benartzi, Peter Bossaerts, Arie Kapteyn,
Andy Lo, Michaela Pagel, Jan Potters, Richard Thaler, and seminar audiences at Arizona State University,
Bentley College, Maastricht, NYU, Tilburg, UCLA, University of Amsterdam, UT Dallas, University
of Mannheim, Wharton, Yale, the Experimental Finance conference, the Annual Conference in Behavioral
Economics, and the NBER. The findings and conclusions expressed are solely those of the authors
and do not represent the views of FINRA, NIA, the Pershing Square Foundation, SSA, any agency
of the Federal Government, or NBER. Comments should be directed to the authors. The FINRA Investor
Education Foundation, formerly known as the NASD Investor Education Foundation, supports innovative
research and educational projects that give investors the tools and information they need to better understand
the markets and the basic principles of saving and investing. For details about grant programs and
other new initiatives of the Foundation, visit www.finrafoundation.org.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by John Beshears, James J. Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Does Aggregated Returns Disclosure Increase Portfolio Risk-Taking?
John Beshears, James J. Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian
NBER Working Paper No. 16868
March 2011, Revised February 2015
JEL No. D14,G11
ABSTRACT
Many previous experiments have found that participants invest more in risky assets if they (i) see their
returns less frequently, (ii) see portfolio-level returns (rather than individual asset-by-asset returns),
or (iii) see long-horizon (rather than one-year) historical asset class return distributions. In contrast,
we find that such information aggregation treatments do not increase equity allocations in an experiment
where—unlike previous experiments—participants invest in real mutual funds over the course of one
year. In a follow-up experiment, we start with the classic Gneezy and Potters (1997) experimental
design and modify it step-by-step to move closer to the design of our first experiment. Using this identification
strategy, we show that previously documented aggregation effects are not robust to (i) changes in the
distribution of the risky asset’s returns and (ii) the introduction of a multi-day delay between the initial
portfolio choice and the realization of returns.
John Beshears
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 439
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
jbeshears@hbs.edu

David Laibson
Department of Economics
Littauer M-12
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
dlaibson@gmail.com

James J. Choi
Yale School of Management
165 Whitney Avenue
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
james.choi@yale.edu

Brigitte C. Madrian
Harvard Kennedy School
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
Brigitte_Madrian@Harvard.edu

A series of experiments has found that participants are more willing to invest in risky
assets with positive expected returns if they receive information on aggregated returns rather
than on individual component returns. Information aggregation along various dimensions
produces this effect: (i) reporting long-horizon portfolio returns at infrequent intervals rather than
short-horizon returns every period (Gneezy and Potters, 1997; Thaler et al., 1997; Gneezy,
Kapteyn, and Potters, 2003; Bellemare et al., 2005; Haigh and List, 2006; Sutter, 2007; Langer
and Weber, 2008; Fellner and Sutter, 2009; Erikson and Kvaløy, 2010a, 2010b; van der Heijden
et al., 2012), (ii) reporting portfolio-level returns rather than returns for each individual asset
separately (Anagol and Gamble, 2013), or (iii) reporting historical long-horizon return
distributions of asset classes rather than historical one-year return distributions of asset classes
(Benartzi and Thaler, 1999).1
These results are predicted by myopic loss aversion (Benartzi and Thaler, 1995)—the
combination of loss aversion (Kahneman and Tversky, 1979) and mental accounting (Kahneman
and Tversky, 1984; Thaler, 1985, 1990, 1999)—if aggregation frames encourage participants to
integrate multiple gamble outcomes into a single mental account.2 When positive-expected-value
gambles are not perfectly correlated, the sum of their outcomes is usually less likely to be a loss
than is each outcome individually.3 Thus, integrating multiple gambles into a single mental
account makes them more attractive to a loss-averse individual than if each gamble occupied its
own separate mental account.
The strength and consistency of the experimental results constitute compelling evidence
that information aggregation can increase risk-taking. In this paper, we consider a related but
separate question: Would a financial institution increase the portfolio risk-taking of its clients if
it started disclosing returns at a more aggregated level? Numerous authors have extrapolated
from the existing experimental literature to suggest that the answer to this question is “yes.”4
1

Guiso (2009) examines another aggregation manipulation that we do not test in this paper. He finds that asking
subjects about their labor income risk before offering a hypothetical lottery makes them more likely to accept the
lottery.
2
Loss-averse agents derive utility and disutility directly from gains and losses, and the disutility of a loss is greater
than the utility of a gain of equivalent magnitude. Agents engage in mental accounting when they evaluate outcomes
within a subset of their wealth portfolio—the “mental account”—in isolation from outcomes outside the mental
account.
3
Aggregating gambles does not decrease the probability of an overall loss for all return distributions, but the loss
probability does decrease, for example, when the aggregated gambles are drawn from the same normal distribution.
4
For example, Thaler et al. (1997) write: “Decisions made by employees covered by such [defined contribution
pension] plans may vary considerably depending on how their investment opportunities are described and the

1

However, the typical investment environment differs in many ways from the laboratory
environment of previous experiments. For example, the experiments to date have been conducted
over the course of one short laboratory session, while the typical investment horizon is many
years. Most previous experiments have used laboratory assets whose return distributions differ
from the return distributions of typical financial assets. Previous experimenters have had their
participants’ undivided attention, along with complete control over information flows during the
experiment, whereas aggregation manipulations by a single financial institution in a typical
investment environment must contend with background information flows and inattention. These
and other differences may blunt the effect of aggregation manipulations on portfolio choices
outside the laboratory.
We conducted an experiment that comes closer to simulating a typical investment
environment. We recruited 597 participants from the general U.S. adult population to participate
in a year-long study. Each participant allocated $325 among four real mutual funds that cover the
U.S. equity, international equity, U.S. bond, and U.S. money market asset classes.5 Participants
were free to reallocate their portfolio throughout the year, just as if they were making real
investments in these mutual funds. We paid each participant whatever the $325 would have been
worth at the end of the year if the money had been invested according to his or her choices. The
large per-participant payment ensured that participants remained interested in their experimental
portfolio through the end of a one-year experiment.
We randomly varied the extent of information aggregation along four dimensions. The
first treatment dimension varied how frequently participants saw their returns by paying half of
participants to view their weekly returns on our study website once per week and paying the
other half to view their biannual returns on our website once every six months. We paid
participants to view their returns on our website rather than simply emailing them their returns

manner and frequency with which they receive feedback on their returns.” Gneezy and Potters (1997) write:
“Manipulating the evaluation period of prospective clients could be a useful marketing strategy for fund managers.”
Haigh and List (2005) write: “[I]nstitutions may have the ability to influence asset prices through changes in their
information provisioning policies.”
5
Haigh and List (2005) find that professional futures and options traders respond to aggregation manipulations over
individual gambles whose maximum possible gain is $10 and maximum possible loss is $4, so any null results that
we find are probably not due to our portfolio stakes being too low.

2

because emails are easily ignored, which would create less variation in viewing frequency across
conditions and reduce our ability to detect a viewing frequency effect on risk-taking.6
The second treatment dimension varied the level of detail participants saw when they
viewed their weekly or biannual returns. Half of the participants saw only their overall portfolio
return over the last week or six months. The other half of participants saw the return over the last
week or six months of each individual asset they were holding. Because a screen available to all
participants showed the dollar value of each asset in their portfolio, participants in the former
group could, in theory, calculate their individual asset returns if they remembered the previous
value of each asset. But we did not provide convenient access to these previous asset values,
making this calculation more difficult. Similarly, participants in the latter group could calculate
their overall portfolio return from their individual asset returns, but we did not perform this
calculation for them.
The third treatment dimension varied the historical returns information shown to
participants. We showed some participants graphs depicting the distribution of real one-year
returns for U.S. equities, international equities, U.S. bonds, and U.S. money markets from 1971
to 2007. Others were shown the distributions of real annualized five-year returns for the four
asset classes over the same time period. We also gave some participants no historical returns
information at all in order to see whether allocations were affected by seeing any version of the
returns graphs.
The fourth treatment dimension varied whether participants who saw the historical
returns graphs could also access information about the historical performance of mixed
portfolios. Some participants could only see historical return distributions of four “pure”
portfolios, each invested 100% in one of the four asset classes offered. Other participants could,
via a Web interface, see return distributions of portfolios invested in whatever mix of asset
classes they wished. This latter treatment, which is the backward-looking analogue of the
previously described overall portfolio return reporting treatment, might make more apparent the
diversification benefits of holding multiple asset classes, thus encouraging greater investment in
risky assets.
6

In our experiment, returns were viewed 87% of the time a viewing was incentivized in the weekly condition, and
74% of the time in the biannual condition. To the extent that real-world return disclosures are more likely to be
ignored than our incentivized disclosures, varying return disclosure frequency outside our experiment will generate
even less variation in return viewing frequency, resulting in even weaker potential effects on risk-taking.

3

We find that none of the four aggregation treatments significantly increased risk-taking as
measured by the fraction of the portfolio invested in equities. We have enough statistical power
to reject increases of more than 2 to 4 percentage points, depending on the treatment. Our null
effects are unlikely to be due to our treatments having no effect on the information participants
received. There is a significant difference between how often participants in the weekly versus
biannual return viewing treatments viewed returns on our study website, and weekly viewing
treatment participants are significantly more likely than biannual viewing treatment participants
to report in an exit questionnaire that study participation made them see market returns more
often. We additionally find that showing either the one-year or five-year historical returns graphs
to participants increased their equity investment by 11 to 12 percentage points (relative to
participants who were not shown any historical returns), indicating that the graphs changed
participants’ beliefs about future asset returns.
Our null effects instead appear to be due to the fact that the aggregation treatment effects
documented in previous studies are sensitive to the risky asset’s return distribution. Our
experiment in fact replicates the Benartzi and Thaler (1999) result that showing participants
long-horizon historical U.S. stock returns increases investment in U.S. stocks relative to showing
participants one-year historical U.S. stock returns. But showing participants long-horizon
historical international stock returns decreases investment in international stocks, so there is no
change in participants’ total equity allocations.
A follow-up experiment demonstrates that the return viewing frequency effect is
similarly sensitive to the return distribution. We conducted this additional experiment to rule out
potential confounds and more precisely identify the reasons that our first experiment’s results
differ from those in the previous literature. We began by successfully replicating the return
viewing frequency effect of the earlier literature: Seeing ongoing returns less frequently within a
one-hour laboratory session increased risk-taking when the risky asset had a binary return
distribution of +250% with 1/3 probability and -100% with 2/3 probability, as is the case in
Gneezy and Potters (1997) and the many subsequent studies that adopt their experimental design
(Gneezy, Kapteyn, and Potters, 2003; Bellemare et al., 2005; Haigh and List, 2006; Sutter, 2007;
Langer and Weber, 2008; Fellner and Sutter, 2009; Erikson and Kvaløy, 2010a, 2010b; van der
Heijden et al., 2012). Such a return distribution is much more extreme than that of most common
financial assets, including the mutual funds in our first experiment. We find that the return

4

viewing frequency effect disappeared when we changed the risky asset’s return distribution to
+25% with 1/3 probability and -10% with 2/3 probability while keeping the total potential
dollars at risk the same. Return viewing frequency similarly had no effect when we told
participants that the risky asset’s return distribution matched the historical U.S. stock market
return distribution.
Even when the risky asset had the binary return distribution of (250%, 1/3; -100%, 2/3),
we find that the return viewing frequency effect disappeared if the amount of time that elapsed
between the portfolio choice and the return viewings lengthened. In all previous studies,
participants saw their returns immediately after making their portfolio choice. We ran
experimental conditions where participants in the frequent viewing treatment saw their returns
once per week for three weeks, while participants in the infrequent viewing treatment only saw
the sum of their three returns three weeks in the future. Return viewing frequency had no effect
on risk-taking, regardless of the risky asset’s return distribution, when return disclosure was
delayed in this way.
In summary, we are able to replicate the classic experimental results in the aggregation
literature. Specifically, the original Gneezy and Potters (1997) viewing frequency manipulation
does increase risk taking in our replication experiment. However, when we make the asset
allocation problem more similar to real-world asset allocation problems, this aggregation effect
vanishes. We also replicate the Benartzi and Thaler (1999) finding that viewing longer-horizon
historical U.S. equity return distributions increases investment in U.S. equities, but we find that
the effect reverses for international equities. We conclude that the originally identified
aggregation effects may not apply to decision environments that more closely resemble the ones
that investors face, so information aggregation may not be a tool that financial institutions can
use to robustly affect risk-taking.
Our paper is related to work that has found that aggregation effects can disappear or
reverse for certain binary gambles. Langer and Weber (2001, 2005) find that return aggregation
reduces investment in binary gambles that have a small probability of a large loss. They show
that this phenomenon is predicted by the diminishing sensitivity to magnitudes and nonlinear
probability weighting in prospect theory (Kahneman and Tversky, 1979; Tversky and
Kahneman, 1992). Since such gambles most closely resemble bonds, it is unclear from this
evidence how aggregation would affect overall risk-taking when the investment menu also

5

includes stocks. Moeher and Koehler (2010) find that less frequent return viewing increases risktaking only when the binary gambles being considered have identical distributions. Financial
asset returns are approximately independently and identically distributed over time, so this effect
may have limited applicability to financial market settings. Zeisberger, Langer, and Weber
(2014) find that if a given experimental subject is switched from one return viewing frequency
regime to another, the tendency to remain anchored to the risk choices induced by the first
regime is stronger than the myopic loss aversion effect.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section I describes the design of our first
experiment, Section II presents the results of the first experiment, and Section III presents
robustness checks for the first experiment. Section IV describes the design of our follow-up
experiment, and Section V presents its results. Section VI concludes.

I. Design of the first aggregation experiment
A. Participant recruitment
We recruited participants in the summer of 2008 for a one-year investing experiment
through the market research firm MarketTools. We requested that participants be at least 25
years old and have an annual income of at least $35,000 so that it was more likely that they
would have some investable assets. All interaction with the participants occurred through the
Internet; we had no direct contact with participants.
Figure 1 shows the number of participants active in the experiment at each calendar date
(the gray bars), as well as the level of the S&P 500 normalized by its July 2, 2007 value (the thin
line in the top graph) and the VIX index of expected annualized S&P 500 volatility (the thick
line in the bottom graph). Even though our experiment spanned the market collapse in the fall of
2008, 94% of our participants made their initial portfolio choices between June 23, 2008 and
July 14, 2008. Ninety-nine percent had completed this task by July 30, 2008, and the remaining
1% had completed the task by August 30, 2008. The market’s precipitous fall did not commence
until after the September 15, 2008 bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers. The VIX averaged only
24.5% from June 23 to July 14, 24.1% from June 23 to July 30, and 22.6% from June 23 to
August 29.7 These averages are not far from the annualized monthly return standard deviation of
large-cap equities from 1926 to 2007 of 20.0% (as reported by Ibbotson Associates), and are far
7

August 30, 2008 was a Saturday.

6

from the VIX levels later in 2008 that would herald the arrival of the financial crisis; the VIX
rose to 31.7% on September 15, 2008 and peaked at 80.9% on November 20, 2008. Hence, our
participants made their initial portfolio allocations in a non-crisis environment, many weeks
before we entered a bear market of historic proportions. In Section III.C, we will discuss
evidence that our null treatment effects are not explained by the market’s 18% decline from its
October 2007 peak to the beginning of our recruiting period. In addition, the follow-up
experiments presented in Sections IV and V show that null aggregation effects can be reliably
produced outside of a bear market.
The initial invitation text introduced the faculty authors with our university affiliations in
an effort to augment the credibility of the study. It then informed participants that they would
receive a $20 up-front participation fee for allocating $325 among four mutual funds. At the end
of one year, we would pay the participants whatever their initial $325 portfolio was worth at that
time, plus an additional amount for periodically checking their portfolio’s return on the study
website. The text concluded by telling the participants that we expected the initial portfolio
allocation task to take thirty minutes to an hour, and that it would take no more than thirty
minutes to an hour of additional time over the course of the next year to check their portfolio
returns.
Those interested in participating in the study clicked a link that took them to an informed
consent page that described the task, the compensation scheme, and the expected time
commitment again. The informed consent document also told participants that they would
periodically receive e-mails with a link that they could click to see their portfolio returns, and
that we would pay them for clicking on these links.
Giving informed consent took participants to a registration page where they supplied their
name and contact information and chose a password. In order to prevent signing up for the study
more than once, we blocked attempts to register multiple times from the same IP address. Upon
registration, an e-mail was sent to participants with a link to click on in order to activate their
accounts.8 The link then took subjects to a login screen.
We recruited 600 participants, but three of them did not continue after registering.
Therefore, our final sample consists of 597 participants whom we randomly assigned to one of

8

Using an e-mailed activation link ensured that we had an active e-mail account to which we could send the returnschecking links.

7

eighteen experimental cells. Table 1 shows the distribution of our sample among the
experimental cells. Treatments varied on four dimensions: whether participants were induced to
view their returns weekly or biannually; whether ongoing returns were reported to participants at
the portfolio level or separately by asset; whether participants saw no historical returns graphs,
one-year historical returns graphs, or five-year historical returns graphs; and whether participants
who were shown graphs were able to see historical returns of only portfolios invested entirely in
a single asset class or portfolios that held any mix of asset classes. All participants who did not
see a historical returns graph had their ongoing returns reported to them at the aggregated
portfolio level.9 The remaining treatment assignments are independent of each other. We will
describe each experimental condition in further detail in Sections I.C and I.F. Online appendix
figures show representative screenshots from the experimental website.

B. Opening instructions screen
After logging in, participants received a more complete description of the study
instructions. The instructions reiterated the nature of the portfolio allocation task and the
compensation scheme, and informed participants that they could reallocate their portfolio any
time during the year by logging into their account on the website. Participants were also told
about the inducement to view their ongoing returns, as well as the content and frequency of the
ongoing returns they would be paid to see. In the conditions where relevant, participants were
introduced to the historical returns graphing tool.

C. Historical returns graph treatments
For 80% of our participants, the bottom of the instructions screen described in the
previous subsection introduced a graphing tool designed to help them understand the historical
real return distributions of four asset classes: U.S. equities, international equities, U.S. bonds,
and U.S. money markets. The remaining 20% of participants did not see the graphing tool and
did not receive any alternative information on historical returns. The graphs generated by the tool
9

We allocated extra subjects to the treatment cells where no historical returns graphs were shown and ongoing
returns were reported at the portfolio level because these treatments were most similar to the Gneezy and Potters
(1997) experiment. If we did not replicate their viewing frequency effect in the full sample, we could estimate the
treatment effect using only these 120 subjects to see if interactions with the historical returns graphs and asset-byasset return reporting were responsible for the non-replication. Results on this subsample are consistent with those
on the full sample, so we do not report them later in the paper.

8

are closely modeled after those in Benartzi and Thaler (1999). Returns for an asset class during
the historical sample period are sorted from lowest to highest and displayed as a bar chart. The
lowest return is the leftmost bar, and the highest return is the rightmost bar. The median return is
also highlighted with its value labeled.10 We used the S&P 500, MSCI EAFE, Barclays Capital
Aggregate Bond Index, and 30-day U.S. Treasury bill as our asset class proxies. Because the
MSCI EAFE series starts in 1970, we cannot use returns prior to 1970 while maintaining
identical sample periods for all asset classes. The most recent year of returns available at the start
of the experiment was 2007. In order for each return series to have a unique median, we used the
period from 1971 to 2007—which has an odd number of years—for all four asset classes.11
Participants who had the graphing tool available to them were required to click through
an animation that explained how to interpret and use the graph before they could proceed to the
next part of the study. This animation could also be replayed in later screens where the graphing
tool was shown.
The graphs varied across treatments along two dimensions. The first dimension was
whether one-year return distributions or five-year annualized return distributions were shown.
We used overlapping periods for the five-year distributions, so there were 33 bars shown on the
five-year graph. The second dimension was whether participants could see only the historical
return distributions of four “pure” portfolios—each of which is invested 100% in a single asset
class—or could see the return distribution of any asset class mix they wanted. The graphing tool
allowed participants to see the return distributions of two different asset classes or portfolios
side-by-side on the same graph. The vertical axis on all graphs was fixed to range between -40%
and 70%, so that differential treatment effects across graphs could not be attributed to visual
scaling effects.

10

A programming error caused the bar immediately to the left of the median return to be highlighted instead of the
median for the first six months of the experiment, even though the correct median return value was displayed in the
graph’s label. The online appendix figures show the graphs with the shifted highlighting. The discrepancy was not
visually apparent except in the one-year U.S. equities graph, where the median return was 10.61% but the
highlighted bar corresponded to a 7.38% return.
11
In addition, the Barclays Capital index starts in 1976. We constructed our own aggregate bond market index
returns from 1971 to 1975 by weighting the returns of Ibbotson’s long-term corporate bond, intermediate Treasury,
and long-term Treasury indexes by the total amount of each type of issue outstanding (as reported by the U.S.
Treasury) at the end of the prior year.

9

D. Initial portfolio allocation
Participants made their asset allocations by specifying portfolio percentages to be
invested in each investment option. For participants who had access to the graphing tool, this
choice was made after they saw the initial instructions screen and clicked through the animated
explanation of the graphing tool. For participants who did not see any historical returns graphs,
the input boxes for the initial portfolio allocation were below the experimental instructions on the
first screen.
Participants could choose among four index funds offered by Northern Funds: the U.S.
Stock Index Fund, the International Equity Index Fund, the Bond Index Fund, and the Money
Market Fund.12 We provided links to each fund’s prospectus. We also informed participants that
the International Equity Index Fund charged a 2% redemption fee on the sale of shares held for
less than thirty days.13 For participants who were shown the historical returns graphs, the
graphing tool remained accessible on the same screen in which the portfolio allocation was
entered in order to aid portfolio decisions. Participants could take as long as they wanted to make
their portfolio decision. We did not (and could not) prevent participants from consulting
information sources available outside of our website.

E. Post-allocation questionnaire
After participants submitted their initial allocation, they completed a post-allocation
questionnaire that elicited information on demographics, self-assessed investment knowledge,
self-assessed confidence about their portfolio allocation, and time preference. We also offered
participants a gamble with a 50% chance of winning $8 and a 50% chance of losing $5. The
outcome of the gamble depended on whether the high temperature at San Francisco International
Airport on a future date, as reported on the National Weather Service website, was an odd or
even integer. We applied the gains and losses from this gamble to the $20 up-front participation
fee. Expected utility maximizers with remotely reasonable risk aversion over large-stakes
gambles should always accept such a small-stakes, positive-expected-value gamble (Rabin,
2000; Barberis, Huang, and Thaler, 2006). Therefore, participants who refuse the gamble are
12

We chose Northern Funds because it was the largest fund family that offered a U.S. equity index fund, an
international equity index fund, a bond index fund, and a money market fund; did not charge sales loads; did not
impose redemption fees on non-international funds; and did not impose frequent trading restrictions.
13
We followed a first-in-first-out (FIFO) convention for determining which shares incurred the redemption fee, as
real-life mutual funds do.

10

particularly likely to be loss averse and prone to engage in mental accounting. Fehr and Goette
(2007) show that in a field experiment on labor supply, only workers who rejected a similar
gamble (50% chance of winning 8 Swiss francs and 50% chance of losing 5 Swiss francs)
exhibited a negative elasticity of effort per hour with respect to an exogenous increase in the
piece wage rate, consistent with their daily labor supply being determined by loss-averse
preferences that are evaluated each day with a reference point around a target daily income level.
Upon finishing the questionnaire, participants were taken to a page that showed their
current investment allocation and total balance. At this point, participants could log out. On
subsequent logins to the site that were not initiated by clicking an e-mailed link (described in
Section I.F), participants would see this portfolio status page first.

F. Ongoing returns viewing treatments
During the one-year duration of the experiment, half of participants received e-mails once
a week with a link they could click to view their previous week’s return. These e-mails were sent
on Saturdays starting at the end of participants’ first full calendar week of participation. If they
clicked the link within a week of receiving the e-mail, we added $1 to their final payment. Thus,
if they clicked all of the e-mailed links they received during the one-year study, they would earn
an additional $52. The other half of participants received e-mails once every 26 weeks with a
link they could click to view their prior six-month return. The dates these biannual e-mails were
sent coincided with when these participants would have otherwise received their 26th and 52nd
e-mails if they had been assigned to receive weekly e-mails. If participants receiving biannual emails clicked the link within a week of receiving the e-mail, we added $20 to their final
payment.14 We offered only $20 per viewing for this group because we anticipated that
participants receiving weekly e-mails would not click on every e-mailed link, and we wanted to
equalize average return-viewing payments across treatments based on our best guess of treatment
compliance.
Within each of the above two treatments, we varied the level of detail participants saw
when they clicked on the e-mailed link. Half of participants saw a screen that showed the return
of each individual asset held. The other half of participants saw a screen that showed only the

14

If an e-mail was sent on day t, the link reported returns through day t, even if the link was not clicked until day t +

n.

11

overall return of their portfolio.15 These return screens were only accessible via the e-mailed link
(i.e., they could not be reached by following links within the study website). If a link in a given
e-mail had already been clicked, clicking it again later would not lead to the return screen; this
was to ensure that participants receiving biannual e-mails did not see the returns screen more
frequently than once every six months.

G. Treatment of interest, dividends, and trades
Dividends and interest were automatically reinvested in the fund that paid them.16 All
participants were free to reallocate their portfolio at any time during the year by logging into
their account and clicking a button on the portfolio status page that took them to a reallocation
screen. The reallocation screen showed the graphing tool relevant for participants’ experimental
condition,17 links to the fund prospectuses, the current percentage allocations across the four
mutual funds, and a note about the international fund redemption fee. Four input boxes allowed
participants to specify a new portfolio allocation. Trades were executed at the next close of the
U.S. markets and could be cancelled by participants up to that time.

H. Exit questionnaire
At the end of the one-year investment period, we administered an exit questionnaire to
participants. We will use in our analysis the questions that elicited beliefs about stock market
return autocorrelations and the effect study participation had on participants’ attention to market
fluctuations. Of the 597 participants, 570 (95%) completed the exit questionnaire.

15

When ongoing returns were reported asset by asset, if the e-mail was sent on day t, only assets held on day t were
included in the returns list. Returns on assets completely liquidated prior to day t were not reported. If a subject
previously held no position in an asset but established a position sometime between e-mail send dates, the asset
return reported was for the full period between e-mails (one week or six months) and did not adjust for the fact that
the asset was held for only part of the time between e-mails.
16
We used Yahoo! Finance for our dividend and price data. On July 1, 2008, Yahoo! erroneously reported a money
market fund dividend of 28.8 cents per dollar invested, which was deposited into 339 of our subjects’ accounts. The
mean excess windfall was 4.5% of portfolio value. After the market close on July 31, 2008, we sent an e-mail to the
affected subjects informing them of the error and (if applicable) how it had affected the July 5 weekly return
reported to them. We let them keep the windfall but reallocated it (at the same time the e-mail was sent) in
accordance with the subjects’ initially chosen asset allocation. This reallocation raised average equity allocations by
1.0 percentage point among subjects receiving weekly e-mails and 2.2 percentage points among subjects receiving
biannual e-mails.
17
The graphs shown to a given subject remained constant throughout the experimental period. That is, they were not
updated in real time to reflect new returns that had been realized since the start of the experiment.

12

II. First aggregation experiment results
A. Participant characteristics
Table 2 displays demographic and financial summary statistics for our participants. This
information was collected in the questionnaire administered immediately after the initial
portfolio allocation. Men slightly outnumber women, and although all ages have substantial
representation in our sample, the young are slightly overrepresented (33% of participants are 35
or younger). Our participants are relatively well-educated, with 56% reporting they hold a
bachelor’s degree or higher. The high average level of education may be due to our request for
participants with annual incomes above $35,000; only 5% of participants report an income less
than that threshold, and the median participant reports an income between $50,001 and $75,000.
Total bank, brokerage, and retirement account assets exceed $75,000 for 38% of our sample, and
29% of the sample reports assets in excess of $100,000. Only 20% of our sample reports holding
no stocks whatsoever in their personal portfolio.
Since the experimental setup was simple (from the perspective of an individual
participant) and the assets were passively managed funds in familiar asset classes, participants
did not necessarily need a long time to make a considered decision. The median participant who
received no historical returns information submitted her initial portfolio allocation 14 minutes
after login, as did the median participant who was only given the historical returns distributions
of portfolios invested 100% in a single asset class. The median participant who was able to see
the historical returns distribution of any portfolio mix took 13 minutes.18

B. Average asset allocations
Participants initially allocated on average 65.7% of their portfolio to equities (with 34.8%
invested in international equities and 30.9% invested in U.S. equities), 18.6% to bonds, and
15.8% to money markets. The relatively high allocation to international equities may be due to
the strong performance of this asset class in the time period immediately preceding the
experiment; the most recent one-year before-tax return reported in the fund prospectus was
25.76% for the international index fund versus 15.56% for the domestic equity index fund. The
average participant made a positive allocation to 3.66 out of the four asset classes.

18

We report medians because of outliers for whom the time between initial login and initial portfolio submission
was extremely long. These subjects likely made their allocations over the course of more than one sitting.

13

C. Return viewing frequency
Table 3 shows that our periodic e-mails to participants were successful at creating
significant variation in the frequency with which they visited the study website and viewed their
returns. During the one-year investment period, participants who received weekly e-mails logged
into the website 60.7 times on average versus only 18.2 times for participants who received
biannual e-mails. Under the weekly e-mail treatment, 45.3 of those 60.7 logins occurred because
participants clicked on an e-mailed link to view the screen with their ongoing returns. Thus,
compliance with the link-clicking requests was high; 87.2% of weekly links sent were clicked
within a week of receipt. In the biannual e-mail treatment, participants clicked 73.8% of links
sent, so they saw the returns screen an average of 1.5 times. Participants in both treatments
logged in about 16 times on average when not prompted by an e-mail.
The extra return viewings by participants who received weekly e-mails did not merely
crowd out or coincide with return viewing that they would have engaged in anyway. In the exit
questionnaire we asked participants, “Did participating in this study make you see the ups and
downs of the market more often than you otherwise would have?” Participants could respond
that participation made them see the fluctuations “more often,” “less often,” or that it had “no
effect.” In the weekly e-mail treatment, 79% of participants reported that participation made
them see the ups and downs of the market more often versus 57% of participants in the biannual
e-mail treatment. Because these responses do not indicate how much more often study
participation made them see returns, this 22% gap (p < 0.01) likely understates the effect that
being in the weekly treatment had on return viewing relative to being in the biannual treatment.
Only 1% of participants in the weekly e-mail treatment and 2% of participants in the biannual email treatment reported that the study caused them to see market fluctuations less often.
The fact that a $1 payment was sufficient to induce participants to view their portfolio
returns almost every week indicates that they did not find the time cost of such viewing to be
high, nor the information revealed by such viewing to be particularly painful, even though the
portfolio returns in this experiment were likely to be quite informative about the returns of their
total financial portfolio. Andries and Haddad (2013) and Pagel (2013) present theoretical models
where people are inattentive to their portfolios because they trade off the benefit of improved
economic choices from better information against the fear of learning negative news. The high

14

return-viewing compliance we obtain from a $1 payment places an upper bound on how strong
this fear can be.

D. Effect of returns aggregation on asset allocations
The main dependent variable in our analysis of how aggregating return information
affects risk taking is the fraction of the experimental portfolio that is invested in equities at the
beginning of the experiment. Any effect of viewing the historical returns graphs would likely be
most easily detected in the initial portfolio allocation, immediately after all participants in the
historical graph conditions were required to view the graphs. Also, the previous literature on
return feedback frequency finds that individuals who know they will receive frequent feedback
reduce their demand for risky assets starting in the very first period of the experiments,
indicating that they prospectively anticipate the disutility from disaggregated ongoing return
disclosure.19 In Section III.B, we show that our results do not meaningfully change when we
consider allocations at later dates.
The first column of Table 4 reports coefficients from OLS regressions where the
dependent variable is the total fraction of the portfolio invested in equities (U.S. plus
international) at the beginning of the experiment and the explanatory variables are treatment
dummies. We find that anticipating biannual rather than weekly e-mails had a 0.0 percentage
point effect on total equity shares. We can reject at the 95% confidence level the hypothesis that
the increase is more than 3.6 percentage points, which would be a treatment effect that is an
order of magnitude smaller than the 28.7 percentage point increase Thaler et al. (1997) find when
participants are shown yearly ongoing returns rather than monthly ongoing returns.20 We also
find that telling participants that they would see ongoing returns consolidated at the portfolio
level rather than separately by each asset insignificantly decreased total equity investment by 1.7
percentage points with a 95% confidence interval of -5.4% to 2.0%.
Being exposed to any historical returns graph significantly raised the initial equity share
by 9.2 to 11.2 percentage points relative to not having access to a historical returns graph; this
suggests that some participants were unaware of how attractive stock returns have been
19

See Gneezy and Potters (1997), Gneezy, Kapteyn, and Potters (2003), Bellemare et al. (2005), and Haigh and List
(2006).
20
It is difficult to compare the magnitudes of our treatment effects with those of Gneezy and Potters (1997), Gneezy,
Kapteyn, and Potters (2003), Bellemare et al. (2005), Haigh and List (2006), and van der Heijden et al. (2012) since
the risky assets in their experiments had binary payoffs.

15

historically. But it does not matter for total equity allocations whether the distributions of oneyear returns or five-year annualized returns are presented. In fact—contrary to the increases in
equity allocations ranging from 19 to 41 percentage points found by Benartzi and Thaler (1999)
when their participants were shown simulated 30-year return distributions rather than one-year
return distributions—our participants who saw the historical five-year return distributions
initially allocated less to equities than participants who saw the historical one-year return
distributions, although the difference is not statistically significant (95% confidence interval
from -5.7% to 1.6%).21 Nor does it seem to matter whether participants were able to see the
historical return distributions of any mix of asset classes instead of only portfolios invested
entirely in a single asset class. Being able to see the mixed asset class distributions is associated
with an insignificant 0.5 percentage point increase in equity allocations (95% confidence interval
from -3.2% to 4.2%).
The subsequent columns of Table 4 show the treatment effect estimates for each of the
four asset classes separately. Less frequent ongoing return viewing and being able to see asset
class mixes in the historical returns graph have no significant effect on allocations to any asset
class. Portfolio-level reporting has a significant effect only on U.S. stock allocations, but with a
negative sign, which is the opposite of what Anagol and Gamble (2013) predict. The most
interesting results are for the one-year versus five-year historical graph treatments. We find that
seeing the five-year graph instead of the one-year graph significantly (p < 0.01) increased
allocations to U.S. stocks by 4.2 percentage points. Thus, we qualitatively replicate the Benartzi
and Thaler (1999) result on aggregation of historical U.S. stock return distributions. However,
aggregation in the graph also significantly (p < 0.01) decreased allocations to international
stocks by 6.3 percentage points, which is why the overall equity allocation did not change
significantly.
Figures 2 and 3 give some insight into why aggregation in the returns graphs decreased
allocations to international stocks. Figure 2 shows returns for each asset class from 1971 to 2007,
sorted from the worst one-year return to the best one-year return, while Figure 3 shows the
analogous figure for five-year annualized returns. The data in these graphs match the data shown
21

Using simulated 30-year returns in the long-horizon condition, as Benartzi and Thaler (1999) did, produces a
starker contrast against one-year returns than the contrast between five-year returns and one-year returns. However,
simulated returns are difficult to explain to ordinary investors and are thus less likely to be employed in a real-world
educational intervention. Reasonable five-year distributions can be computed from our 37-year historical sample
period without resorting to simulation.

16

to participants in the graph treatments, although participants could only see information for one
or two asset classes at a time.
In the one-year returns graph, international stock returns particularly stand out against the
other asset classes in the right tail. The largest international stock return is twice the magnitude
of the largest U.S. stock return, and the second-largest international stock return is 1.6 times the
second-largest U.S. stock return. Everywhere else in the distribution, international stocks have
returns that are mostly similar to U.S. stocks. In contrast, in the five-year return graph, the
international stock returns in the right tail are closer to the U.S. stock returns—1.2 times at the
maximum and 1.5 times at the second-largest value—and they are below U.S. stock returns in
much of the remainder of the distribution. Hence, international stocks look relatively less
attractive in the five-year graph.22
The historical graph aggregation effects contrast with what would be predicted if
participants used valuations produced by a piecewise linear loss-averse value function or
cumulative prospect theory (Tversky and Kahneman, 1992). To perform these calculations, we
assume that: (i) participants who saw one-year graphs perceived each asset class to have 37
possible return realizations corresponding to the 37 annual returns shown in the one-year graphs;
(ii) participants who saw five-year graphs perceived each asset class to have 33 possible return
realizations corresponding to the 33 five-year annualized returns shown in the five-year graphs;
and (iii) each possible realization occurs with equal probability. We use the preference parameter
values estimated by Tversky and Kahneman (1992).23
The first and third columns of Table 5 show the valuation of each asset class by an
individual with piecewise linear loss aversion or cumulative prospect theory preferences,
respectively, who perceives return distributions shown in the one-year return graphs (Panel A) or
the five-year return graphs (Panel B). The valuations of all the asset classes rise in the five-year
22

The salience theory of Bordalo, Gennaioli, and Shleifer (2012) is motivated by intuitions about the
disproportionate influence of salient states that are similar to what we have described here. A document describing
the application of their theory to our experimental setting is available from the authors upon request.
23
In the piecewise linear loss-averse case, the valuation of a lottery is given by ! !! !(!! ), where !! is the
probability of state s occurring, !! is the lottery payout in state s, and ! ! = ! if ! ≥ 0 and ! ! = !" if ! < 0. In
the cumulative prospect theory case, states are ordered such that !! < !! if ! < !. Let –m to –1 be the index values of
states with negative payouts, and 0 to n be the index values of states with weakly positive payouts. The valuation of
a lottery is given by ! !! !(!! ), where !! = ! ! !! + ⋯ + !! − ! ! !!!! + ⋯ + !! if 0 ≤ ! ≤ ! and
!! = ! ! !!! + ⋯ + !! − ! ! !!! + ⋯ + !!!! if −! ≤ ! < 0, ! ! = ! ! if ! ≥ 0 and ! ! = −!(−!)! if
! < 0, ! ! ! = ! ! /[(! ! + 1 − ! ! )!/! ], and ! ! ! = ! ! /[(! ! + 1 − ! ! )!/! ]. Tversky and Kahenman
(1992) estimate α = β = 0.88, λ = 2.25, γ = 0.61, and δ = 0.69.

17

graph condition relative to the one-year graph condition. Since participants cannot increase
allocations to every asset class as they move from the one-year to the five-year graph condition,
valuations relative to the mean asset class valuation within a condition are more relevant for
determining portfolio shares than the absolute valuation. The second and fourth columns show
these relative valuations. Under both piecewise linear loss aversion and cumulative prospect
theory, moving from the one-year return graph to the five-year return graph causes both U.S.
equities and international equities to look relatively more attractive, which is contrary to our
empirical finding that international stock allocations fall when going from the one-year graph to
the five-year graph condition.

III. First aggregation experiment robustness checks
A. Interactions with strength of loss aversion and mental accounting
Aggregating reported returns is thought to increase risk-taking because individuals are
loss averse and engage in mental accounting, and aggregation encourages the integration of
multiple gambles into a single mental account. It is possible, then, that we would find positive
aggregation effects on equity shares among a subset of individuals who are particularly prone to
loss aversion and mental accounting even though there are no positive effects on average over
our entire sample. We identify such individuals as the 47% of our sample who rejected the equal
chance of winning $8 or losing $5, a choice that is difficult to explain in the absence of myopic
loss aversion (Rabin, 2000; Barberis, Huang, and Thaler, 2006).
Table 6 adds interactions between the treatment dummies and a dummy variable for
rejecting the small gamble to the Table 4 total equity share regression. We find no significant
evidence of positive aggregation effects on equity allocations among the participants who reject
the small gamble. The point estimate of the biannual e-mail treatment effect is 2.5 percentage
points higher among gamble rejecters than gamble accepters, but this difference is not
significant. The overall biannual e-mail effect among gamble rejecters, –1.6 + 2.5 = 0.9
percentage points, is not significantly different from zero. Reporting portfolio-level returns
causes gamble rejecters’ equity allocations to change by –2.9 + 2.5 = –0.4 percentage points, but
this difference too is not significant. Gamble rejecters who saw the five-year graphs allocated a
statistically insignificant 6.4 + 6.0 – (12.2 – 1.6) = 1.8 percentage points more to equities than
gamble rejecters who saw the one-year graph, and gamble rejecters who were able to see graphed

18

return distributions of asset class mixes allocated an insignificant –1.4 + 3.7 = 2.3 percentage
points more to equities than gamble rejecters who could see only single asset class return
distributions.

B. Do aggregation effects emerge with a delay?
The participants in the experiments conducted by Gneezy and Potters (1997), Gneezy,
Kapteyn, and Potters (2003), Bellemare et al. (2005), and Haigh and List (2006) did not need to
first experience disaggregated ongoing return disclosure before reducing their portfolio risk.
Instead, they reduced their demand for risky assets starting in the very first period of the
experiments. It is nevertheless possible that our participants did not initially realize how
disaggregated ongoing return disclosure would affect their utility and instead learned gradually
as they became exposed to these returns. This would lead to a relative decrease in the
disaggregated groups’ portfolio risk as the experiment progressed. Our participants were not
inactive in their experimental accounts; the median number of days on which a participant made
a reallocation is 2, and the average is 4.6.
We test for the gradual emergence of a positive aggregation effect on risk-taking by using
the total equity share halfway into the experimental period as the dependent variable in the first
column of Table 7, and the total equity share at the end of the experiment as the dependent
variable in the second column. Equity share at the halfway point is measured eight days after
participants receiving weekly e-mails got their 26th e-mailed returns-checking link, and eight
days after participants receiving biannual e-mails got their first returns-checking link.24
The coefficient estimates indicate that throughout the investment period, reporting
ongoing returns on an aggregated basis did not significantly increase portfolio risk-taking. The
point estimate of the biannual e-mail treatment effect grows slightly from 0.0 percentage points
at the beginning of the investment period (in Table 4) to 2.4 percentage points at the halfway
point, and it flips sign to –1.4 percentage points at the end of the experiment. The portfolio-level
return reporting treatment effect also attenuates from –1.7 percentage points (in Table 4) to an
insignificant 0.1 percentage points at the halfway point and an insignificant –1.2 percentage
24

By measuring allocations at this point, we capture the allocations of subjects receiving both weekly and biannual
e-mails right after they have been induced to see their returns on the website via an e-mailed link. It may be
particularly convenient to reallocate one’s experimental portfolio right after clicking on the e-mailed link. Therefore,
biannual subjects have had a chance to adjust their portfolios in response to market movements and the reporting
regime via the same convenient channel available to weekly subjects each week for the prior six months.

19

points at the end of the experiment. Although having seen historical returns graphs continues to
raise equity share by about 7 to 9 percentage points through the remainder of the experiment, it
still does not matter whether one-year or five-year return distributions were shown. Those seeing
five-year graphs hold 1.7 percentage points more in equities than those seeing one-year graphs at
the halfway mark, and 1.5 percentage points less at the end of the experiment, but the differences
are not significant. The effect of having a historical returns graphing tool that could show
distributions for asset class mixes, which was 0.5 percentage points at the beginning of the
experiment, increases slightly to an insignificant 1.5 percentage points halfway through the
experiment and flips sign to an insignificant -1.0 percentage point at the end of the experiment.

C. Are our aggregation effects null because of negative expected equity returns?
Could our null effects arise because some participants believed that the expected return of
equities was negative due to the market’s drop prior to the experiment? The same logic that
causes gambles with positive expected returns to appear more attractive under aggregation
causes gambles with negative expected returns to appear less attractive under aggregation.
The fact that our participants initially allocated an average of 65.7% of their portfolio to
equities suggests that they did not in fact believe that the expected return on equities was
negative. We further test this story by running regressions of initial equity share on the treatment
dummies and their interactions with a dummy for a participant believing that market returns
follow a random walk. The pre-experiment market decline is unlikely to cause somebody who
believes in random walk returns to forecast a negative equity premium. We classify a participant
as believing in random walk returns if he said in the exit questionnaire that neither a 10%
increase nor a 10% decrease in the stock market last month should affect one’s forecast of stock
market returns next month. Table 8 shows these regression results. Contrary to the hypothesis
that our treatment effects are attenuated by the market’s drop prior to the experiment, we find no
significantly positive aggregation treatment effects among those who believe in random walk
returns.

IV. Second aggregation experiment design
The results of our first experiment can be reconciled with the Benartzi and Thaler (1999)
finding that seeing longer-horizon historical U.S. stock return distributions increases investment

20

in U.S. equities, as we replicate their result on U.S. equity investments, but we also find that this
result does not generalize to other return distributions. On the other hand, our first experiment
offers no reconciliation with the previous literature’s findings that more aggregated disclosure of
ongoing returns increases risk-taking. This inconsistency is especially surprising for the return
viewing frequency treatment, since many different experimenters have replicated this effect.
Our first experiment is not well-suited to identify what causes the return viewing
frequency effect to disappear, since many aspects of the experimental design differ from the
previous literature. In this section, we describe a follow-up experiment that starts with the classic
Gneezy and Potters (1997) design and modifies it step by step to move closer to the design of our
first experiment.25 Our objective is to see which modifications eliminate the return viewing
frequency effect.
Our follow-up experiment allows us to study five dimensions along which our first
experiment differs from the Gneezy and Potters (1997) experiment:
1. The risky asset in Gneezy and Potters (1997) has an extreme binary distribution: a 2/3
probability of a -100% net return and a 1/3 probability of a 250% net return (i.e., the
investment amount plus 2.5 times the investment amount would be returned to the
participant). Such return realizations do not resemble the historical returns of the
diversified asset classes in our first experiment.
2. The risky asset in Gneezy and Potters (1997) is an artificial laboratory asset with which
participants were unlikely to have had prior experience. Participants are much more
likely to have contextual knowledge about the real financial assets offered in our first
experiment, which could have caused them to apply context-specific heuristics such as
“Allocate 100 minus my age to stocks,” blunting the effect of aggregation manipulations
on portfolio choices.
3. The risky asset realizations in Gneezy and Potters (1997) were shown within the course
of a single 40-minute experimental session. The returns in our first experiment were
revealed over the course of one year.
4. At the beginning of each round of Gneezy and Potters (1997), participants were given an
endowment, and they could invest any portion of this endowment in the risky asset. After
25

Like other authors in the myopic loss aversion literature, we choose to base these experiments on the Gneezy and
Potters (1997) design rather than the Thaler et al. (1997) design because the former is a purer demonstration of
myopic loss aversion, while the latter incorporates elements of memory and inference as well.

21

the risky asset’s outcome was seen, participants were given a fresh endowment, and
earnings from previous rounds were not available to invest in the current round.
Therefore, each return-viewing event may have also been perceived as a portfolio
liquidation event. In contrast, when participants viewed returns in our first experiment,
they were not forced to liquidate their portfolios. In the realization utility models of
Barberis and Xiong (2009, 2012), investors receive gain-loss utility from returns only
when they sell a security, not when they view its returns. Therefore, the return viewing
frequency effect of Gneezy and Potters (1997) may really be a liquidation frequency
effect.
5. Gneezy and Potters ran their experiment on Tilburg University students, whereas our first
experiment was run on a non-student population.

For our second experiment, we recruited experimental participants in two waves, the first
in Spring 2013 and the second in Fall 2013 after we had analyzed the results of the Spring 2013
sample. Participants were paid a $5 participation fee plus any experimental earnings. The first
wave consisted of students in the Harvard Decision Science Laboratory subject pool, making the
sample closely comparable to the Tilburg University students used by Gneezy and Potters
(1997). The second wave included both students and non-students in this subject pool, as well as
participants recruited by distributing flyers on the Harvard campus. Only 38% of this second
wave were full-time students. The S&P 500 rose 16.0% in 2012 and 32.4% in 2013, so the
second experiment occurred in a bull market environment.
Figure 4 summarizes the design of our second experiment. Participants in the first wave
participated in both an in-lab study and a post-lab study. Participants were randomly assigned to
one of four in-lab conditions, and independently randomly assigned to one of four post-lab
conditions. Within each condition, each participant was randomly assigned to a high-frequency
viewing treatment or a low-frequency viewing treatment. Participants in the second wave
participated only in the in-lab study. The online appendix contains the experimental instructions.
The first in-lab condition was a direct replication of Gneezy and Potters (1997).
Participants made choices for nine rounds. Participants in the high-frequency treatment received
a $2 endowment each round and could bet any amount from $0 to $2 in a gamble that had a 2/3
probability of a -100% net return and a 1/3 probability of a 250% net return. Participants kept

22

any amount that was not bet. Gamble earnings and amounts not bet from previous rounds could
not be bet in the current round. Participants knew that the outcome of each round’s gamble
would be revealed to them immediately after each round. Participants in the low-frequency
treatment also received $2 per round, but they had to make investment decisions for three rounds
at a time. For example, in round 1, they chose how much they would invest in rounds 1 through
3. Per-round investment amounts were constrained to be the same within each block of three.
Participants knew that they would learn the outcomes of the three gambles for each block
simultaneously instead of one by one.
The second in-lab condition, which we call the “scaled Gneezy-Potters” condition,
modified the first in-lab condition by scaling down the percentage returns of the risky asset to a
2/3 chance of a -10% return and a 1/3 chance of a 25% return, which is within the realistic range
of one-year returns on a diversified stock market investment. To keep the maximum possible
dollars at risk the same, we increased the first period endowment to $20. In order to avoid
creating significant wealth effects, we did not give participants a fresh $20 endowment each
round. Instead, their balance at the end of round t constituted the maximum allowable investment
amount in round t + 1. Participants kept whatever balance remained at the end of round 9.
Because the total balance available to bet changed from round to round, we had participants
specify what percent of their endowment they wished to bet, rather than an absolute dollar
amount as in the first condition. In the low-frequency treatment, this percentage was required to
be constant within each three-round block.
The third in-lab condition replaced the binary risky asset with an asset whose return
distribution matched the historical U.S. stock market distribution. We explicitly labeled this asset
the “stock market” in the instructions given to participants. Participants were told that each round
corresponded to one month, and that we would randomly select a starting month between
January 1923 and January 2010, with each month having an equal chance of being selected. If,
for example, the starting month was March 1954, then the round 1 stock market return would be
the actual March 1954 U.S. stock market return, the round 2 stock market return would be the
actual April 1954 U.S. stock market return, etc. The instructions showed participants a histogram
of historical monthly stock returns from 1923 to 2012.26 There were 18 total rounds, and

26

These histograms had the return magnitude on the horizontal axis and the percent of months with this return on
the vertical axis. These differ from the historical return graphs shown in our first experiment.

23

participants began with a $20 endowment. In the high-frequency treatment, participants made an
allocation choice at the beginning of each round. The instructions said, “At the end of each
round, you will learn how much money you gained or lost and your resulting balance. Your stock
market investment will then be completely sold, and you must decide what percent of your total
balance you wish to invest in the stock market for the next round.” Therefore, we retained the
coincidence of return viewing and portfolio liquidation in this condition. At the end of each
round, participants were told, “Your stock market investment has been completely sold.”
Although this liquidation has no economic meaning, it may be psychologically meaningful.27 A
participant’s experimental earnings equaled her balance at the end of round 18. In the lowfrequency treatment, participants made portfolio choices at the beginning of rounds 1, 7, and 13,
and they saw only their cumulated six-round returns at the end of rounds 6, 12, and 18. The sixround frequency matches the frequency of paid return viewings in our first experiment’s
biannual viewing treatment. Portfolios were not rebalanced within each six-round block, so the
percent invested in stock would move with the risky asset’s return, but the instructions told
participants that their portfolio would be liquidated every six rounds.
The fourth in-lab condition was identical to the third, except that we did not force
liquidation each time a return was viewed. The instructions said that after seeing returns, “you
will have the option of holding onto your stock market investment from the last round or
changing the percent of your balance invested in the stock market.” The computer screen
eliciting the participant’s investment choice showed two radio buttons labeled “Keep current
stock holdings” and “Change stock holdings.” If the participant chose the second button, she was
asked to specify what percent she wished to invest in the stock market.
The four post-lab conditions mirrored the in-lab conditions, except that the amount of real
time that elapsed between rounds was one week. In the Gneezy-Potters replication condition,
there were three post-lab rounds. At the beginning of the first round, which occurred at the end
of the laboratory session, participants in the high-frequency treatment chose an amount between
$0 and $2 to bet in an asset that had a 2/3 chance of a -100% return and a 1/3 chance of a 250%
return. The investment principal was taken from their experimental earnings in the in-lab session

27

Weber and Camerer (1998) find that when shares are automatically sold at the end of each period in an
experimental market, subjects’ disposition effect is greatly reduced even though they can buy their previous position
back costlessly, rendering the liquidation economically meaningless.

24

excluding their $5 participation fee.28 At the end of each subsequent week, participants received
an email with the outcome of the gamble and a link to an online survey. The survey asked the
participant to enter the result of the gamble (to confirm that she had seen it) and how much she
wished to bet in the next round. If the participant filled out the survey within five days of the
email being sent, we added $1 to her final payment. The next round’s bet amount equaled the
previous round’s bet amount for participants who did not fill out the survey within five days. The
third and final survey did not ask for a bet amount. After the last survey, we mailed participants a
payment equal to their final balance plus any survey completion payments they earned.
Participants in the low-frequency treatment in the Gneezy-Potters replication condition
chose a per-round gamble amount that was constrained to be identical across post-laboratory
rounds. The cumulative outcome was only revealed to them in an email sent three weeks in the
future. The email also contained a link to a survey that asked what the result of the gambles was.
If participants filled out the survey within five days of the email being sent, we added $3 to their
final payment.
The second post-lab condition modified the asset to have a 2/3 chance of a -10% return
and a 1/3 chance of a 25% return. Participants specified what percent of their ending in-lab
balance (which does not include their $5 participation fee) they wished to bet, and balances
rolled over from round to round, as in the second in-lab condition. High-frequency treatment
participants chose their bet percentages each week, while low-frequency treatment participants
chose one bet percentage that applied to all three rounds.
The third post-lab condition lasted for six weekly rounds, and the risky asset’s returns
were drawn from one historical monthly U.S. stock market return sequence, as in the third in-lab
condition. Participants in the high-frequency condition were told that their investment would be
completely liquidated at the end of each round, and they would have to choose a new allocation
each week. These participants were paid $1 for completing each of six post-lab surveys about
their realized return and new portfolio choice. Participants in the low-frequency condition were
only told their six-round return at the end of six weeks, and they were paid $6 for completing one
survey at that time.

28

For subjects who earned less than $6 in the in-lab session, the bet amount was limited to one-third of their
earnings.

25

The fourth post-lab condition was like the third, except it did not force liquidation at the
end of each round in the high-frequency treatment. The post-lab surveys allowed participants to
click a radio button to keep their current stock holdings. The low-frequency treatment was
identical to the low-frequency treatment in the third post-lab condition.

V. Second aggregation experiment results
We recruited 320 participants in Wave 1 and another 320 participants in Wave 2. This
allowed us to assign 80 participants to each in-lab condition and 80 participants to each post-lab
condition. Based on the means and standard deviations reported in Gneezy and Potters (1997), a
sample size of 80 gives us 79.9% power to detect an effect of their reported magnitude at 5%
significance in the replication condition.
Panel A of Table 9 reports regression results from the in-lab conditions for Wave 1
participants. The dependent variable is the percent of the available endowment that is invested in
the risky asset in each round. We find that we do not obtain the Gneezy and Potters (1997)
viewing frequency result in our replication condition. The infrequent return viewing treatment
dummy coefficient is 4.8%, which has the predicted sign but is insignificant. Scaling the risky
asset payoffs down by a factor of ten causes the infrequent return viewing treatment effect to flip
sign, so that infrequent viewing actually reduces risky asset investment by 7.8 percentage points,
although this effect is not significant. Further modifying the risky asset payoffs to match the
stock market return distribution does not resurrect the Gneezy and Potters effect, whether
portfolio liquidation is forced upon return viewing or not. The treatment coefficients in these last
two conditions are insignificant.
The Wave 1 in-lab results raised a question: Is our failure to find a viewing frequency
effect in the replication condition the result of Type II error, or is the original Gneezy and Potters
(1997) result a Type I error and the subsequent successful replications in the literature are due to
publication bias? To answer this question, we re-ran the in-lab conditions on Wave 2
participants. Panel B of Table 9 shows that in this second sample, viewing returns less frequently
did increase risk-taking robustly in the replication condition. The effect magnitude is 26.9
percentage points, which is much larger than the 16.9 percentage point effect reported by Gneezy
and Potters (1997) and highly significant (p < 0.0001). If we pool the Wave 1 and Wave 2
samples, the effect is a 15.8 percentage point increase that is significant at the 1% level (p =

26

0.002). We believe that our failure to replicate in Wave 1 was due to Type II error, which we
expected to occur with 20% probability. In the scaled-down Gneezy-Potters condition and the
two stock conditions, we continue to find no significant effects, and each point estimate has the
opposite sign of what we found in Wave 1.29 Therefore, these three treatment effects appear to be
truly zero.
In Table 10, we report regression results from the post-lab conditions, which were run
only on Wave 1 participants. These regressions are analogous to the in-lab regressions in Table
9. In none of the four conditions do we find that infrequent return viewing significantly affects
the fraction of the available endowment invested in the risky asset. The null effect in the post-lab
Gneezy-Potters replication condition is not simply due to participants in the Wave 1 in-lab
replication condition being less susceptible to infrequent return viewing. Because assignment to
the post-lab conditions was independent of assignment to the in-lab conditions, 75% of
participants in the post-lab replication condition were not in the in-lab replication condition.
Our follow-up experimental results indicate that the effect of return viewing frequency on
risk-taking appears to depend on the risky asset having extreme percentage returns and the
returns being viewed immediately after the portfolio choice is made. Scaling down the risky
asset’s percentage returns while keeping the total dollars participants can put at risk constant
causes the viewing frequency effect to disappear, as does creating a one-week or longer delay
between when the choice is made and the first portfolio return is shown. These findings suggest
that both the distribution of the asset returns and the experimental time horizon are responsible
for the null effects in our first experiment. Because the return viewing effect in the in-lab
replication condition is stronger in Wave 2, which contained many more non-student participants
than Wave 1, and neither wave showed significant return-viewing effects in the other three in-lab
conditions, the null results of our first experiment do not appear to be driven by the fact that its
participants are not students.

VI. Conclusion
Many financial behaviors are difficult to explain unless loss aversion and/or mental
accounting are important determinants of economic choices. Such behaviors include aversion to
small-stakes risks with positive expected values (Rabin, 2000; Rabin and Thaler, 2001), the
29

Pooling Waves 1 and 2 does not qualitatively change the significance of these three treatment effects.

27

tendency to sell stocks with paper gains and hold stocks with paper losses (Shefrin and Statman,
1985; Odean, 1998), and the failure to consider the asset allocation of non-salient accounts when
making allocation decisions in a salient account (Choi, Laibson, and Madrian, 2009). Myopic
loss aversion has also been proposed as a resolution of the equity premium puzzle (Benartzi and
Thaler, 1995; Barberis, Huang, and Santos, 2001; Barberis, Huang, and Thaler, 2006).
It seems plausible that the boundaries of investors’ mental accounts could be shifted by
changing information disclosure in order to increase risky asset demand. The experimental
evidence to date has found that indeed, reporting only aggregated outcomes of multiple gambles
increases participants’ willingness to take risks. However, these previous experiments abstracted
away from certain features of the real-world investment environment that may moderate such
effects outside the laboratory. In particular, previous experiments have all taken place within a
single laboratory session and have used laboratory assets. In order to gauge the potential impact
of disclosure policy, our first experiment had participants invest in real financial assets over the
course of an entire year.
We find that disclosing returns at a more aggregated level does not increase portfolio
risk-taking. Further analysis and a second experiment indicate that the effect of aggregated return
disclosure is sensitive to the distribution of the risky asset’s returns and the amount of time that
elapses between the portfolio choice and the return disclosure. Aggregated return disclosure does
not appear to be a policy lever that can be used by financial institutions to robustly affect average
portfolio risk choices.
References
Anagol, Santosh, and Keith Jacks Gamble, 2013. “Does presenting investment results asset by
asset lower risk taking?” Journal of Behavioral Finance 14, pp. 276-300.
Andries, Marianne, and Valentin Haddad, 2013. “Information aversion.” Princeton University
working paper.
Barberis, Nicholas, Ming Huang, and Tano Santos, 2001. “Prospect theory and asset prices.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, pp. 1-53.
Barberis, Nicholas, Ming Huang, and Richard Thaler, 2006. “Individual preferences, monetary
gambles, and stock market participation: A case for narrow framing.” American
Economic Review 96, pp. 1069-1090.

28

Barberis, Nicholas, and Wei Xiong, 2009. “What drives the disposition effect? An analysis of a
long-standing preference-based explanation.” Journal of Finance 64, pp. 751-784.
Barberis, Nicholas, and Wei Xiong, 2012. “Realization utility.” Journal of Financial Economics
104, pp. 251-271.
Bellemare, Charles, Michaela Krause, Sabine Kröger, and Chendi Zhang, 2005. “Myopic loss
aversion: Information flexibility vs. investment flexibility.” Economics Letters 87, pp.
319-324.
Benartzi, Shlomo, and Richard H. Thaler, 1995. “Myopic loss aversion and the equity premium
puzzle.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 110, pp. 73-92.
Benartzi, Shlomo, and Richard H. Thaler, 1999. “Risk aversion or myopia? Choices in repeated
gambles and retirement investments.” Management Science 45, pp. 364-381.
Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer, 2012. “Salience theory of choice under
risk.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 127, pp. 1243-1285.
Choi, James J., David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian, 2009. “Mental accounting in portfolio
choice: Evidence from a flypaper effect.” American Economic Review 99, pp. 2085-2095.
Choi, James J., David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian, 2010. “Why does the law of one price
fail? An experiment on index mutual funds.” Review of Financial Studies 23, pp. 14051432.
Eriksen, Kristoffer W., and Ola Kvaløy, 2010a. “Do financial advisors exhibit myopic loss
aversion?” Financial Markets and Portfolio Management 24, pp. 159-170.
Eriksen, Kristoffer W., and Ola Kvaløy, 2010b. “Myopic investment management.” Review of
Finance 14, pp. 521-542.
Fehr, Ernst, and Lorenz Goette, 2007. “Do workers work more if wages are high? Evidence from
a randomized field experiment.” American Economic Review 97, pp. 298-317.
Fellner, Gerlinde, and Matthias Sutter, 2009. “Causes, consequences, and cures of myopic loss
aversion — an experimental investigation.” Economic Journal 119, pp. 900-916.
Gneezy, Uri, and Jan Potters, 1997. “An experiment on risk taking and evaluation periods.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, pp. 631-645.
Gneezy, Uri, Arie Kapteyn, and Jan Potters, 2003. “Evaluation periods and asset prices in a
market experiment.” Journal of Finance 58, pp. 821-837.
Guiso, Luigi, 2009. “A test of narrow framing and its origin.” EUI Working Paper ECO 2009/02.

29

Haigh, Michael S., and John A. List, 2005. “Do professional traders exhibit myopic loss
aversion? An experimental analysis.” Journal of Finance 60, pp. 523-534.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky, 1979. “Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under
risk.” Econometrica 47, pp. 263-292.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky, 1984. “Choice, values, and frames.” American
Psychologist 39, pp. 341-350.
Langer, Thomas, and Martin Weber, 2005. “Myopic prospect theory vs. myopic loss aversion:
how general is the phenomenon?” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 56, pp.
25-38.
Langer, Thomas, and Martin Weber, 2008. “Does commitment or feedback influence myopic
loss aversion? An experimental analysis.” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization
67, pp. 810-819.
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell, 2009. “How ordinary consumers make complex
economic decisions: Financial literacy and retirement readiness.” Dartmouth College
working paper.
Moher, Ester, and Derek J. Koehler, 2010. “Bracketing effects on risk tolerance: Generalizability
and underlying mechanisms.” Judgment and Decision Making 5, pp. 339-346.
Odean, Terrance, 1998. “Are investors reluctant to realize their losses?” Journal of Finance 53,
pp. 1775-1798.
Pagel, Michaela, 2013. “A news-utility theory for inattention and rebalancing in portfolio
choice.” Columbia University working paper.
Rabin, Matthew, 2000. “Risk aversion and expected-utility theory: A calibration theorem.”
Econometrica 68, pp. 1281-1292.
Rabin, Matthew, and Richard H. Thaler, 2001. “Anomalies: Risk aversion.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 15, pp. 219-232.
Shefrin, Hersh, and Meir Statman, 1985. “The disposition to sell winners too early and ride
losers too long.” Journal of Finance 40, pp. 777-790.
Sutter, Matthias, 2007. “Are teams prone to myopic loss aversion? An experimental study on
individual versus team investment behavior.” Economics Letters 97, pp. 128-132.
Thaler, Richard H., 1985. “Mental Accounting and Consumer Choice.” Marketing Science, 4(3):
199-214.

30

Thaler, Richard H., 1990. “Saving, Fungibility and Mental Accounts.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 4(1): 193-205.
Thaler, Richard H., 1999. “Mental Accounting Matters.” Journal of Behavioral Decision
Making, 12(3): 183-206.
Thaler, Richard H., Amos Tversky, Daniel Kahneman, and Alan Schwartz, 1997. “The effect of
myopia and loss aversion on risk taking: an experimental test.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 112, pp. 647-661.
Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman, 1992. “Advances in prospect theory: Cumulative
representation of uncertainty.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 5, pp. 297-323.
van der Heijden, Eline, Tobias J. Klein, Wieland Müller, and Jan Potters, 2012. “Framing effects
and impatience: Evidence from a large scale experiment.” Journal of Economic Behavior
& Organization 84, pp. 701-711.
Weber, Martin, and Colin F. Camerer, 1998. “The disposition effect in securities trading: an
experimental analysis.” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 33, pp. 167-184.
Zeisberger, Stefan, Thomas Langer, and Martin Weber, 2014. “Do changes in reporting
frequency really influence investors’ risk taking behavior? Myopic loss aversion
revisited.” University of Zurich working paper.

31

Table 1. Sample Size in Each Experimental Cell in the First Experiment
This table reports the number of subjects that were assigned to each experimental cell in the first
experiment. Panel A contains cells where ongoing returns were reported only at the aggregated
portfolio level. Panel B contains cells where ongoing returns were reported separately by each
asset held by subjects.
Panel A: Ongoing returns reported at portfolio level
Return viewing inducement frequency
Historical return graph shown
Weekly
Biannual
None
60
60
1-year returns, single asset classes
30
30
5-year returns, single asset classes
29
30
1-year returns, portfolio mixes allowed
30
30
5-year returns, portfolio mixes allowed
30
30
Panel B: Ongoing returns reported separately by asset
Return viewing inducement frequency
Historical return graph shown
Weekly
Biannual
1-year returns, single asset classes
30
29
5-year returns, single asset classes
30
30
1-year returns, portfolio mixes allowed
30
30
5-year returns, portfolio mixes allowed
30
29

Table 2. Subject Characteristics in the First Experiment
Percent male

56%

Age
25
26-35
36-45
46-55
55-65
66

2%
31%
22%
19%
13%
13%

Education
Some high school
High school graduate
Some college
Associate’s degree
Bachelor’s degree
Some graduate school
Graduate degree

1%
10%
23%
10%
28%
7%
21%

Annual household income
< $35,000
$35,000 - $50,000
$50,001 - $75,000
$75,001 - $100,000
> $100,000
Prefer not to answer

5%
21%
29%
19%
21%
5%

Financial assets in bank,
brokerage, and retirement
accounts
< $25,000
$25,000 - $50,000
$50,001 - $75,000
$75,001 - $100,000
> $100,000
Prefer not to answer

27%
13%
10%
9%
29%
12%

Percent of outside financial
assets invested in stocks at
beginning of experiment
0%
1 - 25%
26 - 50%
51 - 75%
76 - 100%
Prefer not to answer

20%
32%
17%
15%
8%
9%

Table 3. Website Visits After Initial Allocation in the First Experiment
This table shows, by return viewing inducement frequency, the average number of total visits to
the study website per subject, the average total viewings of the returns screens per subject, and
the average fraction of the available returns screens that were viewed by each subject. Total
visits to the website includes any visit that involved viewing a returns screen. Standard errors are
in parentheses.

Total visits to website

Return viewing inducement frequency
Weekly
Biannual
60.7
18.2
(2.6)
(1.9)

p-value of
difference
0.000

Viewings of returns
screens from e-mail links

45.3
(0.7)

1.5
(0.0)

0.000

Fraction of possible e-mail link
returns screens viewed

87.2%
(1.9)

73.8%
(2.5)

0.000

Table 4. Aggregation Effects on Initial Allocations in the First Experiment
The dependent variable is the percent of the portfolio allocated to equities in total (domestic plus
international) or to each asset class at the start of the experiment. Biannual e-mail is a dummy for
whether the subject was sent an e-mail with a link to his ongoing returns biannually. Portfoliolevel return reporting is a dummy for whether the subject’s ongoing returns were reported only
at the consolidated portfolio level. 1-year graph is a dummy for whether the subject was shown
graphs with one-year historical returns. 5-year graph is a dummy for whether the subject was
shown graphs with five-year historical returns. Asset class mixes shown is a dummy for whether
the subject saw a historical returns graphing tool that could show distributions of arbitrary asset
class mixes. Point estimates from an OLS regression are shown, with standard errors in
parentheses.

Biannual e-mail
Portfolio-level
return reporting
1-year graph
5-year graph
Asset class mixes
shown in graph
Constant
Sample size

Total equity
-0.0
(1.8)
-1.7
(1.9)
11.2**
(2.6)
9.2**
(2.6)
0.5
(1.9)
58.3**
(2.8)
597

U.S. stock
-0.5
(1.5)
-4.1*
(1.6)
1.8
(2.3)
6.0**
(2.3)
2.4
(1.6)
29.6**
(2.4)
597

* Significant at 5% level. ** Significant at 1% level.

Int’l stock
0.5
(1.6)
2.4
(1.8)
9.4**
(2.5)
3.1
(2.6)
-1.9
(1.8)
28.8**
(2.6)
597

Bonds
0.5
(1.1)
0.1
(1.2)
-4.4**
(1.7)
-3.2
(1.7)
-0.2
(1.2)
21.3**
(1.8)
597

Money
market
-0.5
(1.1)
1.6
(1.2)
-6.9**
(1.7)
-6.0**
(1.7)
-0.3
(1.2)
20.3**
(1.8)
597

Table 5. Asset Class Valuations Under Piecewise Linear Loss Aversion
and Cumulative Prospect Theory
The first and third columns of this table show the valuation of each asset class by an agent that
has either piecewise linear loss-averse utility or cumulative prospect theory utility. In Panel A,
this valuation is done assuming the agent perceives that each historical one-year return
realization of the asset class, as shown in the one-year historical return graphs, is equally likely
in the future. In Panel B, the agent perceives that each historical five-year annualized return
realization of the asset class, as shown in the five-year historical return graphs, is equally likely
in the future. The second and fourth columns show the deviation of each asset class’s valuation
from the mean asset class valuation in its graph type × utility function cell.

U.S. stocks
Int’l stocks
Bonds
Money market

U.S. stocks
Int’l stocks
Bonds
Money market

Panel A: One-year return graph
Piecewise linear loss aversion
Cumulative prospect theory
Deviation from
Deviation from
Valuation
Valuation
mean valuation
mean valuation
2.9%
0.7%
-2.5%
-2.3%
3.6%
1.3%
0.7%
0.8%
1.8%
-0.5%
0.9%
1.0%
0.7%
-1.5%
0.3%
0.5%
Panel B: Five-year return graph
Piecewise linear loss aversion
Cumulative prospect theory
Deviation from
Deviation from
Valuation
mean valuation
Valuation
mean valuation
6.0%
1.9%
5.5%
1.3%
6.3%
2.1%
7.3%
3.1%
3.3%
-0.9%
2.9%
-1.3%
1.1%
-3.1%
1.1%
-3.1%

Table 6. Aggregation Effects on Initial Equity Allocation
Interacted with Loss Aversion and Mental Accounting in the First Experiment
The dependent variable is the percent of the portfolio allocated to equities in total (domestic plus
international) at the start of the experiment. Biannual e-mail is a dummy for whether the subject
was sent an e-mail with a link to his ongoing returns biannually. Portfolio-level return reporting
is a dummy for whether the subject’s ongoing returns were reported only at the consolidated
portfolio level. 1-year graph is a dummy for whether the subject was shown graphs with oneyear historical returns. 5-year graph is a dummy for whether the subject was shown graphs with
five-year historical returns. Asset class mixes shown is a dummy for whether the subject saw a
historical returns graphing tool that could show distributions of arbitrary asset class mixes. Loss
averse is a dummy for whether the subject turned down the win $8/lose $5 gamble we offered.
Point estimates from an OLS regression are shown, with standard errors in parentheses.
Biannual e-mail
Biannual e-mail ×
Loss averse
Portfolio-level return reporting
Portfolio-level return
reporting × Loss averse
1-year graph
1-year graph × Loss averse
5-year graph
5-year graph × Loss averse
Asset class mixes shown in graph
Asset class mixes shown in graph
× Loss averse
Loss averse
Constant
Sample size
* Significant at 5% level. ** Significant at 1% level.

-1.6
(2.3)
2.5
(3.4)
-2.9
(2.6)
2.5
(3.7)
12.2**
(3.7)
-1.6
(5.3)
6.4
(3.7)
6.0
(5.3)
-1.4
(2.6)
3.7
(3.7)
-7.8
(5.5)
62.3**
(3.9)
597

Table 7. Aggregation Effects on Later Equity Allocations in the First Experiment
The dependent variable is the percent of the portfolio allocated to equities in total (domestic plus
international) 27 weeks into experimental participation or at the end of the experiment. Biannual
e-mail is a dummy for whether the subject was sent an e-mail with a link to his ongoing returns
biannually. Portfolio-level return reporting is a dummy for whether the subject’s ongoing returns
were reported only at the consolidated portfolio level. 1-year graph is a dummy for whether the
subject was shown graphs with one-year historical returns. 5-year graph is a dummy for whether
the subject was shown graphs with five-year historical returns. Asset class mixes shown is a
dummy for whether the subject saw a historical returns graphing tool that could show
distributions of arbitrary asset class mixes. Point estimates from an OLS regression are shown,
with standard errors in parentheses.

Biannual e-mail
Portfolio-level return reporting
1-year graph
5-year graph
Asset class mixes shown in graph
Constant
Sample size
* Significant at 5% level. ** Significant at 1% level.

27 weeks
2.4
(2.1)
0.1
(2.4)
7.4*
(3.4)
9.1**
(3.4)
1.5
(2.4)
48.7**
(3.5)
597

Final
-1.4
(2.2)
-1.2
(2.4)
9.0**
(3.4)
7.5*
(3.4)
-1.0
(2.4)
54.6**
(3.6)
597

Table 8. Aggregation Effects on Initial Equity Allocation
Interacted with Belief in Random Walk Returns in the First Experiment
The dependent variable is the percent of the portfolio allocated to equities in total (domestic plus
international) at the start of the experiment. Biannual e-mail is a dummy for whether the subject
was sent an e-mail with a link to his ongoing returns biannually. Portfolio-level return reporting
is a dummy for whether the subject’s ongoing returns were reported only at the consolidated
portfolio level. 1-year graph is a dummy for whether the subject was shown graphs with oneyear historical returns. 5-year graph is a dummy for whether the subject was shown graphs with
five-year historical returns. Asset class mixes shown is a dummy for whether the subject saw a
historical returns graphing tool that could show distributions of arbitrary asset class mixes.
Random walk is a dummy for whether the subject believes that neither a 10% increase in the
market in one month nor a 10% decrease in the market in one month should affect one’s forecast
of the market’s return next month. Point estimates from an OLS regression are shown, with
standard errors in parentheses.
Biannual e-mail
Biannual e-mail ×
Random walk
Portfolio-level return reporting
Portfolio-level return
reporting × Random walk
1-year graph
1-year graph × Random walk
5-year graph
5-year graph × Random walk
Asset class mixes shown in graph
Asset class mixes shown in graph
× Random walk
Random walk
Constant
Sample size
* Significant at 5% level. ** Significant at 1% level.

1.2
(2.4)
-1.4
(3.4)
-3.9
(2.7)
4.4
(3.8)
7.4
(3.8)
7.0
(5.4)
8.5**
(3.7)
1.8
(5.4)
-1.4
(2.7)
4.3
(3.8)
-2.6
(5.6)
59.2**
(3.9)
570

Table 9. In-Laboratory Viewing Frequency Experiment Results
This table shows regression results where the dependent variable is the fraction of the
endowment invested in the risky asset in each round and the explanatory variable is a dummy for
the subject having returns reported infrequently. Every choice by a subject is a separate
observation, and standard errors are clustered by subject.

Gneezy-Potters
replication
Infrequent
return viewing
Constant
N
Subjects
Infrequent
return viewing
Constant
N
Subjects

4.8
(7.8)
48.2**
(5.7)
480
80
26.9**
(6.0)
32.9**
(4.5)
480
80

Scaled GneezyPotters
Panel A: Wave 1
-7.8
(8.0)
49.5**
(5.8)
480
80
Panel B: Wave 2
0.7
(6.7)
32.9**
(5.0)
480
80

Stock
condition,
forced
liquidation

Stock
condition, no
forced
liquidation

-0.8
(7.0)
48.7**
(4.9)
840
80

4.0
(6.9)
43.1**
(4.9)
840
80

5.4
(7.0)
36.7**
(4.6)
840
80

-5.7
(5.9)
34.8**
(4.5)
840
80

* Significant at 5% level. ** Significant at 1% level.

Table 10. Post-Laboratory Viewing Frequency Experiment Results
This table shows regression results where the dependent variable is the fraction of the
endowment invested in the risky asset in each round and the explanatory variable is a dummy for
the subject having returns reported infrequently. Every choice by a subject is a separate
observation, and standard errors are clustered by subject.

Infrequent
return viewing
Constant
N
Subjects

Gneezy-Potters
replication
-2.8
(7.7)
55.7**
(5.1)
160
80

Scaled GneezyPotters
6.6
(8.9)
40.9**
(6.0)
160
80

* Significant at 5% level. ** Significant at 1% level.

Stock
condition,
forced
liquidation
-4.8
(7.2)
46.0**
(4.6)
280
80

Stock
condition, no
forced
liquidation
-10.0
(7.2)
50.4**
(4.9)
280
80

0.2

0
Jul-07
Aug-07
Sep-07
Oct-07
Nov-07
Dec-07
Jan-08
Feb-08
Mar-08
Apr-08
May-08
Jun-08
Jul-08
Aug-08
Sep-08
Oct-08
Nov-08
Dec-08
Jan-09
Feb-09
Mar-09
Apr-09
May-09
Jun-09
Jul-09
Aug-09

Normalized S&P 500 level
(July 2, 2007 = 1)
1.2
700

1
600

0.8
400

0.6
300

0.4
Active subjects

S&P 500
200

100

0

Active subjects

Figure 1. Experimental Period

500

80

0
Active subjects

VIX

60

50
400

40
300

30
200

20

10
100

0

Active subjects

70

Jul-07
Aug-07
Sep-07
Oct-07
Nov-07
Dec-07
Jan-08
Feb-08
Mar-08
Apr-08
May-08
Jun-08
Jul-08
Aug-08
Sep-08
Oct-08
Nov-08
Dec-08
Jan-09
Feb-09
Mar-09
Apr-09
May-09
Jun-09
Jul-09
Aug-09

VIX index level
90
700

600

500

Figure 2. 1-Year Asset Class Returns, 1971-2007, Sorted From Worst to Best
80%

60%

40%

20%

0%

-20%

-40%
U.S. stock

Int’l stock

Bonds

Money market

Figure 3. 5-Year Annualized Asset Class Returns, 1971-2007, Sorted From Worst to Best
80%

60%

40%

20%

0%

-20%

-40%
U.S. stock

Int’l stock

Bonds

Money market

Figure 4. Second Experiment Design
In-lab conditions (Administered to Waves 1 and 2)
Gneezy-Potters replication
9 rounds
$2 endowment each round
Risky asset return:
2/3 prob. -100%
1/3 prob. +250%

Segregated
Outcomes
revealed each
round

Aggregated
Outcomes
revealed in
rounds 3, 6, 9

Scaled Gneezy-Potters
9 rounds
$20 endowment in 1st round
Risky asset return:
2/3 prob. -10%
1/3 prob. +25%

Segregated
Outcomes
revealed each
round

Aggregated
Outcomes
revealed in
rounds 3, 6, 9

Stock condition,
forced liquidation
18 rounds
$20 endowment in 1st round
Risky asset return:
U.S. stock market returns
Position liquidated each round

Segregated
Outcomes
revealed each
round

Aggregated
Outcomes
revealed in
rds. 6, 12, 18

Stock condition,
no forced liquidation
18 rounds
$20 endowment in 1st round
Risky asset return:
U.S. stock market returns

Segregated
Outcomes
revealed each
round

Aggregated
Outcomes
revealed in
rds. 6, 12, 18

Post-lab conditions
(Administered to Wave 1 only; random assignment independent of in-lab condition assignment)
Gneezy-Potters replication
3 rounds, each 1 week long
$2 endowment each round
Risky asset return:
2/3 prob. -100%
1/3 prob. +250%

Segregated
Outcomes
revealed each
round

Aggregated
Outcomes
revealed at
end

Scaled Gneezy-Potters
3 rounds, each 1 week long
In-lab final balance is
endowment in 1st round
Risky asset return:
2/3 prob. -10%
1/3 prob. +25%

Segregated
Outcomes
revealed each
round

Aggregated
Outcomes
revealed at
end

Stock condition,
forced liquidation
6 rounds, each 1 week long
In-lab final balance is
endowment in 1st round
Risky asset return:
U.S. stock market returns

Segregated
Outcomes
revealed and
position sold
each round

Aggregated
Outcomes
revealed at
end

Stock condition,
no forced liquidation
6 rounds, each 1 week long
In-lab final balance is
endowment in 1st round
Risky asset return:
U.S. stock market returns

Segregated
Outcomes
revealed each
round

Aggregated
Outcomes
revealed at
end

