                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     FUEL TAX INCIDENCE AND SUPPLY CONDITIONS

                                            Justin Marion
                                          Erich Muehlegger

                                        Working Paper 16863
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16863


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2011




The authors thank Erzo Luttmer, Raj Chetty, Monica Singhal, two anonymous referees and seminar
participants at UC Berkeley, Northeastern, UC Santa Cruz, Harvard, Wisconsin, Columbia, Stanford,
the Public Choice Society Annual Conference, the National Tax Association Annual Conference, and
the NBER Economics of Taxation Summer Institute for helpful comments. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Justin Marion and Erich Muehlegger. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Fuel Tax Incidence and Supply Conditions
Justin Marion and Erich Muehlegger
NBER Working Paper No. 16863
March 2011
JEL No. H22,H71,L98,Q4

                                            ABSTRACT

The incidence of taxes on consumers and producers plays a central role in evaluating energy tax policy,
yet the literature testing the main predictions of the tax incidence model is sparse. In this paper, we
examine the pass-through rate of state gasoline and diesel taxes to retail prices, and importantly we
estimate the dependence of pass-through on factors constraining the gasoline and diesel supply chains.
We consider several factors that alter the elasticity of supply, including within state heterogeneity
in gasoline content requirements, refinery capacity utilization, inventory constraints, and variation
in the demand for untaxed uses of diesel. In general, we find that in periods of time when the supply
chain is constrained, and the constraint is plausibly unrelated to shifts in demand, the pass-through
rate of fuel taxes declines. We describe several potential implications for tax policy, including tax
breaks during peak driving season and during times of supply disruptions such as after major hurricanes.


Justin Marion
Assistant Professor of Economics
Engineering II
University of California Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
marion@ucsc.edu

Erich Muehlegger
Harvard Kennedy School
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
erich_muehlegger@hks.harvard.edu
1     Introduction

Tax incidence plays a central role in current energy policy debates. The extent to which taxes
are passed through to retail prices, and on what the pass-through rate depends, determines in
part the distributional impact of carbon taxes, the eﬀectiveness of using a tax holiday to ease
high fuel prices, and how tax policy can be used to respond to disruptions in the fuel supply
chain, such as those caused by natural disasters like hurricane Rita.
    While the theory of tax incidence is front and center in the textbook treatment of taxation,
the main predictions of the tax incidence model are largely untested. Though it is often assumed
that commodity taxes are fully passed through to consumers, this assumption is based on
relatively few empirical studies. There is only sparse evidence regarding the extent to which taxes
are incorporated into retail prices, as noted by Poterba (1996) and Doyle and Samphantharak
(2008), and little work examining the extent to which tax incidence responds to changes in
market power or supply elasticity. As a result, the empirical literature on tax incidence is
unable to shed much light on the aforementioned policy questions.
    In this paper, we examine the pass-through rate of fuel taxes to retail prices by utilizing
changes in state gasoline and diesel taxes. Our primary contribution is estimating the depen-
dence of pass-through on factors constraining the gasoline and diesel supply chains. Under-
standing this dependence provides insight on how tax policy might be conditioned on observed
supply conditions. Furthermore, to the extent by which supply chain constraints suggest varia-
tion in the elasticity of fuel supply, it provides a test of a fundamental prediction of tax incidence
theory.
    Consistent with prior literature on gas tax incidence, we ﬁnd that state gasoline and diesel
fuel taxes are on average fully and immediately passed on to consumers. The above result masks
important heterogeneity in the rate of pass-through, as we ﬁnd evidence consistent with the
notion that pass-through falls in times of inelastic supply. In particular, the pass-through rate
of diesel is low when reﬁnery capacity utilization is at its highest, and when untaxed uses of diesel
fuel are less important (which reduces the residual supply elasticity of taxed diesel). We ﬁnd that
the pass-through of gasoline taxes is lower when gasoline content regulations are heterogeneous
within a state, which has been found to constrain reﬁners’ ability to adjust production in the
short-run. (see for instance Muehlegger, 2006). Moreover, it has been suggested that inventories
play a role in constraining the market power of wholesalers – we ﬁnd that when inventories are
constrained from below, the pass-through rate of diesel taxes is greater than one.
    Our ﬁndings have several implications for current tax policy. First, our work speaks directly


                                                  2
to the eﬃcacy of “fuel tax holidays.” Like Doyle and Samphantharak (2008), who examine
the eﬀects of a gas tax moratorium on prices in Illinois and Indiana, our work suggests that
the beneﬁts of a tax holiday will be driven by contemporaneous market conditions. We ﬁnd
that the relationship between capacity utilization and the tax pass-through rate diﬀers between
diesel and gasoline. Gasoline taxes are fully passed through to consumers regardless of season
or capacity utilization. Consequently, a seasonal state gas tax holiday would apparently provide
relief to consumers. In contrast, the pass-through of diesel taxes falls during periods of high
capacity utilization. This ﬁnding is particularly relevant for fuel tax holidays. Although fuel
taxes are passed-through fully under normal circumstances, fuel tax holidays are most attractive
to legislators during times of high fuel prices induced by supply chain constraints. We ﬁnd that
at these times, taxes are likely to be shared between consumers and producers - consequently,
consumers are unlikely to reap the full beneﬁt of fuel tax moratoria.
   Second, our results inform the politics of increasing gasoline taxes. The proposal of the
Deﬁcit Reduction Committee recently advocated increasing gasoline prices as part of balancing
the federal budget. In addition, several carbon proposal put forth in 2010 implicitly taxed
gasoline and diesel by taxing carbon emissions from reﬁnery operations. Our ﬁndings inform the
distributional consequences of these policies. We ﬁnd that under most circumstances, gasoline
and diesel taxes are fully passed onto consumers. Moreover, since demand for gasoline and
diesel fuel are relatively inelastic, our results suggest that reﬁners, wholesalers and retail station
operators likely require little compensation (in the form of tax credits or free carbon permits)
to be made whole.
   In addition, our work makes several contributions to existing literature on fuel taxes and to
the broader literature on tax incidence. To our knowledge ours is the ﬁrst study to consider the
incidence of diesel fuel taxes. Moreover, our work is unique in its examination of how regula-
tions aﬀect tax pass-through. Chouinard and Perloﬀ (2004,2007) and Alm et al (2009) provide
evidence regarding the incidence of gasoline taxes on retail prices using state-level variation in
taxes and prices. Chouinard and Perloﬀ (2004) tests the response of incidence to residual supply
elasticity at the state level, noting that small states should have a greater supply elasticity and
therefore a higher rate of consumer incidence. More generally Poterba (1996) examines the inci-
dence of retail sales taxes on clothing prices, Besley and Rosen (1999) consider city-level prices
across twelve commodities, and a number of papers including Sung, Hu and Keeler (1994), Bar-
nett et al (1995), Delipalla and O’Donnell (2001), Harding, Lovenheim and Leibtag (2009) and
Chiou and Muehlegger (2009) estimate cigarette tax incidence as well as how incidence varies



                                                  3
      geographically or demographically.1
          The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents a theoretical discussion of incidence and
      supply. Section 3 describes the data and empirical methods we will use. Section 4 presents the
      empirical results, and Section 5 concludes.



      2      Model and Industry Background

      We consider a quantity tax of t per unit of a good, which is paid by the supplier. A unit mass
      of ﬁrms sell a quantity q of this good to consumers at the tax inclusive price p. Consumers
      have an aggregate demand for the product given by D(p), while competitive supply can be
      characterized by the function S(p, t). The textbook approach to characterizing incidence starts
      from the equilibrium condition D(p) = S(p, t) and perturbs this equilibrium by changing the
      tax:
                                            dp        St (p, t)
                                               =                                                     (1)
                                            dt   Dp (p) − Sp (p, t)

      where Sp , St , and Dp represent the derivative of supply with respect to price and tax and the
      derivative of demand with respect to price, respectively.
          Suppose diesel is produced at cost C(q) where C  (q) > 0 and C  (q) > 0. If ﬁrms behave
      competitively, this yields the proﬁt function


                                          Π(q) = p(q) − tq − C(q).                                   (2)


      Firms produce to the point where price is equal to marginal cost, or q = φ(p − t) where
      φ(p − t) = C −1 (p − t). Supply is a function of the price net of tax, so that the supply response
      to taxes is the same as the response to prices: Sp = −St . Substituting this into equation
      (1), multiplying through by p/q, and taking the limit as t → 0, the standard representation of
      incidence is obtained:
                                                 dp    η
                                                    =                                                (3)
                                                 dt   η−

      where η and  are the elasticities of supply and demand, respectively. The rate of pass-through
      goes up as supply is more elastic and demand is less elastic.
          A long literature in public ﬁnance extends this result to non-competitive markets and shows
      that tax pass-through in oligopolistic markets can exceed one under certain demand conditions.
  1
    Early empirical work on incidence includes Due (1954), Brownlee and Perry (1967), Woodard and Siegelman
(1967), and Sidhu (1971).




                                                      4
       Following the derivation in Stead (1985), a ﬁrm with market power facing consumers with
       constant demand elasticity will more than fully pass taxes along to consumers. For ﬁrm i
       setting prices with market power, proﬁt maximizing prices are given by

                                                       mc + τ
                                                  p=
                                                       1 + 1i

       where i is the residual demand curve faced by the ﬁrm. Since the proﬁt maximizing ﬁrm will
       set price on the elastic portion of the demand curve, a change in τ increases tax-inclusive prices
              1
       by   1+ 1
                    > 1.
                i




       2.1      Industry Background

       The primary contribution of our paper is to estimate how fuel tax pass-through responds to
       constraints at various points of the supply curve. We brieﬂy describe the US supply chain for
       petroleum products. We then present a discussion of factors that shift the elasticity of supply
       η and empirically examine how these shifts aﬀect the pass-through of gasoline and diesel taxes.
            A four-part supply chain (reﬁning, bulk transport, terminal storage, and retail delivery) de-
       livers petroleum products to US consumers. Crude oil is reﬁnery primarily at domestic reﬁneries,
       with ﬁfty percent of domestic reﬁning capacity located in Texas, Louisiana and California. From
       1983 to 2003, 94 percent of national gasoline consumption was reﬁned domestically.2 Diesel fuel
       and gasoline are shipped from reﬁneries in bulk by pipelines or barge to wholesale terminals
       located near most major US metropolitan areas. Wholesale terminals hold gasoline and diesel
       inventories to smooth local demand shocks - from the wholesale terminals, tanker trucks trans-
       port fuel to industrial and commercial customers and to retail stations for sale to individual
       drivers.


       2.2      Refinery Constraints

       We examine the eﬀect of four supply chain constraints on fuel tax pass-through. The ﬁrst
       constraint we study is when demand for reﬁned products approaches domestic reﬁning capacity.
       Demand for reﬁned products tends to peak during the summer driving season. On average,
       domestic reﬁnery capacity is 92 percent utilized during summer months in our study period.
   2
    Although regulations do not prevent gasoline and diesel fuel from being reﬁned outside the United States and
imported into the country, imports face several barriers to being an eﬀective way to mitigate the eﬀects of supply
chain constraints. As Borenstein et al (2004) notes, many arbitrage opportunities (due to unanticipated demand
shocks or supply constraints) are relatively short in duration. The lag between reﬁning product to meet US fuel
requirements and shipping the product to US markets is often great enough to prevent foreign reﬁneries from acting
as a competitive source of peak supply.


                                                        5
      During several summers of our sample, though, utilization peaks at over 99 percent. During
      periods of high capacity utilization, academic studies and government investigations have noted
      that gasoline prices tend to rise dramatically.3 Moreover, unanticipated reﬁnery closures often
      lead to large increases in local prices.
          Reﬁnery capacity constraints persist for two reasons. First, siting a new reﬁnery is very
      diﬃcult. Due to environmental regulations, siting challenges and resistance from local commu-
      nities, no new domestic reﬁneries have been built since 1976 (although a small reﬁnery (163k
      bbls/day) is currently proposed in Arizona). Second, expansions of capacity at existing reﬁneries
      is limited in scope - the growth of domestic reﬁning capacity to approximately 1.0 percent per
      year between 1995 and 2005, the period during which domestic reﬁning capacity was heavily
      utilized. Over the same decade, consumption of reﬁned products has increased by 1.7 percent
      per year.


      2.3    Storage constraints

      Firms’ abilities to store gasoline and diesel fuel at wholesale terminals introduce important
      complications when considering tax incidence. Storage places restrictions on the intertemporal
      evolution of prices. Suppose that a change in the tax rate in time t + 1 is anticipated at time t.
      Allow ﬁrms to store an amount of fuel, St , from time t to t + 1 at a marginal storage cost of k.
      A wholesale terminal chooses storage to maximize expected proﬁts:


                          Et [Πt+1 ] = Et [pt+1 − τt+1 ]St /(1 + r) − (pt − τt )St − kSt             (4)


      The ﬁrst-order condition of a competitive storage ﬁrm is therefore given by


                                    (E[pt+1 ] − τt+1 )/(1 + r) = pt − τt + k.                        (5)


      A simple model of storage predicts that ﬁrms will use storage to arbitrage away anticipated
      diﬀerences in prices net of taxes. So long as the no-arbitrage condition holds, prices will rise by
      the amount of the tax increase and taxes will be fully passed onto consumers. Importantly for
      our context, the condition (5) should hold even when production is temporarily inelastic, such
      as when reﬁneries face short-run capacity constraints.
          There are several reasons why the simple no-arbitrage condition given by equation (5) may
      not hold for gasoline or diesel fuel. Borenstein et al (2004) note capacity constraints in the
3
    see e.g. Muehlegger (2006) and the FTC Midwest Gasoline Price Investigation



                                                        6
      storage market. If capacity constraints in the storage market are binding, the shadow value of
      the storage constraint would enter into (5). At the low end, storage obviously cannot fall below
      zero.
          In addition, storage plays an important role in mitigating market power in wholesale fuel
      markets.4 Inventories help to mitigate market power concerns that may arise due to short-
      run mismatches between supply and demand – ﬁrms are less able to exercise unilateral market
      power if other ﬁrms hold large inventories. When inventories are low, competitors may be less
      able to oﬀset a reduction in quantity by a competitor. If inventories act as a hedge against
      market power in wholesale fuel markets, the residual demand elasticity faced by the ﬁrm would
      be negatively correlated with competitors’ inventories. When inventories are low, ﬁrms able to
      exercise temporary market power may more than fully pass the taxes onto consumers.
          Consequently, the relationship between inventories and tax incidence is complicated. In a
      market with no constraints and costless storage, we should expect to estimate full pass-through in
      a ﬁrst-diﬀerenced speciﬁcation. However, if storage capacity constraints bind, pass-through may
      either decrease or decrease. Inventories are unable to respond to changes in price, thereby making
      supply elasticity, however low inventories may increase market power at wholesale terminals, in
      which case it is conceivable that wholesalers will be able to more than fully pass taxes along to
      consumers.


      2.4     Residual Supply Elasticity

      For diesel, untaxed supplies provide a source of inventories that supplement wholesale terminal
      inventories. No. 2 distillate can either be sold as diesel or as heating oil, which suggests that
      the supply of diesel is the residual of No. 2 distillate supply after subtracting the demand for
      fuel oil. The residual supply of diesel is therefore given by S diesel (p) = S(p) − Doil (p), where
      S(p) is the supply of No. 2 distillate.5 Diﬀerentiating with respect to p, we obtain the residual
      supply elasticity of diesel,6
                                              η diesel = η/σ − oil /σ o                                     (6)

      where η diesel is the residual supply elasticity of diesel, η is the supply elasticity of No. 2 distillate,
      σ is diesel’s share of No. 2 distillate, oil is the demand elasticity for fuel oil, and σ o is the supply
   4
     As Borenstein et al (2004) notes, signiﬁcant barriers to entry exist in the fuel storage market. Consequently,
wholesale storage markets tend to be relatively concentrated.
   5
     We consider the residual supply rather than residual demand since demand is likely to be largely independent
across fuel oil and diesel markets, while supply is interrelated.
   6
     Chouinard and Perloﬀ (2004) perform a similar exercise for gasoline, showing how the residual supply elasticity,
and therefore pass-through, in a state is higher as its share of national gasoline demand is lower.



                                                          7
       of diesel relative to the supply of fuel oil. The supply elasticity is therefore greater when fuel oil
       demand is high relative to diesel, and a more elastic supply of diesel should increase the pass-
       through of the diesel tax to consumers. In the empirical section to follow, we utilize variation
       in weather and households’ use of fuel oil as factors that shift σ and σ o .


       2.5     Environmental Regulations

       Finally, we consider environmental regulations that complicate the bulk transportation, whole-
       sale storage and local distribution of gasoline. In 1990, the Clean Air Act Amendment mandated
       special requirements for fuel in regions failing to meet EPA limits for ozone and carbon monoxide
       pollution. The EPA designed reformulated gasoline (RFG) to reduce mobile-source emissions
       (cars) in areas in serious or severe ozone non-attainment.7 For regions in carbon monoxide
       non-attainment, the EPA designed oxygenated gasoline for winter use.8
           Special blends complicate the petroleum product supply chain – reﬁners must determine
       which blends to produce in advance, pipeline operators must manage the transportation of
       a larger number of incompatible fuels and wholesale terminal operators may have to manage
       storage for more than one speciﬁcation of gasoline at once.9 Consequently, we anticipate that
       taxes will be less fully passed-through in states where regulatory heterogeneity is greater.10



       3     Data and Methods

       3.1     Data

       We collect a 20-year monthly panel of average state-level prices of gasoline and diesel fuel from
       the Energy Information Administration (EIA). The EIA reports the monthly average price of
    7
      Initially, nine cities with 63 million residents fell into this category: Baltimore, Chicago, Hartford, Houston, Los
Angeles, Milwaukee, New York City, Philadelphia and San Diego. Subsequently, Sacramento was reclassiﬁed as in
severe ozone non-attainment area in the summer of 1995. In addition, many other states, counties and cities chose to
voluntarily adopt the new, more stringent reformulated gasoline standards. Between 1995 and 2001, areas containing
approximately 35 million people have “opted-in” to the federal RFG program.
    8
      Oxygenated gasoline is required in winter months where carbon monoxide emissions are greatest. Thirty-nine
areas were in non-attainment initially, containing 86 million people. Of these areas, the majority have since come
into attainment and stopped using oxygenated gasoline in winter months.
    9
      As an example, following Hurricane Rita, the Missouri Department of Natural Resources received an EPA waiver
from local RFG requirements. The EPA determined that “an ‘extreme and unusual fuel supply circumstance’ exists
that will prevent the distribution of an adequate supply of RFG to the St. Louis RFG covered area.” The waiver
allowed St. Louis retail stations to sell conventional gasoline from Sept 27th until October 7th - since the supply of
conventional gasoline to the area outside of the RFG covered area was relatively unaﬀected.
   10
      Special blends may also increase concentration if they are suﬃciently costly for reﬁneries to produce. For example,
the FTC complaint for the Chevron Texaco merger speciﬁcally singles out reﬁning, bulk supply and marketing of
California Air Resource Board (CARB) gasoline. We do not ﬁnd evidence that pass-through varies for conventional
gasoline and special blends.



                                                            8
       No. 2 distillate separately by the type of end user for twenty-three states.11 To measure the
       price of No. 2 diesel for on-highway purposes, we use the price to end users through retail
       outlets. This price is virtually a perfect match of the low-sulfur diesel price, which is almost
       exclusively for on-highway use. The EIA publishes average retail gasoline prices for all ﬁfty
       states monthly from 1983 onwards.
          We collect information about the federal and state gasoline and on-road diesel tax rates from
       1983 to 2003 from the Federal Highway Administration Annual Highway Statistics.12 Federal
       on-road diesel excise taxes were four cents per gallon in 1981, rising to the current level of 24.4
       cents per gallon in 1993. State on-road diesel excise taxes also rose throughout the period, from
       a weighted average excise tax rate of 9.2 cents per gallon in 1981 to 19.4 cents per gallon in
       2003.13 Within-state variation also rose throughout the period. In 1981, state on-road diesel
       taxes varied from a low of 0 cents per gallon in Wyoming to 13.9 cents per gallon in Nebraska.
       In 2003, Alaska imposes the lowest state diesel taxes, at 8 cents per gallon, while Pennsylvania
       imposed the highest taxes of 30.8 cents per gallon. As with diesel taxes, state and federal
       gasoline taxes increased during this time frame. In 1983, the federal gasoline tax was four cents
       per gallon and average state gasoline taxes were 11.3 cents per gallon. In 1983, tax rates were
       lowest in Texas at ﬁve cents per gallon and highest in Washington and Minnesota at 16 cents
       per gallon. By 2003, the federal gasoline tax rose to 18.4 cents per gallon and the average state
       gasoline tax rose to 20.5 cents per gallon, with a low of 7.5 cents per gallon in Georgia and a
       high of 30 cents per gallon in Rhode Island.
          We also collect data capturing market factors that aﬀect the demand and supply of gasoline
       and diesel. Our demand shifters for diesel fuel are primarily related to temperature and the
       prevalence of the use of fuel oil as a home heating source. We obtain monthly heating degree
       days by state from the National Climate Data Center at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
       Administration. The number of heating degree days in a month, commonly used to model
       heating demand, is deﬁned as the sum of the daily number of degrees the temperature is below
       65.14 We also measure state heating oil prevalence using the fraction of households in a state
  11
     The EIA surveys prices for states using No. 2 distillate as a “signiﬁcant heating source.” (source: EIA Form
782b explanatory notes) Price data exists for Alaska, Idaho, Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, Ohio, Oregon,
Virginia, Washington, West Virginia, Wisconsin and all states in New England (PADD1a) and the Central Atlantic
subdistricts (PADD1b).
  12
     Several states in our sample also levy ad-valorem taxes on gasoline or diesel sales. Since the vast majority of the
tax changes in our sample are changes to state and federal quantity-based excise taxes, we focus primarily on the
pass-through of these taxes. We do not ﬁnd that the pass-through of quantity based excise taxes diﬀers signiﬁcantly
for states that additionally levy ad-valorem taxes and states that do not levy ad-valorem taxes.
  13
     Oregon does not tax diesel sold for trucking, instead taxing the number of weight-miles driven in the state. For
this reason, we exclude Oregon from the subsequent analysis.
  14
     For example, if the temperature in a state were 55 degrees for each day in the month of January, the number of


                                                           9
      reporting in the 1990 census to use fuel oil as the primary energy source for home heating. In
      addition, we collect state unemployment rates and we calculate the minimum diesel and gasoline
      tax rates in neighboring states.
          To measure capacity constraints at domestic reﬁneries, we obtain national, monthly reﬁnery
      capacity utilization from the EIA for 1990 to 2003. Capacity utilization is deﬁned as the ratio
      of total crude oil input to the total available distillation capacity – capacity utilization captures
      both production constraints arising from both high demand and from unanticipated reﬁnery
      repairs. In addition, we obtain monthly data on diesel and gasoline inventories at the PADD-
      level from the EIA for our entire time period. We normalize the inventories by the average daily
      demand in the prior 12 months in each PADD to measure inventories in terms of number of
      days of supply.
          To measure the eﬀect of environmental regulations, we collect data on within-state variation
      in gasoline content regulations. For each state, the EIA tracks the proportion of gasoline meeting
      federal reformulated gasoline requirements, federal oxygenated gasoline requirements and less
      stringent conventional gasoline requirements.15 To measure within-state heterogeneity, we sum
      the squared proportions of RFG, oxygenated and conventional gasoline. A value of one denotes
      uniform regulation for the entire state; a value of one-third denotes that equal amounts of
      reformulated, oxygenated and conventional gasoline are sold.
          Table 1 reports the summary statistics of our variables. To help interpret the results re-
      garding capacity utilization and incidence, the variable means are also reported separately for
      months with diﬀerent rates of US reﬁnery capacity utilization. The average tax inclusive retail
      price is 120.8 cents per gallon over the course of the series. This price is on average highest
      when capacity utilization is between 90 and 95 percent, though it is in fact lowest at the highest
      level of capacity utilization.16 Over our sample, tax inclusive gasoline prices average 118 cents
      per gallon. Unlike diesel prices, the average gasoline price rises as reﬁnery capacity utilization
      increases. The average state diesel tax rate is 18.2 cents per gallon, compared with the average
      federal tax of 19.8 cents per gallon. Gasoline taxes average 17.1 cents per gallon at the state
      level and 14.2 cents per gallon at the federal level. The average month has 5.3 heating degree
heating degree days for each day would be 10 and the number of heating degree days for the month would be 310.
  15
     The EIA does not report quantities when quantities are small enough to potentially infer the actions of any
one company. After ﬁrst-diﬀerencing, EIA redaction causes us to omit twenty-seven percent of the base sample.
Redaction varies by region - forty seven percent of the observations in PADD 5 are omitted after ﬁrst-diﬀerencing,
while only seventeen percent of the observations in PADD 2 are omitted after ﬁrst diﬀerencing. Importantly, we do
not ﬁnd that our base pass-through results diﬀer signiﬁcantly when we limit ourselves to this subsample.
  16
     Since the capacity utilization series is not available for the entire sample, the means separated by capacity
utilization may appear inconsistent with the overall mean.




                                                       10
days. Since cold months tend to have lower demand for gasoline, the average degree days are at
their highest when reﬁnery capacity utilization is at its lowest. For the average state, 28 percent
of households use fuel oil (diesel) to heat their homes, yet this varies considerably across states
as standard deviation of this variable is 0.20.
   The average capacity utilization is 91 percent. Low capacity utilization months dispropor-
tionately occur in the winter and spring, while 88 percent of high capacity utilization months
are in the second and third quarters of the year. Twelve percent of the gasoline sold during
the period met federal reformulated gasoline requirements. Approximately two percent of the
gasoline sold met federal oxygenated requirements. Content regulations vary substantially both
within and across states. Although the mean of the sum of squared content shares is 0.95,
the value is less than 0.75 for approximately ten percent of the sample, and less that 0.6 for
approximately ﬁve percent of the sample.
   Tax increases are most likely to come when capacity utilization is low, as there is a 2.7
percent likelihood a state raises its diesel tax in a month with a capacity utilization of less than
85 percent, compared with 1.6 percent overall. This is primarily due to January being a popular
month for tax changes. Yet tax increases in high capacity utilization months are not uncommon.
States raise taxes in 1.2 percent of months with a capacity utilization above 95 percent, and tax
increases are in fact more likely during these months than when capacity utilization is between
85 and 95 percent.
   To further illustrate the variation used in this paper, Figure 1 shows the average diesel
tax rate over time for the 22 states we use in the analysis, and the number of states per year
changing taxes. The average tax per state increases steadily over time, with the growth rate of
taxes perhaps slowing somewhat beginning in the nineties. Fewer states changed diesel tax rates
during the nineties, yet we still see that several states change taxes in each year of the data.
The only exception is 2000, when tax rates were stable for all states. Figure 2 shows a similar
series for gasoline taxes. Gas taxes rise over time, with the rate of growth slowing considerably
in recent years. Nonetheless, each year saw at least two states increasing gasoline taxes, with
most years witnessing between ten and thirty states changing tax rates.


3.2    Methods

The approach taken in this paper is to estimate the eﬀect of federal and state taxes on post-tax
(consumer) prices. We assume that the data generating process at the state-month level for




                                                  11
       prices pit in cents per gallon is given by:


                                pit = β0 + β1 TitS + β2 TtF + BXit + ρi + σt + it                         (7)


       where TitS and TtF are the state and federal tax rates in cents per gallon, Xit is a vector of time-
       varying state level covariates, ρi is a state-level ﬁxed eﬀect meant to capture time-invariant local
       cost shifters, and σt represents time eﬀects. To estimate (7) in the presence of the unobserved
       state-level heterogeneity described by ρi , we will estimate the ﬁrst-diﬀerenced equation


                              Δpit = β0 + β1 ΔTitS + β2 ΔTtF + BΔXit + σt + it .                          (8)

       The coeﬃcients β1 and β2 are therefore estimated from contemporaneous changes in taxes and
       prices.17
           Our approach provides a signiﬁcant advantage over estimating the relationship in levels. In
       order for our estimates to be biased, the ﬁrst-diﬀerenced omitted variable must be correlated
       with state-level tax changes. Thus, demographic trends (or other slow moving variables) are
       unlikely to bias our results, whereas they are more likely to be correlated with prices in a levels
       regression. In addition, other variables that change discretely such as transportation policy
       variables must change contemporaneously with the state-level tax changes in order to bias our
       results. Furthermore, for the majority of our results, σt consists of month*year ﬁxed eﬀects.
       Although our eﬀects prevent the estimation of the pass-through of federal taxes (β2 ), the ﬁxed
       eﬀects subsume all state-invariant shocks that aﬀect gasoline or diesel prices.



       4     Results

       4.1    Basic incidence results

       The results of estimating equation (8) for diesel are presented in Table 2. The speciﬁcations
       presented in column 1 control for year and month eﬀects, while the speciﬁcation shown in column
       2 also includes state-level covariates. By separately controlling for state and month eﬀects, we
       allow for the identiﬁcation of the eﬀects of both state and federal fuel taxes. Our ﬁndings
       indicate that a one cent increase in the state tax rate increases the retail price by 1.22 cents,
  17
    If tax changes are endogenous to prices then this approach will not be valid, a problem shared with other studies
of gasoline tax incidence. For instance, if tax increases are not undertaken when prices are increasing, then our
estimate of β1 will not be valid. We have found little relationship between tax changes and factors aﬀecting supply
conditions. Furthermore, the lag between the passage of a tax rate increase and its implementation implies that tax
increases are unlikely to be related to unexpected changes in supply.


                                                         12
       and every one cent increase in federal taxes is estimated to increase the consumer price by 1.1
       cents. We are unable to statistically distinguish the pass-through rate of state taxes from that
       of gasoline taxes. Prior theoretical work on incidence suggest that pass-through of greater than
       100 percent is possible. (see Katz and Rosen, 1985; Stern 1987, Besley, 1989; Delipalla and
       Keen, 1992; and Hamilton 1999) While the estimates for the incidence of state taxes suggest
       more than full pass-through, we cannot reject a null hypothesis of merely full pass-through. It
       is worth noting that there are few tax changes from which to estimate the pass-through rate
       of federal taxes. One of these tax changes occurs in October of 1993, coinciding with more
       stringent content regulations for diesel fuel. In these and future speciﬁcations, we will include a
       separate regressor controlling for the change in prices in October of 1993.
           We next account for a richer set of time eﬀects by controlling for year*month eﬀects. Since
       federal taxes vary only at the year*month level, this precludes the estimation of β2 . In column
       3, we present the results. Including the ﬁner time eﬀects has a noticeable eﬀect on the estimates
       of β1 . We estimate a pass-through rate for state taxes of 1.09, which as before is not statistically
       distinguishable from one, but is more precisely estimated.18
           Changes in taxes are not necessarily immediately reﬂected in the retail price of diesel. Lags
       in adjustment by both suppliers and demanders could make short-run elasticities diﬀer from
       longer-horizon elasticities. To account for the dynamic adjustment of taxes into prices, we
       follow Alm et al (2009) by including the lagged tax rate in the speciﬁcation shown in column
       4 of Table 2. The coeﬃcient on the interaction term is estimated to be 0.071 and statistically
       insigniﬁcant. Therefore, almost the entire eﬀect of changes in tax rates are immediately realized
       in prices.19
           We next investigate whether the price response is linear in the size of the tax change. We
       divide tax changes into 24 evenly sized bins 0.5 cents wide. We then ﬁnd the average change
       in price by bin. The results of this exercise are presented in Figure 3, where we see that the
       relationship in the data between price and tax changes appears linear.
           In Table 3, we display the basic incidence results for gasoline. These results are not new,
  18
     One drawback to using state-level price data is that the EIA only reports these data for 23 states. It is desirable
to provide incidence estimates for the entire US, as the states for which we have price data may not be representative.
We perform a similar analysis aggregating state taxes and covariates up to the PADD-level, at which the EIA reports
data for all states. We present the results in Appendix Table A2. With PADD-level covariates and month and year
ﬁxed eﬀects, we estimate the pass-through rate of the average state tax rate of 1.01, while the pass-through rate of
the federal tax rate is 0.98. Using year*month eﬀects, we estimate pass-through of 1.04, very close to the analogous
state-level estimate of 1.09. Similarly, we ﬁnd that taxes seem to be immediately reﬂected in the retail price of diesel.
  19
     It is unlikely that controlling for the lagged tax rate will have the power to account for longer horizon adjustments
by demanders. For instance, if higher prices leads to the take up of more eﬃcient vehicles by drivers, even a relatively
swift adjustment in the ﬂow of vehicles purchased will only alter the fuel eﬃciency of the stock of existing vehicles
very slowly.


                                                           13
       as they have been documented using similar variation in Alm et al (2009) and Chouinard and
       Perloﬀ (2004). Consistent with these papers, we ﬁnd full pass-through of state taxes. Unlike
       Chouinard and Perloﬀ, we also ﬁnd full pass-through of federal gasoline taxes. We employ a
       speciﬁcation of the changes of gasoline prices and taxes, a source of diﬀerence with Chouinard
       and Perloﬀ, who estimate a speciﬁcation in levels.20 We also ﬁnd that the gasoline tax is fully
       incorporated into gasoline prices in the month of the tax change, as the lagged tax rate is
       small and statistically insigniﬁcant. These ﬁndings are robust to the inclusion of covariates and
       year*month eﬀects.
           We again examine the linearity of the relationship between tax changes and prices by dividing
       gasoline tax changes into 24 evenly spaced bins 0.5 cents wide. The average price change in
       each of these bins is shown in Figure 4. As with diesel, there appears to be a linear relationship
       between changes in taxes and changes in prices.


       4.2     Supply Conditions and Tax Incidence

       4.2.1     Untaxed diesel and supply elasticity

       We next examine whether the incidence of diesel and gasoline taxes varies with three changes in
       supply conditions – changes in the residual supply elasticity arising the demand for untaxed uses
       of diesel, supply inelasticity arising from reﬁnery capacity constraints, and supply conditions
       related to varying inventory levels. To test the ﬁrst, we will include a triple interaction between
       the state tax rate, the heating degree days in a state-month, and the prevalence of fuel oil’s use
       to heat homes in the state. In cold weather, demand for untaxed diesel fuel increases with the
       proportion of households using oil for residential heating. As shown in equation (6), substantial
       demand for an untaxed alternative will increase the residual supply elasticity of taxed diesel in a
       state.21 While cold weather may directly inﬂuence the price due to delivery cost or cold-weather
  20
      Under certain assumptions, estimating a speciﬁcation of the level of gasoline prices, controlling for state ﬁxed
eﬀects, and estimating a model in ﬁrst-diﬀerences should both yield consistent estimates of the pass-through param-
eter. Given the serial correlation in tax rates, we are concerned that unobserved factors that shift over time will be
correlated with both price and taxes, and therefore the speciﬁcation in levels will be more prone to bias than the
ﬁrst-diﬀerenced speciﬁcation, which estimates the pass-through parameter using only contemporaneous changes in
taxes and prices. If this is true, the levels speciﬁcation is likely to be particularly sensitive to misspeciﬁcation of the
time trend. In the Appendix Table A1, we estimate a levels speciﬁcation similar to that of Chouinard and Perloﬀ
(2004) using diﬀerent speciﬁcations of the time trend. In column (1), we control only for seasonal dummies. In the
speciﬁcation showin in Column (2) year enters linearly, while in column (3) year enters quadratically. Finally in the
speciﬁcation shown in column (4) we allow for a full set of year and month eﬀects. The estimate of the pass-through
of the federal tax varies wildly across the speciﬁcations. On the other hand, the estimated pass-through rate is stable
across diﬀerent forms of the time trend in the ﬁrst-diﬀerences speciﬁcations, as shown in columns (5)-(8)
   21
      We choose not to use a direct measure of σo for two reasons. First, at least in the pre-dye period, sales of distillate
intended for on-highway use comprised a signiﬁcant share of reported fuel oil sales. Second, the fuel oil series is often
missing.


                                                             14
additives, this speciﬁcation will control for state degree days directly so that the eﬀect of tax
changes in cold weather is compared between states with diﬀering levels of household fuel oil use.
Furthermore, it is conceivable that fuel oil demand could directly inﬂuence the price of diesel in
a state. We condition on the interaction of degree days and fuel oil use by households, which
should capture any demand eﬀects on price, and focus instead on the coeﬃcient on the triple
interaction between diesel taxes, degree days, and fuel oil. Finally, our measure of household use
of heating oil is a snapshot from the 1990 census and therefore on its own will not be directly
correlated with month-to-month variation in prices.
   The last column of Table 2 presents the relationship between residual supply elasticity of
taxed diesel and tax pass-through. To make reading the table easier, degree days have been
divided by 100. The coeﬃcient on the interaction between degree days/100, the state tax rate,
and the fraction of households using fuel oil to heat their homes is 0.055. This implies that a state
with a one standard deviation greater fraction of households using heating oil (20 percent), in a
month with 1000 degree days (approximately equal to February in Chicago), has a pass-through
rate 11.0 percentage points higher than a month with zero degree days.


4.2.2    Capacity Utilization

To examine how incidence varies with domestic reﬁnery capacity utilization, we separately es-
timate the incidence of state taxes for months with high and low levels of capacity utilization.
Capacity utilization is measured at the national level in our data, and therefore we are not
exploiting cross-state variation in supply constraints. Instead, we are examining how the pass-
through rate of a state’s tax depends on the prevailing national supply constraints. If reﬁners
are operating at full capacity, there is little scope to alter production in the short-run in re-
sponse to changes in taxes. For gasoline, periods of high capacity utilization may also indicate
particularly strong demand, which could be associated with more inelastic demand. Capacity
constraints may therefore be associated with two conﬂicting eﬀects on gas tax incidence, as both
demand and supply are less elastic. It is worth noting that diesel demand does not appear to
drive capacity constraints, and therefore diesel tax incidence may provide a clearer view of the
eﬀect of supply elasticity on pass-through.
   Since supply may only be truly constrained for high levels of capacity utilization, we will
allow for the eﬀect to enter nonlinearly. We estimate incidence separately for months with less
than 85 percent capacity utilization, between 85 and 90, between 90 and 95, and above 95
percent. Since capacity utilization tends to be higher in the summer months, we also perform



                                                 15
the estimation separately for the four quarters of the year to investigate the possibility that the
eﬀect depends on the season.
   The results for diesel are presented in Table 4. In Panel A, we show the results for capacity
utilization. We ﬁnd that there is virtually no diﬀerence in incidence between 80 and 95 percent
capacity utilization. The incidence parameter for less than 85 percent capacity utilization is
estimated to be 1.29, 1.00 for 85-90 percent capacity utilization, and 1.06 for between 90 and 95
percent capacity utilization. None of these coeﬃcients are statistically distinguishable from one.
However, there is a noticeable diﬀerence in the estimated incidence for tax changes occurring
in months with greater than 95 percent capacity utilization. For these months, only 41 percent
of the diesel tax is passed through to consumers. Therefore, we ﬁnd that the eﬀect of capacity
utilization on incidence is highly nonlinear, as it is only noticeable for the most capacity con-
strained months. However, it is worth noting that even in these extreme situations, almost half
of the tax is born by consumers. In Panel B, we present the diesel incidence parameter sepa-
rately by season. We ﬁnd that the rate of diesel pass-through is statistically indistinguishable
from one regardless of quarter.
   In Table 4 we present similar results for gasoline. Unlike diesel, we ﬁnd that gasoline incidence
is largely independent of capacity utilization. We estimate that consumer incidence is 90 percent
of the gasoline tax in the highest capacity utilization months, which is indistinguishable from
one. This diﬀers from the diesel result, likely due to the fact that capacity constraints are driven
by a large extent by demand for gasoline. In Panel B, we present results indicating that the
pass-through rate of the gas tax is virtually one for the ﬁrst, second, and third quarters of the
year. This suggests that a state tax holiday occurring during the summer would be fully passed
to consumers.


4.2.3    Inventories

Next, we estimate the association between incidence and inventories, as measured at the PADD
level by the days of supply of gasoline and diesel stored at the wholesale level. Inventories are
constrained by storage capacity since there are signiﬁcant barriers to entry in the storage market.
Storage is also likely to be constrained at the low end as well due to marketing costs, which
are suspected to be highly nonlinear at low levels of inventory (see Pindyck, 1994). Storage
constraints could indicate a less elastic supply curve, in which case less of the tax is passed on to
consumers. On the other hand, stored gallons could represent competition for producers. Low
inventory levels could therefore exacerbate any regional market power, and market power could



                                                 16
in fact lead to over-shifting of taxes to consumers.
   To examine the eﬀect of inventories, we include wholesale inventory levels (measured in terms
of days of supply), lagged inventory levels to capture dynamic adjustment, and the interaction
between inventory levels and the state tax rate. The former term captures the eﬀect of invento-
ries on price levels, while the interaction term captures the association between inventories and
tax incidence. We also consider periods of time where inventories are likely to be constrained,
interacting changes in the fuel tax rate with indicators for the monthly inventory lying in the
bottom 10 percent and top 10 percent of all monthly inventories in the sample.
   In Table 6, we present the results for diesel in panel A and gasoline in panel B. Each
speciﬁcation includes the full set of covariates, as well as month*year ﬁxed eﬀects. We ﬁnd that,
for both gasoline and diesel, the inventories are negatively correlated with the tax-inclusive
price. When considering the interaction between inventories and taxes, we ﬁnd that lower
inventory levels are associated with a signiﬁcant decrease in pass-through for gasoline, but not
for diesel. We estimate that a one standard deviation decrease in inventories is associated with
approximately 13.1 percentage point greater pass-through of gasoline prices.
   Interestingly, pass-through spikes substantially in months where diesel inventories are par-
ticularly low. In the bottom ten percent of inventory months, approximately 159 percent of
diesel taxes are passed through to consumers. In the absence of market power, pass-through
must be between zero and 100 percent regardless of the elasticities of supply and demand.
Therefore, rather than indicating a particularly inelastic supply curve during those months,
this over-shifting suggests that low inventories are associated with market power on the part of
suppliers.
   The same does not hold for gasoline. While pass-through is estimated to be higher during
the low gasoline inventory months, this eﬀect is not statistically signiﬁcant. On the other hand,
when gasoline inventories are unusually high – in the top ten percent of inventory months –
pass-through is estimated to be substantially lower. This is consistent with inelastic supply
when inventories are constrained.


4.2.4    Regional Content Regulations

Finally, we examine the introduction of regional gasoline content regulations and estimate the
relationship between regulatory heterogeneity and pass-through of gasoline taxes. Although the
particular example is speciﬁc to gasoline, interaction between regulations and taxes is common
– many industries face both taxes on inputs or products as well as regulatory standards their



                                               17
       processes or products must meet. Moreover, examining environmental regulations present a
       potentially cleaner test of supply constraints than examining reﬁnery capacity constraints or
       inventory constraints. Both high reﬁnery utilization and low inventories are at least partially
       driven by demand. The fraction of a state’s gasoline required to meet content regulations, on
       the other hand, is largely set exogenously to monthly supply and demand conditions.
          We control for changes in the composition of a state’s gasoline sales by including the percent
       of gasoline sold within the state meeting federal Reformulated and Oxygenated requirements. As
       a measure of the complexity of wholesale storage and distribution, we sum the squared market
       shares of Conventional, Reformulated and Oxygenated gasoline in each state. A value of one
       denotes a state using a consistent blend of gasoline state-wide. Importantly, a value of one does
       not diﬀerentiate between a state using all conventional gasoline or all reformulated gasoline - in
       each case, the wholesale storage and distribution of gasoline is uncomplicated. In contrast, a
       value of one-third would denote a state that uses all three types of gasoline in equal proportion
       and requires the most complex supply chain. The most heterogeneous state in our sample period
       is Nevada (0.37), which uses roughly equal quantities of all three formulations during the winter.
       We then interact our measure of regulatory homogeneity with the state’s gasoline tax rate to
       test if incidence is correlated with variation in a state’s gasoline regulations.22
          The estimates are presented in Table 7. All of the speciﬁcations include ﬁrst-diﬀerenced
       control variables as well as month*year ﬁxed eﬀect. In column 1, we present the results from
       estimation our baseline gasoline speciﬁcation (column 3 from Table 3) including only the seventy-
       three percent of the data for which we observe content shares. We estimate a very similar pass-
       through rate for the subsample – the point estimate is 1.067 (in comparison to a point estimate
       of 1.053). As with the full sample, we cannot statistically distinguish our estimate from full
       pass-through. In the speciﬁcation shown in column 2, we include the percent of gasoline sold
       as reformulated and as oxygenated are added as additional covariates to the base speciﬁcation.
       While both are positively correlated with price as we expect, neither coeﬃcient is statistically
       signiﬁcant.
          In column 3, we include the sum of squared content shares as well as the interaction term.
       Consistent with our prediction, we ﬁnd reduced pass-through of gasoline taxes in states requir-
       ing more heterogeneous gasoline supply. We estimate that pass-through is approximately 22
       percentage points higher in states with uniform regulations (eg. California or Massachusetts)
  22
    Special blends may also increase concentration if they are suﬃciently costly for reﬁneries to produce. For example,
the FTC complaint for the Chevron Texaco merger speciﬁcally singled out reﬁning, bulk supply and marketing of
California Air Resource Board (CARB) gasoline, a more stringent version of RFG used in California. We do not ﬁnd
evidence that pass-through varies signiﬁcantly for conventional gasoline and special blends.


                                                          18
than a state that uses two gasoline formulations in roughly equal proportion (eg. Illinois). All
else equal, shifting from using conventional gasoline to using reformulated gasoline exclusively
is associated with a 2.2 cent per gallon increase in the tax inclusive retail price. While the
point estimate on the percent of gasoline meeting oxygenated requirements is positive, it is still
imprecisely estimated.



5     Conclusion

In this paper, we examine the eﬀect of diesel and gasoline taxes on retail prices. We ﬁnd at least
full, and potentially more than full, pass-through of both federal and state diesel and gasoline
taxes to consumers. The pass-through eﬀects are immediately reﬂected in prices. For diesel,
the pass-through rate is ampliﬁed in cold months, particularly in states with a high fraction
of households using heating oil. Since heating oil and diesel are chemically equivalent, this
is consistent with heating oil use increasing the residual supply elasticity of diesel. We also
consider the eﬀect of reﬁnery capacity constraints and wholesale inventory levels on the pass-
through of diesel and gasoline taxes. We provide support for the notion that pass-through is
considerably less-than 100 percent if tax changes occur when U.S. reﬁnery capacity utilization
is high. This holds for diesel taxes but not for gasoline taxes. This could be due to diﬀerences in
gasoline demand during high capacity utilization months. We ﬁnd that low inventory levels are
associated with higher tax inclusive prices for both gasoline and diesel fuel, and are associated
with greater tax pass-through for gasoline.
    Finally, we examine the interaction between gasoline content regulations and tax incidence.
We ﬁnd a positive and signiﬁcant relationship between the consistency of a state’s gasoline
regulations and tax pass-through. We estimate that tax pass-through in a state with consistent
regulations (like California) is 22 percentage points higher than pass-through in a state using
two blends in equal proportions (like Illinois). This suggests that the interaction between taxes
and other forms of regulation is likely to have important implications for tax incidence.
    Our results inform two current policy debates. First, our results suggest that the beneﬁts
of fuel tax holidays are likely to accrue to consumers during under normal market conditions,
but are likely to be shared by consumers and producers during times at which supply chain
constraints exist. This distinction is important for policy, since tax holidays are most attractive
during time of supply chain constraints and associated high fuel prices. Second, since the burden
on fuel taxes falls primarily on consumers and demand for diesel and gasoline are inelastic,
producer proﬁts are unlikely to fall as taxes rise. Consequently, tax credits or free permits (in


                                                19
the case of carbon policy) are unlikely to be necessary to compensate producers.




                                             20
References

 [1] Alm, James, Edward Sennoga, and Mark Skidmore. (2009) “Perfect competition, urbanic-
     ity, and tax incidence in the retail gasoline market,” Economic Inquiry 47:1, p.118-134.
 [2] Barnett, Paul G., Theodore E. Keeler, and Teh-wei Hu. (1995) “Oligopoly structure and
     the incidence of cigarette excise taxes,” Journal of Public Economics 57:3, p. 457470.
 [3] Besley, T. (1989) “Commodity taxation and imperfect competition: A note on the eﬀects
     of entry,” Journal of Public Economics 40, p. 359-367.
 [4] Besley, Timothy J. and Harvey S. Rosen. (1998) “Vertical externalities in tax setting:
     evidence from gasoline and cigarettes,” Journal of Public Economics 70, p. 383-398.
 [5] ——– (1999) “Sales taxes and prices: an empirical analysis,” National Tax Journal 52,
     157178.
 [6] Borenstein, Severin, James Bushnell, and Matthew Lewis. (2004) “Market Power in Cali-
     fornia’s Gasoline Market,” Center for the Study of Energy Markets working paper 132.
 [7] Brownlee, Oswald and George Perry. (1967) “The Eﬀects of the 1965 Federal Excise Tax
     Reduction on Prices.” National Tax Journal 20:3, p. 235-49.
 [8] Bushnell, James, Howard Chong and Erin Mansur. (2009) “Proﬁting from Regulation: An
     Event Study of the EU Carbon Market.” NBER working paper w15572.
 [9] Chouinard, Hayley and Jeﬀrey M. Perloﬀ. (2004) “Incidence of federal and state gasoline
     taxes,” Economics Letters 83, p. 55-60.
[10] ——– (2007) “Gasoline Price Diﬀerences: Taxes, Pollution, Regulations, Mergers, Market
     Power, and Market Conditions,” The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 7:1
     (Contributions).
[11] Chernick H. and A. Reschovsky. (1997) “Who pays the gasoline tax?” National Tax Journal
     50, 157-178.
[12] Decker, Christopher S. and Mark E. Wohar. (2006) “Determinnats of state diesel fuel excise
     tax rates: the political economy of fuel taxation in the United States,” Annals of Regional
     Science 41, p. 171-188.
[13] Delipalla, Soﬁa and Michael Keen. (1992) “The comparison between ad valorem and speciﬁc
     taxation under imperfect competition,” Journal of Public Economics 49, p. 351-367.
[14] Devereux, M.P., B. Lockwood, and M. Redoano. (2007) Horizontal and vertical indirect
     tax competition: Theory and some evidence from the USA,” Journal of Public Economics
     91, p. 451-479.
[15] Doyle, Joe J. and Krislert Samphantharak. (2008) “$2.00 Gas! Studying the eﬀects of a
     gas tax moratorium.” Journal of Public Economics 92, p. 869-884.
[16] Due, John F. (1954) “The Eﬀect of the 1954 Reduction in Federal Excise Taxes on the List
     Prices of Electrical Appliances.” National Tax Journal 7:3, p. 222-6.
[17] Hamilton, S.F. (1999) “Tax incidence under oligopoly: a comparison of policy approaches,”
     Journal of Public Economics 71, p. 233245.
[18] Katz, Michael and Harvey S. Rosen. (1985) “Tax analysis in an oligopoly model,” Public
     Finance Quarterly 13, p. 319.
[19] Marion, Justin and Erich Muehlegger. (2008) “Measuring Illegal Activity and the Eﬀects
     of Regulatory Innovation: Tax Evasion and the Dyeing of Untaxed Diesel,” Journal of
     Political Economy 116:4, p.633-666.
[20] Muehlegger, Erich. (2006) “Gasoline Price Spikes and Regional Gasoline Content Regula-
     tions: A Structural Approach.” working paper.


                                              21
[21] Pindyck, Robert S. (1994) “Inventories and the Short-Run Dynamics of Commodity
     Prices,” The Rand Journal of Economics 25:1, pp. 141-159.
[22] Poterba, James M. (1996) “Retail Price Reactions to Changes in State and Local Sales
     Taxes,” National Tax Journal 49:2, p. 165-76.
[23] Sidhu, Nancy D. (1971) “The Eﬀects of Changes in Sales Tax Rates on Retail Prices,”
     Proceedings of the Sixty-Fourth Annual Conference on Taxation p. 720-33.
[24] Slemrod, Joel and Shlomo Yitzhaki. (2000) “Tax Avoidance, Evasion, and Administration,”
     in A. Auerbach and M Feldstein (eds.), Handbook of Public Economics Volume 3, North-
     Holland, p. 1423-1470.
[25] Stern, Nicholas. (1987) “The eﬀects of taxation, price control and government contracts in
     oligopoly and monopolistic competition,” Journal of Public Economics 32, p. 133158.
[26] Woodard, F.O. and Harvey Siegelman. (1967) “Eﬀects of the 1965 Excise Tax REduction
     Upon the Prices of Automotive Replacement Parts,” National Tax Journal 20:3, p. 250-8.




                                              22
Appendix




           23
                                Table A1: Gasoline Incidence Sensitivity to Time Trend Speciﬁcation
     Dependent variable: Real gasoline price

                                                 Levels, state FE                                          First-diﬀerences

                             (1)           (2)            (3)          (4)             (5)           (6)            (7)          (8)
     Real gas tax            1.190         1.067          1.024        1.016           1.056         1.068          1.069        1.066
                             (0.054)***    (0.042)***     (0.026)***   (0.018)***      (0.096)***    (0.094)***     (0.094)***   (0.086)***
     Real federal gas tax    0.266         0.488          0.428        1.108           1.092         1.116          1.119        1.056




24
                             (0.159)*      (0.150)***     (0.156)***   (0.186)***      (0.086)***    (0.092)***     (0.094)***   (0.122)***
     Linear time trend                     X                                                         X
     Quadratic time trend                                 X                                                         X
     Year dummies                                                      X                                                         X
     Observations            10665         10665          10665        10665           10560         10560          10560        10560
     R-squared               0.94          0.95           0.95         0.95            0.51          0.51           0.51         0.52

       Standard errors clustered by year*month are in parentheses.
       *,**,*** denote signiﬁcance at the 90%, 95%, and 99% level, respectively.
       In speciﬁcations (1)-(4), each variable in the model is the level of the stated variable, while in speciﬁcations (5)-(8) each variable
       has been ﬁrst-diﬀerenced. Additional controls include the WTI crude oil spot price, the lagged WTI price, month dummies, the
       minimum of neighboring states’ tax rates, and a dummy indicating Oct 1993. Speciﬁcations (1)-(4) also include state ﬁxed eﬀects.
                     Table A2: Diesel Tax Incidence, PADD level

                                    (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)


State diesel tax                    0.960        1.009        1.037         1.051
                                    (0.169)***   (0.175)***   (0.133)***    (0.158)***
Federal diesel tax                  0.979        0.983
                                    (0.178)***   (0.178)***
State tax t -1                                                              0.032
                                                                            (0.187)
Covariates                                       X            X             X
Year, month eﬀects                  X            X
Year*month eﬀects                                             X             X
Observations                        1747         1698         1706          1698
R-squared                           0.56         0.60         0.85          0.85

  Standard errors clustered by year*month are in parentheses.
  *,**,*** denote signiﬁcance at the 90%, 95%, and 99% level, respectively.
  The dependent variable is the one month change in the PADD-level tax inclusive price.
  The PADD level tax rate is obtained by taking a weighted average of the tax rates
  across states within the PADD. The weights used are the average monthly quantity
  of No. 2 distillate consumed in the state.
  Other controls in the speciﬁcation shown in column 2 include WTI Crude Spot Price
  and its lag. The speciﬁcations shown in columns 3 and 4 have controls for degree days,
  degree days interacted with prevalence of household fuel oil use for home heating,
  and the unemployment rate. As with the state tax rate, these controls are obtained
  by taking a weighted average of the values across states within the PADD. Each
  independent variable has been ﬁrst-diﬀerenced.




                                           25
           Figure 1: Average State Diesel Tax Rates by Year

Tax rate                                                                     N um berofstates
25                                                                                         12




                                                                                          10
20



                                                                                          8

15

                                            State tax rate
                                                                                          6
                                            N um berofstates changing (rightaxis)

10

                                                                                          4



 5
                                                                                          2




 0                                                                                        0
   83

   84

   85

   86

   87

   88

   89

   90

   91

   92

   93

   94

   95

   96

   97

   98

   99

   00

   01

   02

   03
 19

 19

 19

 19

 19

 19

 19

 19

 19

 19

 19

 19

 19

 19

 19

 19

 19

 20

 20

 20

 20




                                 26
                          Figure 2: Average State Gasoline Tax Rates by Year

Avg tax                                                                                           Number of states

25                                                                                                               35




                                                                                                                 30

20


                                                                                                                 25



15
                                                                                                                 20




                                                                                                                 15
10



                        State gas tax                                                                            10
                        Number of states changing tax
 5

                                                                                                                 5




 0                                                                                                               0
     1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003




                                                        27
                           Figure 3: Diesel Price and Tax Changes


        10
        8
Change in price
   4    2
        0    6




                  -2   0           2          4             6       8   10
                                         Change in tax




                                            28
                           Figure 4: Gasoline Price and Tax Changes


        10
Change in price
        0
        -5   5




                  -2   0            2          4             6        8   10
                                          Change in tax




                                             29
                 Table 1: Summary Statistics by Capacity Utilization
                                               (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)
                                               Overall   < 85%     85-90%    90-95%    >95%

Diesel tax inclusive retail price (c/gall)     120.83    126.21    126.15    129.43    125.76
                                               (19.31)   (15.12)   (20.10)   (18.68)   (18.00)
Gasoline tax inclusive retail price (c/gall)   118.15    105.23    112.88    125.98    119.22
                                               (19.03)   (16.09)   (17.69)   (18.40)   (15.38)

State diesel quantity tax (c/gall)             18.22     19.00     20.19     20.72     20.64
                                               (5.23)    (4.02)    (4.73)    (5.07)    (5.00)
Federal diesel quantity tax (c/gall)           19.79     20.04     22.59     24.00     24.23
                                               (5.24)    (1.91)    (2.12)    (1.22)    (0.77)
State gas quantity tax (c/gall)                17.08     14.25     17.14     19.38     16.13
                                               (5.21)    (3.85)    (4.74)    (4.83)    (5.77)
Federal gas quantity tax (c/gall)              14.23     9.94      13.29     17.55     14.15
                                               (4.41)    (1.93)    (4.07)    (2.29)    (4.96)
Minimum neighboring state diesel tax           14.27     15.22     16.03     16.39     16.37
                                               (4.33)    (3.43)    (3.87)    (4.00)    (4.06)
Minimum neighboring state gas tax              13.03     10.53     13.00     15.14     12.21
                                               (4.51)    (3.08)    (4.21)    (4.30)    (4.79)

Heating degree days                            5.33      8.52      7.48      5.26      1.63
                                               (4.49)    (3.21)    (4.32)    (4.26)    (2.30)
Fraction of HH using heating oil               0.28
                                               (0.20)
Diesel Inventories (days)                      51.5      54.0      49.2      48.7      48.1
                                               (16.1)    (15.2)    (13.9)    (14.7)    (14.8)
Gasoline Inventories (days)                    38.8      43.0      39.4      34.8      34.8
                                               (14.6)    (13.4)    (13.4)    (13.7)    (14.1)
Unemployment rate                              5.71      6.73      5.89      5.06      4.73
                                               (2.08)    (1.50)    (1.69)    (1.41)    (1.30)
US Reﬁnery capacity utilization                91.36
                                               (3.89)
Percent Reformulated Gasoline                  0.12
                                               (0.29)
Percent Oxygenated Gasoline                    0.02
                                               (0.10)
Sum of Squared Content Shares                  0.95
                                               (0.14)

Diesel tax raised                              0.016     0.027     0.007     0.012     0.012
Gas tax raised                                 0.022     0.027     0.032     0.014     0.010
Quarter 1                                                0.39      0.39      0.16      0
Quarter 2                                                0.18      0.23      0.23      0.44
Quarter 3                                                0.10      0.23      0.28      0.44
Quarter 4                                                0.33      0.15      0.34      0.11
Number of months                                         51        61        80        36

  Standard errors are in parentheses.
  Each row reports the mean of the stated variable separately for months with the U.S.
  reﬁnery capacity utilization stated in the column heading. The exception is the number of
  months, which simply reports the number of months that experienced the given capacity
  utilization.
  The samples used to compute the means diﬀer between column 1 and columns 2-5. The
  former uses the entire series, while the latter is based only on those months for which
  capacity utilization data is available.


                                               30
                                     Table 2: Diesel Tax Incidence
                                             (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)

State diesel tax                             1.262        1.218        1.087        1.087        1.071
                                             (0.176)***   (0.124)***   (0.083)***   (0.083)***   (0.086)***
Federal diesel tax                           1.081        1.110
                                             (0.252)***   (0.262)***
State tax t -1                                                                      0.071
                                                                                    (0.083)
State tax * degree days * HH fuel oil frac                                                       0.055
                                                                                                 (0.022)**
Diesel tax * degree days                                                                         0.000
                                                                                                 (0.004)
State tax * HH fuel oil frac                                                                     0.116
                                                                                                 (0.513)
WTI Crude Oil Price                          1.285        1.232
                                             (0.160)***   (0.172)***
WTI Price t-1                                0.831        0.899
                                             (0.127)***   (0.128)***
Oct 1993                                     3.673        3.613
                                             (1.258)***   (1.299)***
Minimum neighbor tax                                      1.177        0.739        0.741        0.723
                                                          (0.499)**    (0.456)      (0.456)      (0.438)
Degree days                                               -0.021       -0.051       -0.050       0.226
                                                          (0.120)      (0.076)      (0.078)      (0.130)*
Degree days * HH Oil Frac.                                0.507        0.512        0.506        -0.502
                                                          (0.151)***   (0.135)***   (0.138)***   (0.386)
Unemployment rate                                         0.481        0.446        0.339        0.424
                                                          (0.822)      (0.498)      (0.506)      (0.495)
Year, month eﬀects                           X            X
Year*month eﬀects                                                      X            X            X
Observations                                 5272         5133         5200         5133         5200
R-squared                                    0.46         0.51         0.77         0.77         0.77

  Standard errors clustered by year*month are in parentheses.
  *,**,*** denote signiﬁcance at the 90%, 95%, and 99% level, respectively.
  The dependent variable is the one month change in the tax inclusive retail price of No. 2 diesel. Each
  independent variable has been ﬁrst-diﬀerenced.




                                                    31
                     Table 3: Gasoline Tax Incidence
                         (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)

State gas tax            1.066         1.069        1.053        1.054
                         (0.089)***    (0.088)***   (0.054)***   (0.054)***
Federal gas tax          1.034         1.038
                         (0.192)***    (0.190)***
State tax t -1                                                   0.038
                                                                 (0.046)
WTI Crude Oil Price      1.125         1.125
                         (0.146)***    (0.145)***
WTI Price t-1            1.037         1.037
                         (0.148)***    (0.148)***
Oct 1993                 2.705         2.688
                         (1.186)**     (1.175)**
Minimum neighbor tax                   -0.302       -0.029       -0.030
                                       (0.162)*     (0.124)      (0.124)
Unemployment rate                      -0.271       0.011        0.016
                                       (0.727)      (0.246)      (0.248)
Year, month eﬀects       X             X
Year*month eﬀects                                   X            X
Observations             10560         10560        10606        10560
R-squared                0.47          0.47         0.77         0.77

  Standard errors clustered by year*month are in parentheses.
  *,**,*** denote signiﬁcance at the 90%, 95%, and 99% level, respectively.
  The dependent variable is the one month change in the tax inclusive retail
  price of gasoline. Each independent variable has been ﬁrst-diﬀerenced.




                                      32
Table 4: Diesel Incidence and U.S. Reﬁnery Capacity Utilization
 Dependent variable: Change in tax inclusive diesel price

                       Panel A: Split by lagged capacity utilization

                     <85%          85-90%        90-95%         >95%

 State diesel tax    1.290         0.995         1.059          0.414
                     (0.164)***    (0.204)***    (0.076)***     (0.150)***
 Observations        1111          1247          1682           660
 R-squared           0.71          0.79          0.82           0.79
                                   Panel B: Split by quarter
                     Quarter 1     Quarter 2     Quarter 3      Quarter 4
 State diesel tax    1.057         1.261         0.953          1.197
                     (0.184)***    (0.155)***    (0.104)***     (0.036)***
 Observations        1257          1268          1323           1352
 R-squared           0.79          0.75          0.76           0.75
   Standard errors clustered by year*month are in parentheses.
   *,**,*** denote signiﬁcance at the 90%, 95%, and 99% level, respec-
   tively.
   Other controls include month*year eﬀects, the minimum of the
   neighboring states’ tax, the number of heating degree days, heating
   degree days interacted with household use fuel oil for home heating,
   and the state unemployment rate. Each independent variable has
   been ﬁrst-diﬀerenced.



 Table 5: Gasoline Incidence and U.S. Reﬁnery Capacity Uti-
 lization
  Dependent variable: Change in tax inclusive gas price

                      Panel A: Split by lagged capacity utilization

                    <85%          85-90%        90-95%         >95%
  State gas tax     1.036         1.007         1.205          0.898
                    (0.115)***    (0.108)***    (0.109)***     (0.116)***
  Observations      1840          2394          3619           1653
  R-squared         0.84          0.82          0.77           0.65
                                  Panel B: Split by quarter
                    Quarter 1     Quarter 2     Quarter 3      Quarter 4
  State gas tax     1.008         0.988         1.065          1.394
                    (0.117)***    (0.115)***    (0.077)***     (0.048)***
  Observations      2663          2702          2620           2621
  R-squared         0.83          0.76          0.71           0.73
    Standard errors clustered by year*month level are in parentheses.
    *,**,*** denote signiﬁcance at the 90%, 95%, and 99% level, re-
    spectively.
    Other controls include month*year eﬀects, the minimum of the
    neighboring states’ tax, and the state unemployment rate.


                                     33
                                                 Table 6: Fuel Tax Incidence and Wholesale Inventories
     Dependent variable: Change in tax inclusive fuel price

                                                               Panel A: Diesel                                     Panel B: Gasoline

                                           (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)            (5)          (6)          (7)           (8)
     State fuel tax                        1.092         1.082         1.042        1.013          1.051        0.636        0.565         0.565
                                           (0.081)***    (0.137)***    (0.141)***   (0.133)***     (0.056)***   (0.155)***   (0.170)***    (0.172)***
     Inventories                           -0.045        -0.048        -0.048       -0.006         0.096        -0.057       -0.099        -0.090
                                           (0.020)**     (0.039)       (0.040)      (0.037)        (0.039)**    (0.031)*     (0.043)**     (0.045)**
     Lagged inventories                                                             -0.112                                                 -0.224
                                                                                    (0.021)***                                             (0.045)***
     State tax * Inventories                             0.000         0.000        0.001                       0.009        0.012         0.012
                                                         (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.002)                     (0.003)***   (0.004)***    (0.004)***
     State tax * Bottom 10% Inventories                                0.594        0.564                                    0.194         0.177




34
                                                                       (0.297)**    (0.320)*                                 (0.243)       (0.225)
     Bottom 10% Inventories                                            0.021        -0.056                                   0.139         0.000
                                                                       (0.354)      (0.352)                                  (0.527)       (0.498)
     State tax * Top 10% Inventories                                   0.126        0.106                                    -0.330        -0.382
                                                                       (0.259)      (0.258)                                  (0.192)*      (0.194)**
     Top 10% Inventories                                               -0.422       -0.056                                   -0.083        -0.067
                                                                       (0.355)      (0.366)                                  (0.074)       (0.096)
     Observations                          5114          5114          5114         5029           10606        10606        10606         10560
     R-squared                             0.77          0.77          0.78         0.78           0.78         0.78         0.78          0.78
       Standard errors clustered by year*month are in parentheses.
       *,**,*** denote signiﬁcance at the 90%, 95%, and 99% level, respectively.
       Inventories are measured as days of supply, where supply is a moving average of quantities sold in the prior 12 months. The variable bottom 10%
       inventories is an indicator for the level of the days supply measure for that month being in the bottom ten percent of months in the sample. The
       variable “top 10% inventories” is similarly deﬁned. All variables have been ﬁrst-diﬀerenced. Other controls for both diesel and gasoline include
       month*year eﬀects, the minimum of the neighboring states’ tax, and the state unemployment rate. In addition, for the diesel regressions, we
       include the number of heating degree days, fuel oil for home heating, and heating degree days interacted with household use.
Table 7: Gasoline Tax Incidence and Content Regulations
Dependent variable: Change in tax inclusive gasoline retail price
                                 (1)         (2)         (3)

State gas tax                       1.067***   1.069***   0.629**
                                    (0.0598)   (0.0598)   (0.250)
Percent Reformulated Gas                       1.593      2.189**
                                               (1.120)    (1.046)
Percent Oxygenated Gas                         0.404      1.577
                                               (0.908)    (0.975)
Sum of Squared Content Shares                             -6.047
                                                          (5.289)
Sum of Sq. Cont. Shares *                                 0.451*
State Gas Tax                                             (0.255)
Observations                        8148       7977       7977
R-squared                           0.788      0.789      0.789
  Standard errors, clustered at the state-level, are in parentheses.
  *,**,*** denote signiﬁcance at the 90%, 95%, and 99% level,
  respectively. All variables have been ﬁrst diﬀerenced. Other
  controls include month*year ﬁxed eﬀects, the minimum of the
  neighboring states’ tax, and the state unemployment rate.




                               35
