                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       IS INCREASED PRICE
                    FLEXIBILITY STABILIZING?



                       J. Bradford DeLong

                      Lawrence H. Summers



                     Working Paper No. 1686




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                          August 1985




We have benefitted from useful discussions with Olivier Blanchard
and financial support from the National Science Foundation. The
research reported here is part of the NBER's research programs in
Economic Fluctuations and Financial Markets and Monetary Economics.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                             NBER Working Paper #1686
                                             August 1985




                         Is Increased Price
                      Flexibility Stabilizing?


                                ABSTRACT




    This paper uses Taylors model of overlapping contracts to show that

increased wage and price flexibility can easily be destabilizing. This

result arises because of the Mundell effect. While lower prices increase

output, the expectation of falling prices decreases output. Simulations

based on realistic parameter values suggest that increases in price

flexibility might bell increase the cyclical variability of output in the

United States.




J. Bradford DeLong                           Lawrence H. Summers
Department of Economics                      Department of Economics
Harvard University                           Harvard Univers ity
Cambridge, MA 02138                          Cambridge, MA 02138
(617) 495—2447                               (617) 495—2447
     Most economists would answer the question posed in our title

affirmatively. It is certainly true that if prices were completely

inflexible, markets could never equilibrate to changing conditions. And

given a disturbance in nominal aggregate demand, "more flexible" prices

imply that more of the disturbance is absorbed as a change in the price

level, leaving less to appear as a cyclical movement in production.

Considerations along these lines have led to a widespread belief that there

is an intimate causal connection between wage and price inflexibility and

cyclical fluctuations in employment and output.

     This paradigmatic belief——that the magnitude of the business cycle

depends largely on the degree of institutional wage rigidity——is

institutionalized by the pedogical style of many macroeconomics courses. At

some point a "Classical" aggregate supply curve generated by complete price

flexibility and atomistic markets, is counterposed to a "keynesian"

aggregate demand—aggregate supply model, where the short—run aggregate

supply curve is infinitely price—elastic because nominal wages are assumed

fixed. The teacher then demonstrates that in the "Classical" model a

monetary (or any other nominal) shock has no real effects on output because

the aggregate price level adjusts to clear all markets, and in the

"leynesian" model a monetary shock has real effects because quantities

adjust. The message carried away is that the crucial market failure

generating business cycles is the existence of sticky nominal wages: if only

the labor market were fully competitive and flexible, then business cycles

would be much smaller. This view suggests the desirability of any possible

policy measures which increase wage and price flexibility.



                                       3
    This message is too simple. We believe, as we argued in DeLong and

Summers (1984). that the sign of the macroeconomic consequences of increased

aggregate price flexibility is not a settled issue. We think that the

question, "is increased price flexibility stabilizing?" is——or should be——

kept open, and there is a real chance that aggregate price flexibility would

be destabilizing at the margin given the present structure of the American

economy.

     The view that price level flexibility can be destabilizing has been

expressed many times. Irving Fisher (1923,1925) saw the business cycle as

"largely a 'dance of the dollar'": expected deflation led to high

anticipated real interest rates, little investment, and low output.   If the

money supply were manipulated to stabilize the price level——said Fisher

much of the business cycle would disappear, for "what concerns business is

not whether prices are high or low but whether they are rising or falling.

Thus rising prices stit2ulate business because the prices a producer can get

outrun his expenses for interest rent, salaries, and wages, while falling

prices depress trade...lWJe find that this one element, randitv of vric

movement, during the period 1914—1922 seems to account, almost completely,

for the ups and downs of business."

     Keynes (1936) argued in his chapter 19 that it was preferable in a

gathering recession to increase real balances by printing money rather than

by helping along the decline in prices, because

     it would be much better that wages should be rigidly fixed
     and deemed incapable of material changes, than that depression
     should be accompanied by a gradual downward tendency of money—
     wages, a further moderate wage reduction being expected to
     signalize each increase of, say, one percent in the amount of
     unezployment. For example, the effect of an expectation that
     wages are going to sag by, say, two percent in the coming year
     will be roughly equivalent to the effect of a rise of two



                                        4
     percent in the amount of interest payable for the same period.

and according to L. Jonung (1981), the Swedish Central Bank's attempt to

adopt a price—stability rule for the conduct of monetary policy greatly

insulated Sweden from the Great Depression.

     More recently, James Tobin (1975) has stressed the potential role of

destabilizing deflation in creating a situation in which there is

"protracted unemployment which the natural adjustments of a market economy

remedy very slowly if at all." Be argues that "even with stable monetary

and fiscal policy, combined with price and wage flexibility, the adjustment

mechanisms of the economy may be too weak to eliminate persistent

unenaployznent" because the destabilizing price change effect on aggregate

demand may well swamp the stabilizing price level effect.

     In DeL.ong and Summers (1984), we noted that the increasing degree of

nominal rigidity in the U.S. economy over the past century had coincided

with a dramatic decrease in the cyclical volatility of economic activity.

This observation tends to bely explanations of cyclical fluctuations based

on nominal rigidities. We presented models with backward—looking

expectations, in which marginal increases in aggregate price flexibility

were destabilizing, in the sense that they increased the steady—state

variance of output in response to independent stochastic shocks. We

conjectured that the same property——destabilizing price flexibility——would

hold true in at least some models with fully rational expectations.1

     This paper presents such a model. We take Taylor's (1979 and 1980)

macroeconomic model with staggered labor contracts and modify it so that (a)

it produces persistent fluctuations of output in response to macroeconomic

demand shocks, and (b) it allows anticipated changes in the price level to

affects on the level of aggregate demand through effects on real interest



                                        5
rates or the distribution of wealth. Solving the model numerically, we find

that for a wide range of parameter values1 an increase in the responsiveness

of wages to excess demand or supply in the labor market leads to an increase

in cyclical variability as measured by the steady state variance of output.

     The paper is organized as follows: Section I describes our

modifications of the Taylor model and shows that increasing the flexibility

of prices may well be destabilizing in our modified model. Section II

verifies the robustness of this result by exazining modifications of the

time structure of contracts. We are able to verify that the volatility of

output ultimately declines as the wage—price process approaches perfect

Vairas—like flexibility. But this limiting result is very misleading as a

guide to marginal changes in price flexibility that start from current

levels. Section III generalizes the analysis by allowing aggregate demand

to depend on both Tobin's q and the rate of deflation as well as the real

interest rate. The former generalization tends to increase the stabilizing

character of price flexibility while the latter reduces it. Section IV

concludes the paper by discussing some empirical observations supporting our

analysis.




I.   WAGE RIGIDITY AND OUTPUT VOLATILITY


     John Taylor ((1979) for the intuitive, simplified version (1980) for the

full model and extensions) set forth the following simple macroeconomic

model to illustrate how the asynchronization of nominal price setting

decisions can have important aggregate effects:




                                       6
    • ]. Y        — Pt       +
                                 Vt   aggregate   demand


     2. m — hp                                money—supply rule


     .    Pt   .5(w +                     definition   of price level


     4 '       .5wt_i
                         +
                                 .5E 1w1 +   g(.5Ey+.5EY)+g
                                                       ——wage setting eçuation



where e and v are stochastic shocks.

     Equations (1) through (3) are cou3pletely standard. Equation (1) says

that with variables in logarithms, output y equal to real ioney balances

       plus a white—noise velocity shock v. Equation (2) asserts that the

monetary authority partially accomxiiodates increases in the price level by

increasing the nominal money supply in the proportion h. Equation (3)

defines the aggregate price level. Taylor supposes that workers negotiate

two—period fixed nominal wage contracts. The aggregate price level in

period t is simply the average of the two different contracts in force at

that moment——the contract which begins in period t—]. and the contract which

begins in period t. Each contract covers half of the labor force, and             w is
defined as the (log of the) wage paid in periods t and t+i to those workers

whose contract is negotiated at the end of t—i.

     Equation (4) contains the heart of the model. The            contract   wage w is

                                                  w_1 and
set as the average of the contract wages                    the expected contract wage

w+1_the average of the wages of those contracts which overlap the periods

covered by the contract which pays we—_adjusted for excess demand or supply

in the labor market through the terms containing Et_1y and
                                                                     E_1y+1.
       appears because the contract is negotiated before the realization of




                                             7
period t's shocks. The    parameter   g represents the degree of wage

flexibility: the higher is g, the greater is the response of wages to demand

conditions.

     Recent research, Akerlof and Yellen (1985), Nankiw (1985), and

Elanchard (1985), suggests that contracts of the type envisioned by Taylor

can be justified on micro—economic grounds. The private loss from such

arrangements is second—order relative to the social consequence which is

first—order. In the presence of small transactions costs, firms and

workers may therefore enter into such contracts. Alternatively, following

the arguments advanced in Fischer (1984), the analytical use of a

contracting model of this type may be justified on enApirical grounds:

contracts similar to those envisioned by Taylor do predominate in American

labor markets, even if economists cannot fully rationalize their existence.

     Taylor's model provides a clean and forceful implementation of the

fundamental insight that the asynchronization of price changing decisions

can have significant consequences for the business cycle. But for the

purpose of examining the effects of varying degrees of price flexibility,

Taylor's particular implementation of this idea is deficient in two major

respects: first, the specific models advanced by Taylor (in 1979 and 19O)

produce the wrong kind of output persistence second, the specific oodel

possesses no channel through which price flexibility could be stabilizing.

We consider these points in turn.

     As Taylor demonstrates, equations (1) through (4) can be solved to

produce a moving average representation for output as a function of the

 shocks e end


                —
      (5)
                    .5et_.5{((D)il+(D))eti)+Vt

                                            8
whore D is some complex function of structural parameters and 1—h. An

aggregate demand shock——the velocity shock v__enerates no persistent

fluctuations. The only source of persistent fluctuations is the e shock in

equation (4).

     What economic interpretation can be given to a positive e shock? It

is an exogenous increase in the wage rate attached to the contract beginning

in period t. It may be thought of as representing an exogenous outburst

of union militancy. These episodes of successful bargaining lead to

inflation, to a higher price level. Because the monetary authority does not

fully accommodate this cost—push shock, this price—level increase is

gradually rolled back by a prolonged period of subnormal output. The

business cycle described by Taylor is, therefore, a cost—push business

cycle. Equation (5) describes persistent cyclical output fluctuations that

come about because of exogenous supply—side wage shocks. It has, therefore,

relatively little to tell us about the persistent output fluctuations in

response to demand—side shocks that Keynesian econozijists at least, think lie

at the heart of the business cycle.2

    If a version of Taylor's (1979) model is to give much   insight   into

the workings of the business cycle, the model must generate persistent

output fluctuations as a result of demand shocks. Note that if the model's

timing convention is modified so that wages depend on contemporaneous

demand, white noise nominal shocks will generate negatively serially

correlated movements in output. We found it impossible to generate

persistent output flucutations as the result of transitory nominal shocks in

this framework. To examine the issue of price flexibility within a model

which gives a plausible account of business cycles, the assumption that



                                       9
aggregate demand shocks are serially uncorrelated must be droped. Instead,

the model must incorporate a persistent nominal demand shock.

    Even with a persistent nominal demand shock,, however, the Taylor model

is still unsatisfactory for the purposes of this piper. There    is   no channel

through which price flexibility could possibly be destabilizingi the model's

treatment of the determinants of aggregate demand is too simple. Given

and the monetary policy reaction function, output simply moves inversely

with the price level. In order to treat the effects of deflation which

might exert downward pressure on output, we must complicate the determinants

of aggregate demand. We do this by relaxing Taylor's assumption that the

demand for money is interest inelastic.

     The modified model exhibits the Mundell effect. The interest rate that

determines demand for goods is a real interest rates the interest rite that

clears the money market is a nominal interest rate. Inflation or deflation

drive a wedge between the two and shift the short—run solution of the IS—L11

system,    which determines output. While a lower price level is expansionary.

the expectation of falling prices is contractionary, creating the

possibility of instability. This seems the easiest but not the only way to

model the host of possible channels——redistributionu, bankruptcies,

liquidity failures, real interest rate changes, and so forth——through which

deflation might depress output.

     We assume output as determined by the IS curve depends on the short—run

real interest rate and a serially—correlated demand shift term s:


     (6)          _A(i_[Ep+1_p]} +




                                         10
where         is independent and identically distributed. The money—demand

function is standard, with velocity depending on the nominal interest rate:


        (8)       —Pt +y

               v —


Parallelling      Driskill and Sheffrin (1985), the money authority follows an

interest—rate rule which is designed to remove          as an independent

variable from (8) and (9):


        (10) ui



Deleting       the NcOst_puSht wage shock from the wage equation, but otherwise

using the price level definition and the wage setting equation from the

original two—period contract version of the Taylor model described above

yields:


        (11) Pt =      .S(w+w1)

        (12)       =             + E1(w1)) + .5g(E      + E_1Yt+1)


        This model (6)—(12) resists analytic solution. Therefore the model is

numerically solved for a range of parameter values. Although there are five

free parameters——g43,y,A and si——the behavior of output and prices has only

four independent dimensions of variation. y and          affect the movement of

and Pt only through their sum since substituting (10) and (9) into (8) leads to:


        (13) y +       p   =
                               (s÷y)i

                                            11
and substituting (13) into (6) leads to:


     (14)
            y (A(LEp+i
                            —
                                Pt]
                                      —   B(p))    +




There B (+y)1. Equation (14) reveals that the price level affects,

directly and indirectly, output through two channels: there is a

"destabilizing" expected price change effect and a "stabilizing" price level

effect.

     Vith this model, we pose the following question: given that the model

falls short of some ideal contingent—claims Walrazian economy in many ways,

does additional aggregate price flexibility——an increase in the

responsiveness of wages to excess supply and demand, an increase in the

coefficient g—stabilizing the economy? Ve              calculate   the steady—state

variance of output in response to a unit variance white—noise process for

z, and determine whether additional price flexibility increases or

decreases the steady—state variance of output for the economically relevant

part of the range of parameter values.

     The    model is solved numerically for the steady—state variance of output

by the following procedure: first, we calculate the impulse response

functions for output and prices in response to a single z shock. To

determine a unique solution, the transversality condition that the effects

of the shock eventually go away is imposed. The model thus becomes

mathematically a two—point boundary value problem which can be solved

numerically along the lines of the Fair—Taylor (1983) algorithm. That is, we

assume a path of expectations for prices and output after the shock, solve

the model forward conditional on this path of expectations, check for the



                                              12
convergence of the "actual" with the "anticipated" path, update the path of

expectations, and iterate. Second, once the impulse response function has

been found, the steady—state variance of output in response to a univariate

white—noise process for        is easy to determine. If k. is the impulse

r.sponse in the i'th period after the shock, then the effects of the shock

       will contribute (Rj)2(z)2 to the variance of y. Since independent

variances add, the steady—state variance of ' generated by a unit—variance

independent and identically distributed z process is simply


 2,c
aL
  0
       j
       2


       In our initial set of numerical solutions, we let A——the semi—elasticity of

output with respect to the real      interest   rate——vary between 1 and 3.

Assuming an average nominal interest, rate of 8 percent, the .17 interest
elasticity of real spending estimated by Friedman (1978) is eçuivalent to an

A of two. B, the inverse of the sum of the interest semi—elasticities of

money demand and money supply, takes on two values: .2, representing

accommodating monetary policy (or a banking sector which elastically supplies

real balances) and *    sizable   responsiveness of money demand to interest

rates, and .4, representing relatively unaccoizmodating money supply and money

demand behavior. To place these values in perspective, note that with a

nominal interest rate assumed to average eight        percent   and Goldfeld's (1976)

estimate of —.20 for the interest elasticity of ironey demand, completely

interest inelastic money supply implies B equals .42 if           the   money supply has

an   interest   elasticity of +.20, then B equals .21.

       Perhaps the best way to evaluate the plausibility of our parameter

estimates for A and B is to calculate their implications for the sinple




                                           13
leynesian multiplier. Eolding all present and future expected prices

constant, the simple comparative—statics calculation of d/ from equations

(6)(1O) assuming a marginal propensity to spend of .67 is given

by:

                               ____            B—.6

               A—i             2.5             2.2
               A—2             2.1             1.5
               A=3             1.9             1.5


an    increase in autonomous spending of 1 percent GNP leads in the

comparative—statics to an increase in nominal demand of K percent. These

values    span most estimates of this spending Liultiplier.

       We allow g, the responsiveness of wages to excess demand or supply in

the labor market, to vary between 0 and 1. Thinking of a period as 1 year,

a value of .1 for g implies that a one percent reduction in output reduces

the wages by .05 percent in the first year and by .1 percent after two

years. In the language of Okun (1978), it implies a sacrifice ratio of 20

slightly greater than his upper bound estimate. A value of 1 for g implies a

sacrifice ratio of 2, which is somewhat below Saclis' (195) optimistic

reading of recent experience.

        The basic numerical solutions are presented in Table 1. The degree of

price flexibility increases within each row reading across. And it can be

clearly seen that increasing price flexibility typically increases—not

decreases——the steady—state variance of output.

        Price flexibility is destabilizing at the margin in almost all cases.

Only as the disturbance to the IS equation approaches a random walk is price

flexibility ever helpful in reducing the variance of output, and then only

over a relatively narrow range as the parameters move from a situation with




                                          14
no price flexibility to one with some price flexibility. Starting from the

position of no price response to output fluctuations at all, a small amount

of price flexibility can effectively damp the far—future effects of a

current shock1 thus reducing steady—state output variance. But very soon

the margin of diminishing returns is reached because the far—future output

fluctuations have already been damped, there are only small marginal returns

as price flexibility is increased, and increased price flexibility disturbs

the real interest rate in the present.

     The pattern of responses shown in Table 1 is typical of the many

calculations which we performed. In general, increases in B, A, and i         all
tend to slightly increase the region over which price flexibility is

stabilizing. The steeper the U   curve   or the flatter the IS curve, the

smaller is the scope for destabilizing price flexibility. And    the   more

persistent are shocks, the more likely are the advantages of moving the

price level quickly towards its equilibrium level to counteract the

disadvantages of having a volatile rate of change of the price level.

     It is interesting to note that price flexibility increases the variance

of output not by increasing the persistence of shocks but by froiit—1oadin.

their effects. As Figure 1 shows, the combination of price flexibility and

the real interest rate effect together concentrate the output effects of a

persistent nominal demand shocks in the present and near future, close in

time to the moment when the shock occurs. If in response to a

monetary contraction the price level is expected to decline substantially,

then (a) real balances will be back to normal in the following period, so

the effects of the contraction will not persist, and (b) the contractionarY

effects of high nominal interest rates will be reinforced by the extra

increase in the real interest rate created by the anticipated price decline.



                                         15
                                                  Table    1


                                     Steady—State Variances of Output


                                                        B=.2

                                                 -
          A=l        92*           97*          103*            113*         120*          126*           129*
                                   23*           25*             27*          29*           31*            32*
          2.0        23*
                                   10*           11*             11*          12*           13*            14*
          3.0        10*

                                  710*          776*            914*        1019*         1104*          1176*
          A=l
                                  176*          192*            226*         253*          275*           293*
jj=1.0    2.0                                                                                             130*
          3.0                      78*           84*             99*         112*          122*


                                                        B= .4



                                                                 76*          80*           83*            85*
           Al         68           69*            72*
                                                                 19*          20*           21*            22*
           2.0        17           17*            18*
                       75            73*           77*            8.2*         8.6*           9.1*          93*
           3.0

                                   328           314            326*          344*         360*           374*
           A=1
                                                  79             81*           R5*          90*            93*
p=l.O      2.0                     85
                                                                               38*          40*            41*
           3.0                     36             35             36*




Note:    Price flexibility destabilizing at the margin is denoted by *•   The choice of parameters is described
         in the text.
                                     Figure 1

                     Impulse Response Functions to a   Shock:

             Low (g0) and Moderate (g.4) Price Flexibility Cases


                                A=2 .0 B—. 25   .7




         100 -




Output



                                                                g= 0




           0—                                                   g=.4



                 0                                     10




                                       Period
Output is   subject to shorter——and sharper——swings with wore flexible

prices. In DeLong and Summers (1984) we show that serial correlation in

output has in fact increased over time as prices have become wore and output

less volatile. The serial correlation in quarterly changes in output has

risen from approximately .4 before World War I to approximately .8 today.

A common pattern——increased serial correlation and decreased volatility with

wore rigid prices——is present both in history and in the model. Perhaps this

mechanism has something to do with the changing character of American

business cycles.

       Although this model is too simple and stylized for the conclusions

reached from analysis of it to be easily applied, the conclusions do seem

striking. Taking Taylor's (1979) model, and modifying it so that it (1)

allows for the influence of real interest rates on aggregate demand, ana (2)

generates persistent output fluctuations in response to demand—side shocks,

we found that this model exhibits destabilizing price flexibility as

stressed by Fisher, Keynes, and Tobin for a wide range of plausible

parameter values.




II •   ALTERNATIVE CONTRACT STRUCTURES

Changina    Contract Length:
       In addition to changing g as   a   way of modelling   increases or decreases

in wage and price flexibility, there is another possible type of change in

price flexibility that can be analyzed with this model. It is possible to

change the number and the length of the overlapping contracts. Taylor (1980)

describes how to generalize his wage—setting equation from the case of two—

to the case of many—period contracts.



                                            16
                                                      Table    2


                                 Increasing the Length of Nominal Contracts


                                                      A=2,B=.4

         Contract Length:                 2   periods                           3   periods                 4 periods

p=. 5         g0                               17.0                                  17.0                      18.0
                .1                             17.2                                  17.1                      17.1*
                .2                             17.6*                                 17 4*                     17.2*
                .4                             18.7*                                 17.9*                     17 5*
              1.0                              21.3*                                 19.2*                     18.2*


                                                a,
ji=l.0        g 0
                .1                             84.6                                  97.4                     109.4
                .2                             79.6                                  84.2*                     933*
                .4                             80.8*                                 79. 6*                    83. 6*
              1.0                              934*                                  83.1*                     81.0*




Note:    Price flexibility destabilizing at the margin    is       denoted by   .     The choice of parameters is described
         in the text.
     The previous section has shown that price flexibility is almost always

destabilizing for the case of two period contracts, but how does the

'variance of output change as the number of periods a given contract lasts

increases from two to three to four?

     Table 2 shows that, at least for the parameters chosen, increasing the

of nominal contracts in the model frequently decreases the steady—state

variance of output. We present only results for B=.4. With 13.2,

increasing contract length reduces the variance of output for all our chosen

values of i and A. As the contract length increases, the aggregate price

level does not adjust as quickly to nominal shocks. And this sluggish

response of the price level slightly reduces the magnitude of real interest

rate fluctuations enough to reduce the variance of output in many cases.

     This result casts some doubt upon the validity of arguments by those

who, like Thurow (1979), argue that the United States should attempt to

explicitly encourage the development of "corporatist" institutions to

explicitly conduct centralized wage bargaining. ?ore generally, it calls

into question standard Leynesian arguments suggesting that long term

contracts help to explain the cyclical variability of output. In the model

we are working with, shortened contracts, frequent reopeners and so forth

do not necessarily stabilize output in many cases.

Apvroachin the Limit of "Perfect Iarkets

     There is yet another dimension of changing flexibility available which

we can use to further explore the properties of this simple model: it is

possible to change the "length" of the period itself, to reduce the amount

 of "time" taken up by each count of the index t. Instead of thinking of the

 model as comprising one year—long periods and two year—long labor contracts,




                                       17
we can examine the performance of the model with six month—long periods and

one year—long contracts, or with three month—long periods, and so forth.

Bow do the effects of price flexibility change as we change the length of

the period in the model?

     In order to effectively halve the length of the amount of time covered

by a single period in the model, the following steps are necessary: first,

we set the parameter         equal to        For the demand shock to decay in

the same amount of "time" in the transformed model, it must decay in twice

the number of periods. Second, we adjust the variance of the initial shock

   so that the steady state variance of the shift term s in the IS curve is

the same as it was before.

    leaping the parameter g the same in the transformed and the

untransformed model implies that the transformation to a period that covers

half as much time involves a doubling of the responsiveness of the price

level to output deviations.

     This way of increasing price flexibility has a strong advantage over

the other two possible ways——decreasing the contract length and increasing

the value of the parameter g. It is not possible by varying the contract

length or increasing g to create a sequence of economies which smoothly

converges to the Wairasian limit. There is a tremendous difference between

one— and two—period contracts, and continuously increasing g eventually

leads to economically—meaningless behavior on the part of the model as small

expected price changes lead to enormous output jumps in the present.

Shortening the amount of "time" covered by a single period allows for

continuous movement to the Wairasian ideal, where nominal demand shocks have

no real effects it   all.
     As Table 3 illustrates, convergence toward the Wairasian limit does



                                        18
                                                      Table   3


                                          Approaching the Wairasian Limit




                                    Period Length Relative    to   Initial Value

                                                        1/8            1/16        1/32   1/64...   1/a'
                        1        1/2         1/4

                                                       54.4            54.4        54.4   54.4      54.4
A=l.0    g=O           54.4     54.4        54.4
                                            54.1       49.0            39.3        31.5   29.5      0
         .1            54.5     54.6
                                                                       40.2        32.2   30.1       0
         .2            54.6     56.0        56.3       50.0
                                                                       42.3        33.4   31.0       0
         .4            56.0     59.6        60.6       53.5
                                                       56.9            44.7        35.1   32.6       0
         .6            57.2     62.7        64.3
         .8            58.6     65.6        67.4       62.1            45.9        36.6   34.1       0
                                            69.8       62.6            47.8        38.0   35.3       0
        1.0            59.6     68.1

                       13.6     13.6        13.6       13.6            13.6        13.6   13.6      13.6
A=2.0    0                                                                                           0
         .1            13.6     13.6        13.6       12.5            10.7         9.0    8.9
                                13.7        13.8       12.5            10.4         8.6    8.5       0
         .2            13.6                                                                          0
         .4            13.8     14.2        14.8       13.1            10.4         8.4    8.3
                                            15.8       13.9            11.0         8.8    8.6       0
         .6            14.1     14.9                                                                 0
         .8            14.5     15.6        16.8       14.7            11.8         9.3    9.2
                                            17.6       15.5            12.3         9.7    9.5       0
        1.0            14.8     16.2



Note:    The value of B=.4 is assumed.   When the period length is 1, w.25 is assumed.
happen eventually: for periods of l/& the original or shorter, the steady

state variance of output drops relatively quickly (although by only 10—20

percent, by much less than 50 percent, with each iteration) as the period is
                       3
shortened further.         But before the value of 1/8. convergence toward the

limit is not or is at most only slightly visible. The           effect   of a shortened

period in causing more rapid price changes——and thus more of an incentive to

postpone or accelerate spending by one period——approximately balances the

stabilizing effects of more rapid price flexibility. In the limit,

increased price flexibility is indeed stabilizing. But one must already be

very close to that Wairasian limit before its properties become a good guide

to the behavior of the model.




III •   ALTERNATIVE DETERIINANTS CF AGGREGATE DF2LAND


        The previous   sections have all assumed   that what   matters for the

determination of aggregate demand is the short—term real interest rate, the

one—period interest rate r. But there is an important and convincing line

of thought which argues that the relevant interest rate for the purpose of

determining investment is a long—term interest rate. Suppose that the level

of aggregate demand is determined by the level of investment, which is in

turn determined by Tobin's q. Bow does this shift in the mechanism that

determines aggregate demand change the results of the previous sections?

        Blanchard and Sachs (1983) consider a model with quantity—constrained

demands, fully optimizing agents, and durable capital that is costly to

adjust. They conclude that the Jundell effect is not strong enough to be

destabilizing. In their model, price flexibility amplifies fluctuations in




                                            19
the short—term real interest rate. But because price flexibility leads to

the faster damping of disturbances, long—term rates are less erratic and

output is less variable.

     A critical issue here is the length of time which constitutes the "long

run," is the horizon with which Tobin's q is calculated. In the spirit of

the previous models in this paper, we replace r in (8) with its closest

analogue in a q—theoretic framework__q—1.


     (15) (i+AB)y=A(_l) +5



Arbitrage   implies that   evolves according to:


                     j
                 '
     (16) q          LI

                jO
where (Fk)t is the paid on a unit of capital in place in period t, 6
is the su of the risk premium on equity, and rate of depreciation1 and

is the real short term interest rate. Clearly the larger is 6, the closer

is    to 1—re. If 6 is "high enough" in some sense, price flexibility will

be destabilizing even in this q—theoretic framework. The process

determining t will place very high weight on the more volatile real return

fluctuations in the present and less weight on the more stable real returns

 in the far future. The interesting question is whether 6 is likely to be

 "high enough" to render price flexibility destabilizing in actual economies.

     Since World War II, the real return on equities in the U.S. has

averaged some nine or so percentage points higher per year than the return

on treasury bills. One component of 6 is therefore this risk premium. It

 is reasonable to assume that capital depreciates at 10 percent per year.   We




                                       20
therefore postulate that 8.20 in the calculations reported below.

      The model used in the simulations reported below in Table 4 is,

therefore, our basic model with two period contracts with the IS aggregate

demand equation (8) replaced by (15) and with the arbitrage condition (16)

for     included with a value of .20 for 8 and with profits taken to be a

constant fraction of output. Results are presented for =.75. With lower

values of p price flexibility is more destabilizing. With greater values of

p it is less destabilizing.

      For high interest elasticities of money demand and money supply——and

thus low B's—price flexibility is still destabilizing over a large range.

Moving to a theory of aggregate demand based on the long rather than on the

short—term interest rate weskens but does not eliminate the plausibility of

destabilizing price flexibility. With higher values of B, the traditional

conclusion that price flexibility is stabilizing is restored.

      As Ball (1977) emphasizes, there are strong reasons to expect

investment to depend on short as well as long real rates. Timing is a critical

aspect of many investment decisions. For many types of capital goods,

adjustment costs are not important. And        so the financial variable that
should enter into the determinant of aggregate demand should be neither

nor       but instead some weighted average.

      There   are   several other reasons to think that the weight placed on

should be relatively high.      liuch cyclically—sensitive   capital formation is

non—durable, or not very durable. Moreover, there may be effects which are

well—correlated with the short—term interest rate which are not in

representative decision—maker models. Agents may be limited in their

spending by liquidity constraints. And      sharp   declines in the price level

that were unanticipated at the moment many contracts specifying financial



                                          21
liability were written can have large effects on aggregate demand through

the distribution of wealth. Putting a high weight on r1 would

leads us back towards the results in earlier sections.

     Destabilizing price flexibility is not removed as a possibility by the

move from using short—term housing long—term interest rates in the

determination of aggregate demand. Our initial conclusion that models

derived from Taylor (1979 and 1980) can exhibit destabilizing price

flexibility for a wide range of plausible parameter values has turned out to

be quite robust. If Taylor's models can serve as a reasonable base from

which to reason about the behavior of the economy, the results of this paper

show that there is every reason to take Keynes (1936) seriously when he

challenges the view that increased price flexibility would reduce the

seriousness of business cycles.




IV. CONCLUSIONS


     Our   results   suggest that standard Keynesian models wage and price

rigidity have the implication that increases in price flexibility may well

increase the cyclical variability of output. This conclusion holds even

allowing for forward looking behavior in wage setting and in financial

markets. This observation makes it unlikely that nominal rigidities of the

type associated with union contracts for example, can plausibly be blamed

for cyclical fluctuations in output. Even if increased nominal rigidity is

not stabilizing, it is unlikely to be significantly destabilizing. As we

have emphasized elsewhere (Delong and Summers, 1984), these observations are

consistent with the broad sweep of American macro—economic history. The




                                         22
                                                   Table    4


                                      A Q—Theory   of Aggregate Demand




                                           .1          .2        .4           .6      .8     1.0

               A=l             157        14*         149*      153*         157*    158*    159*
B=.2             2             39.2        37.0*       56.3*    37.0*        37.6*   377*    374*
                 3             17.4        16.7*       16.0*    16.2*        16.5*   16.7*   16.6*


B=.4           Al             115          96         88        83           81      79      74
                 2             28.8        25.1       21.8      20.2         19.6    19.2    18.9
                 3             12.8        11.7        9.7       8.9          8.7     8.5     8.4




                                                                         *
Note:   Price flexibility destabilizing at the margin is denoted by
increasingly non—Walrasian character of the economy md the associated

reductions in wage and price flexibility have coincided with improvements in

macro—economic performance.

     The mainline American Keynesian view that the major difference between

economies that are well—approximated by "classical" and economies that are

well—approximated by "Keynesian" models lies in the fact that the first set

of economies have more aggregate price flexibility is particularly odd in

view of the origins of Keynesian economics in the experience of the Great

Depression. Between 1929 and 1932, the U.S. price level declined by nine

percent a year. In 1932, U.S. real GNP was two—thirds of what it had been

three years earlier. Is it difficult to believe that the problems of the

U.S. economy during the Great Contraction were due to the fact that prices

did not adjust quickly enough to absorb the nominal shock which came either

from inappropriate monetary policy or from pessimistic animal spirits? It

seems implausible to assert that if only the price level had declined by

twenty percànt per year instead of nine that the U.S. economy would have had

a high level of output in 1932. Rather more plausible is the belief that if

the price level had fallen at twenty percent per year the contraction would

have been even more serious as very high real interest rates would have

drastically reduced the level of economic activity. These inferences are

supported by the coincidence of the beginnings of recovery and the end of

rapid deflation in 1933.

     International evidence corroborates our skepticism about the empirical

importance of nominal rigidities as an explanation for business cycles.     In


much of Latin America, high rates of inflation are endemic. Nominal

rigidity is one of the few problems that these economies do not have. With

 the increased wage and price flexibility that accompanies rapid inflation,



                                       23
real interest rates are much more variable than in the United States and so

too is real output. The experience of a number of countries suggests that

the variability of output in Latin America is not a purely real phenomenon.

Despite a high degree of price flexibility, monetary and fiscal policies

have potent effects on the level of economic activity.

     As Fisher (1984) emphasizes, economics does not possess a fully

satisfactory theory of price adjustment. There does not yet exist a

convincing demonstration that a decentralized economy wuill rapidly converge

to its Wairasian equilibrium after being shocked. The    stability   of an

economy without institutional impediments to price flexibility, in the face

of demand shocks is an assumption not a conclusion of economic analysis.

The performance of actual economies suggests that it may not be a

particularly good one.




                                      24
References

0. Akerlof and   1.   Yellen (1985), "A Near—Rational Model of the Business

Cycle," Quarterly Journal of Economici.

0.1. Blanchard, "Menu Costs. Monopolistic Competition, and the Roil Effects

of Nominal Money," xerox.

0.1. Blanchard and 1.     Sacha (1983). "Anticipations. Recessions and Policy,"
European Economic Reviev.

0.1. Blanchard and C. Wyplosz (1981), "An Empirical Structural Model of

Aggregate Demand," Journal of Monetary Economics.

P. Cagan (1975), "Changes in the Recession Behavior of Wholesale Prices."

Exvlorations in Economic Research 2.

B. Delong and L. Summers (1984), "The Changing Cyclical Variability of

Economic Activity in the United States," BIER Working Paper No. 1077,

forthcoming in R. 3. Gordon. ed., THE AMERICAN BUSINESS CYCLE: CONTINUITY

AND   CHANGE (Chicago).

R. Driskill and S. Sheffriu (1985),      "Is Price   Flexibility Destabilizing?"

U.C. Davis Working Paper No. 25.

S.    Fischer (1984), "Contracts, Credibility and Disinflation," NUER Working

Paper.

F. Fisher (1964), DISEQUILIBRIUk FOUNDATIONS OF EQUILIBRIUL ECONOMICS

(Cambridge.

I. Fisher (1923), "The     Business   Cycle Largely a 'Dance of the Dollar,' in

Journal of the American Statistical Association.

I. Fisher (1925), "Our     Unstable   Dollar and the So—Called Business Cycle," in

Journal of the American Statistical Association.

B. Friedman (1978). "Crowding Out       or   Crowding In? Economic Consequences of



                                              25
Financing Government Deficits," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. 3,

pp. 593—641.

S. Goldfeld (1976), "The        Case of the Missing Money," Brookings PaDers on

Economic Activity.

R. Gordon (1980), "A Consistent Characterization of a Near Century of Price

Behavior," American Economic Review 70.2.

L. Jonung (1981), "Comparative Responses to the Great Depression: Sweden and

the U.S.," in K. Brunner, ed., THE GREAT DEPRESSION REVISITED (Kiuwer—

Nijhoff).

J.M. Keynes     (1936),    ThE GENERAL THEORY OF EZPLOYMENT, INTEREST AN1) MONEY

(Macmillan)

N.G. Mankiw (1985), "Small Menu Costs and Large Business Cycles," Quarterly

Journal of Economics.

A. Okun (1978), "Efficient Deflationary Policies," American Economic Review.

A. Okun (1981), PRICES AND QUANTITIES (Brookings).

I. Sachs (1980), "The Changing Cyclical Behavior of Wages and Prices,"

American Economic Review.

3. Sachs (1984), "The        Policy   Mix in 1985," xerox.

C. Schultze (1981), "Some Macro Foundations for Micro Theory," Erookinii

Paners on Economic Activity.

I. Taylor (1979), "Staggered Wage Setting in a Macro Model," in American

Economic Review.

3.   Taylor   (1980), "Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts," Journal of

Political Economy.

L. Thurow (1979), THE ZERO—SUM SOCIETY.




                                               26
FOOTNOTES




1.   This conjecture was challenged by Driskill and Sheffrin (1985). For reasons

discussed below, we believe that their model does not provide a satisfactory

framework for examining the issue of destabilizing price flexibility.

2. Driskill and Sheffrin (1985)   rely   on a version of Taylor's model in which

there are . aggregate demand shocks in their study of the impact of

flexible prices. This formulation does not seem very satisfactory for

capturing eynes' vision of cyclical fluctuations.

3. Results are presented for B=.4. Results with B.2 suggest that the

Wairasian limit is even less relevant.




                                         27
