                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  SPILLOVERS, LINKAGES, AND PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH IN THE US ECONOMY,
                              1958 TO 2007

                                         Edward N. Wolff

                                       Working Paper 16864
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w16864


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2011




An earlier version of this paper was presented at the CESIS Workshop on Innovation and Productivity,
“Spillovers, Linkages, and Productivity Growth in the US Economy, 1947 to 2007,” Vienna University
of Economics and Business, Vienna, Austria, April 6-8, 2010. The views expressed herein are those
of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Edward N. Wolff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Spillovers, Linkages, and Productivity Growth in the US Economy, 1958 to 2007
Edward N. Wolff
NBER Working Paper No. 16864
March 2011
JEL No. O30,O33

                                              ABSTRACT

I speculate that technological spillover effects may have become more important over time as IT penetrated
the U.S. economy. The rationale is that IT may speed up the process of knowledge transfer and make
these knowledge spillovers more effective. Using US input-output tables for years 1958, 1967, 1977,
1987, 1997, and 2007, I compare my new results with Wolff and Nadiri (1993) covering years 1947-1977
and Wolff (1997) covering 1958- 1987. I estimate that the direct rate of return to R&D is now 22%
and the indirect rate of return to R&D is 37%. The former is higher than in the previous studies. The
indirect rate of return to R&D is now significant at the one percent level, in comparison to a 10 percent
significance level in Wolff (1997). The newly estimated social rate of return to R&D is 59%, compared
to 53% in Wolff (1997). In contrast to the earlier studies, the coefficients of R&D embodied in new
investment are now statistically significant at the five percent level. Separate regressions on the 1958-1987
and 1987-2007 periods and the addition of successive periods to the sample also suggest a strengthening
of R&D spillovers between the 1958-1987 and 1987-2007 periods. A decomposition of TFP growth
also indicates a higher contribution from R&D spillovers in the later period. These results suggest
a strengthening of the R&D spillover effect over time.


Edward N. Wolff
Department of Economics
New York University
19 W. 4th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
edward.wolff@nyu.edu
          This paper examines whether the contribution of inter-sectoral spillovers to
industry productivity growth has increased over time in the US over the years from 1958
to 2007. There are two potential sources for this. First, the size of the inter-sectoral
linkage may have grown over time – that is, linkages may have strengthened over time.
Second, the coefficient on the inter-sectoral linkage may have risen over time. With the
introduction of Information Technology (IT) and its widespread adoption beginning in
the early 1970s, one would think that the speed of knowledge spillovers would have
accelerated over time. Another contribution of the paper is that the results of the
empirical analysis will make it possible to estimate the direct and indirect return (as well
as the social rate of return) to R&D.

          In this regard, this paper extends previous work (Wolff and Nadiri, 1993, and
Wolff, 1997) on the measurement of R&D spillovers based on computing embodied
R&D using US input-output tables from 1947 to 1987. Throughout the paper, I will
compare the new results to the old ones to see whether the spillover effects found in the
older papers still hold up for the more recent period (and whether new relations are
found).
          The paper is organized as follows. The first section provides a review of the
pertinent literature on spillover effects across industries. Section 2 introduces the model
to be used in the empirical analysis. Section 3 discusses the data sources and methods.
Section 4 presents the results of the econometric analysis. Concluding remarks are
provided in the last part, Section 5.


I. Review of Previous Literature
          A. Domestic R&D Spillovers
          R&D spillovers refer to the direct knowledge gains of customers from the R&D
of the supplying industry (see Griliches, 1979).1 There have been several approaches to
measuring R&D spillovers. In, perhaps, the earliest work on this subject, Brown and
Conrad (1967) based their measure of borrowed R&D on input-output trade flows

1
  Griliches also identifies a second interpretation of spillovers; namely, that inputs purchased from an
R&D-performing industry may embody quality improvements that are not fully appropriated by the
supplier. It should be emphasized at the outset that though these two spillover notions are quite distinct,
they cannot be distinguished statistically in this work.


                                                                                                              2
(purchases and sales) between industries. Terleckyj (1974, 1980) provided measures of
the amount of R&D embodied in customer inputs on the basis of inter-industry material
and capital purchases made by one industry from the supplying industries. Scherer
(1982), using Federal Trade Commission line of business data, used product (as distinct
from process) R&D, aimed at improving output quality, as the basis of his measure of
R&D spillovers.
       Another approach is to measure the degree of “technological closeness” between
industries. For example, if two industries use similar processes (even though their
products are very different, or they are not directly connected by inter-industry flows),
then one industry may benefit from the new discoveries by the other industry. Such an
approach is found in the work of Jaffe (1986), where patent data are used to measure
technological closeness between industries.
       Bernstein and Nadiri (1989) used total R&D at the two-digit Standard Industrial
Classification (SIC) level as a measure of intra-industry R&D spillovers and applied this
measure to individual firm data within industry. Mairesse and Mohnen (1990) used a
similar schema by comparing R&D coefficients based on firm R&D with those based on
industry R&D. If there exist intra-industry externality effects of firm R&D, then the
coefficient of industry R&D should be higher than those of firm R&D. However, the
results of Mairesse and Mohnen did not show that this was consistently the case.
       There have been a large number of studies which have followed one or other of
these approaches for estimating the spillover effects of R&D (see Mohnen, 1990 and
1992, Griliches, 1992, and Cameron, 1996, for reviews of some of the earlier literature).
In contrast, the literature on direct productivity spillover is more limited. Some of the
earlier literature on this subject was quite suggestive. For the German economy
Oppenlander and Schulz (1981) calculated that only about one third of new products
were derived from technology (that is, process innovation). The remainder are ‘market
innovations,” which are used to open up new markets for the producers. Pavitt (1984)
estimated that out of 2000 innovations introduced in the U.K, only about 40 percent were
developed in the sector using the innovation. The remainder were borrowed from new
technologies developed in other sectors.




                                                                                            3
       The work of Nelson and Winters (1982) illustrated another approach. In their
evolutionary model, spillovers in technology among firms may occur as firms search or
sample from their environment to develop new production techniques. Moreover,
Rosenberg (1982) and Rosenberg and Frischtak (1984) suggested the existence of
clusters of innovations in industries that occupy a strategic position in the economy in
terms of both forward and backward linkages. They speculated that there are certain
intra-industry flows of new equipment and materials that have a disproportionate level of
technological change in the economy.
       A paper by Bartelsman et al. (1991) is also highly suggestive. Using regression
analysis, they related the growth in an industry’s output to a weighted average of the
growth in the outputs of the supplying industries, where the weights are determined by
the industry’s input coefficients. They concluded that the linkage between an industry
and its suppliers appeared to be the dominant factor in accounting for long-term growth
externalities. However, they did no directly relate an industry’s own productivity growth
to the R&D of its suppliers or to its suppliers’ rate of productivity advance.
       Wolff and Nadiri (1993) provided one of the first investigations of direct
productivity spillovers. They used as their measure of embodied technical change a
weighted average of the TFP growth of the supplying industries, where the weights are
determined by the industry’s input-output coefficients. This formulation assumes that the
knowledge gained from a supplying industry is in direct proportion to the value of that
industry in a sector’s input structure. Using U.S. input-output data from 1947 to 1977,
they found a statistically significant effect of this index on an industry’s own rate of
technical change.
       Wolff (1997) followed up this work using U.S. input-output data from 1958 to
1987 and found an even stronger effect of embodied TFP growth on an industry’s own
rate of technical advance, with an elasticity of almost 60 percent. The return to embodied
R&S was estimated at 43 percent. Direct productivity spillovers from the technological
progress made by supplying sectors appeared to be more important than spillovers from
the R&D performed by the suppliers. Moreover, changes in the contribution made by
direct productivity spillovers to TFP growth accounted for almost half of the slowdown




                                                                                            4
in TFP growth in manufacturing from 1958-1967 to 1967-1977 and for 20 percent of the
TFP recovery in this sector from 1967-1977 to 1977-1987.
       Following up the work of Scherer (1982), Ornaghi (2006) considered a model
where process innovations spillovers to other firms raise firms’ relative efficiency and
technological diffusion of product innovations enhances firms' demand. Using panel data
of Spanish manufacturing firms over the period 1990 to 1999, he found technological
externalities significantly affect firm-level productivity growth. He also found that
technological diffusion of product innovations was larger than the one deriving from
process innovations, both in magnitude and pervasiveness.
       Several papers have looked at the importance of geographic proximity in
explaining R&D spillovers. The usual argument is that firms that are located in the same
or proximate locations have greater opportunities to communicate than those further
away. Geographic proximity may lead to the formation of social networks that can
facilitate learning. Adams and Jaffe (1996) used a panel of manufacturing establishments
over time from the Census and Annual Survey of Manufactures, matched by firm and
industry to the firm-level R&D survey conducted by the National Science Foundation.
The sample period was from 1974 to 1988. They found that the effects of parent firm
R&D on plant-level productivity are diminished by both the geographic and
technological distance between the research lab and the plants.
       Orlando (2004) looked at firms in SIC 35, Industrial, Commercial Machinery, and
Computer Equipment. The primary data were from Standard & Poor’s Compustat
database from 1970 to 1998. These were supplemented with Bureau of labor Statistics
price deflators for industry input and output, as well as county-level latitude and
longitude data from the U.S. Geological Survey. He used a production- function
framework to examine the role of geographic and technological proximity for inter-firm
spillovers from R&D in SIC 35. He found that spillovers among firms within narrow,
four-digit industrial classifications were generally stronger than those identified within
the broader, three-digit class. Such spillovers, however, did not appear to be reduced by
distance. Geographic distance did appear to attenuate spillovers that cross four-digit
boundaries, suggesting that they may play a role in the formation of diverse (but not too
diverse) industrial agglomerations.



                                                                                             5
        Lychagin et. al. (2010) used U.S. Compustat data for manufacturing firms for the
period 1980 to 2000. These were matched with patent data from the U.S. Patent and
Trademark Office available from the NBER data archive. Inventor location was taken
from the address of the lead inventor of the patent, which is recorded at the city level.
Their purpose was to investigate the contributions to productivity of three sources of
research and development spillovers: geographic, technology and product–market
proximity. They found that technological proximity (as developed by Jaffe, 1986) was
important in explaining R&D spillovers. Moreover, geographical distance also had an
effect in accounting for R&D spillovers even after conditioning on horizontal
and technological spillovers. However, product–market proximity was less important
than these two factors in accounting for R&D spillovers.


        B. International R&D Spillovers
        Over the last 15 years or so, much of the attention in this literature has been
directed at international spillovers, and, as a result, there are also quite a few papers that
have investigated the presence and importance of cross-national R&D and technological
spillovers. Coe and Helpman (1995) were among the first to provide evidence on the
importance of trade as a vehicle for the international diffusion of technology. They
argued that if there is evidence (as seems to be the case) that innovation or R&D
performed in one industry leads to technological gains in using industries, then is it
possible that R&D performed in one country leads to technological gains in countries
which import products from the first country? Coe and Helpman gathered data for 22
OECD countries covering the period from 1971 to 1990. They constructed measures of
(domestic) R&D stock by country and estimated import flows between countries. Their
major contribution was to construct a measure of “foreign R&D capital,” which they
defined as the import-share weighted average of the domestic R&D capital stocks of
trade partners. Using bilateral import shares to weight foreign R&D expenditures, they
calculated the variable Sfi, which represented the foreign R&D stock of country i, as:
        Sfi = ∑j mik RDk




                                                                                                 6
where mik is the share of imports coming from country k as a share of total imports into
country i and RDk is the stock of R&D in country k. Thus, the more R&D intensive the
imports are from other countries, the higher is a country’s stock of foreign R&D capital.
       They then regressed a country’s annual total factor productivity (TFP) growth on
both its domestic and foreign R&D capital. They found like most studies that domestic
R&D was a significant determinant of a country’s TFP growth. However, their most
important finding was that foreign capital was also a significant determinant of TFP
growth within a country. They calculated a domestic R&D elasticity of 23 percent for the
G-7 countries and about 8 percent for the 15 smaller OECD countries. However, their
estimated elasticities for foreign R&D (that is, R&D embodied in imports into these
countries) were 6 percent for the G-7 countries and 12 percent for the other OECD
countries. They concluded that imported R&D was a more important factor in explaining
domestic productivity growth in the smaller OECD countries but the converse was true
for the larger OECD economies. They also found that the more open a country was, the
higher the return to foreign R&D.
       They then looked at two additional issues. First, they wanted to determine
whether a country’s productivity growth was greater to the extent that it imported goods
and services from countries with a high (domestic) R&D intensity relative to imports
from countries with low R&D expenditures. Second, after controlling for the composition
of its imports, they were interested in whether a country’s productivity growth would be
higher the higher its overall import share. They found support for both predictions. In
particular, they found that international R&D spillovers were related to both the
composition of a country’s imports as well as to its overall import intensity.
       This paper stimulated a lot of additional work on the importance of foreign
spillovers from trade and R&D. Park (1995), using aggregate data for 10 OECD countries
(including the G-7 countries), had similar results. He estimated that foreign R&D
accounted for about two thirds of the total effect of R&D on domestic productivity. He
estimated a domestic R&D elasticity of 7 percent and a foreign R&D elasticity of 17
percent.
       However, Verspagen (1997) challenged the findings of Coe and Helpman.
Verspagen constructed a technology flow matrix based on European patent data which



                                                                                            7
indicated not only in which sector the patent originated but also in which sectors the
patent was used. This approach allowed the researcher to identify explicitly the pattern of
inter-sectoral spillovers of knowledge. In contrast, Coe and Helpman based their spillover
calculations on inter-sectoral trade (import) flows. Another difference was that
Verspagen related TFP growth on the sectoral level to both direct and indirect R&D
capital stocks.
       Using a panel dataset of 22 sectors, 14 OECD countries, and 19 years (1974-1992,
though there were missing data for some countries, sectors, and years), Verspagen was
able to distinguish between R&D effects across sectors (the so-called “between” effect)
and R&D effects over time (the so-called “within” effect). He found that foreign R&D
spillovers were significant only in the “within” estimation (that is, the time-series effect).
Foreign spillovers were positive in the “between” estimation (that is, between sectors) but
not statistically significant. It thus appeared that the Coe and Helpman results overstated
the contribution of foreign R&D to domestic productivity growth.
       Eaton, and Kortum (1999) used a broader approach to calculating the relative
importance of domestic and foreign R&D in domestic productivity growth. In their
model, they included not only the direct effects on productivity growth but also a
contribution from the transitional adjustment path to long-run equilibrium. They
estimated that the portion of productivity growth attributable to domestic as opposed to
imported R&D was about 13 percent in Germany, France, and the U.K; around 35
percent for Japan; and upwards to 60 percent in the U.S. Keller (2002) used a more
general form of the R&D productivity function by allowing for multiple channels by
which the diffusion of R&D can interact with domestic TFP growth. Using this method,
he estimated that over the period from 1983 to 1995, the contribution of technology
diffusion from France, Germany, Japan, the U.K., and the U.S. to nine other OECD
countries amounted to about 90 percent of the total R&D effect on TFP growth.
       Eaton and Kortum (1996), on the other hand, controlled for both distance and
other effects. They found that once these other influences are controlled for, bilateral
imports were not significant as a predictor of bilateral patenting activity, which they used
as an indicator of international technology diffusion. Moreover, Keller (1998) replicated
the set of regressions used by Coe and Helpman (1995) with what he termed



                                                                                              8
“counterfactual import shares.” These were simulated import shares based on alternative
assumptions rather than actual import shares that were used to create the imported R&D
variable in the regression equations. Keller argued that for there to be strong evidence for
trade induced international R&D spillovers, one should expect a strong positive effect
from foreign R&D when actual bilateral import shares were used but a weaker and likely
insignificant effect when the made-up “import” shares were used. Keller found high and
significant coefficients when counterfactual import shares were used instead of actual
import shares. The magnitude of the coefficients and the level of significance were
similar in the two sets of regression. On the basis of these results, he disputed the claim
of Coe and Helpman that the import composition of a country was an important factor in
explaining the country’s productivity growth.
       Xu and Wang (1999) showed that the import composition effect remained strong
when trade in capital goods was used instead of trade in goods produced in total
manufacturing. Xu and Wang obtained a R2 statistic of 0.771 when the weights used in
the construction of the imported R&D variable were based on imports of capital goods. In
comparison, Keller obtained an R2 statistic of 0.749 on the basis of his counterfactual
import weights, and Coe and Helpman (1995) obtained a R2 statistic of 0.709 in their
original regressions.
       Sjöholm (1996) took a different approach by analyzing citations in patent
applications of Swedish firms to patents owned by inventors in other countries. Patent
citations have been used in a number of studies now as an indicator for knowledge flows
either between firms or between countries (see, for example, Jaffe, Trajtenberg, and
Henderson, 1993). Sjöholm controlled for a number of other variables and found a
positive and significant relation between Swedish patent citations and bilateral imports.
He concluded that imports contributed to international knowledge spillovers.
       Acharta and Keller (2008) looked at two channels by which imports affect
productivity. The first is that import competition may lead to market share reallocation
among domestic firms with different levels of production. This they called the “selection
effect.” The second is that imports can also improve the productivity of domestic firms
through learning externalities or spillovers. They used a sample of 17 industrialized
countries covering the period 1973 to 2002. They reported two principal findings. First,



                                                                                              9
increased imports lowered the productivity of domestic industries through selection.
Second, if imports embodied advanced foreign technologies (as measured by their R&D
intensity), increased imports could also generate technological learning through spillovers
that on net raised the productivity of domestic industries.
        Madsen (2007) took an even longer perspective on the relationship between trade
and productivity growth. His data covered the period from 1870 to 2004. Using data for
16 OECD countries from Maddison (1982) and augmenting this with data on bilateral
trade flows and patents for each of the countries, he constructed a measure of knowledge
imports from foreign countries. Using a cointegration method, he estimated that as much
as 93 percent of the TFP growth of the average OECD country could be attributed to the
international transmission of knowledge through the channel of imports.


II. Accounting Framework and Input-Output Model
         The input-output model can be introduced as follows, where all vectors and
matrices are 45-order and in constant (2007) dollars, unless otherwise indicated:

         Xt = column vector of gross output by sector at time t.
         Yt = column vector of final output by sector at time t.
         At = square matrix of technical inter-industry input-output coefficients aij at time
t.

It should be noted that we use the industry by industry matrix instead of the commodity
by industry matrix because R&D data are available by industry of production, not by
commodity.
         Lt = row vector of labor coefficients ℓi, showing employment per unit of output
at time t.
         Kt = square matrix of capital stock coefficients kij, showing the capital stock of
each type i per unit of output j at time t.
         Nt = square matrix of investment coefficients nij, showing the new investment of
each type i made by sector j at time t.
        Pt = row vector of prices at time t, showing the price per unit of output of each
industry.


                                                                                              10
        In addition, let us define the following scalars:
        wt = annual wage rate at time t (assumed the same for all workers).
        it = the rate of profit on capital stock at time t (assumed constant across industries
and types of capital).
        I will also make use of the so-called inter-industry value matrix A* defined as:
        A*t = square matrix of value inter-industry input-output coefficients a*ij at time t,
where a*ij = pi aij / pj.
        Another concept that will be used is the sales coefficient matrix B, which shows
the percentage of sector i’s output that is sold to sector j and is given by:
        Bt = square matrix of inter-industry sales coefficients bij at time t, where bij ≡ aijxj
/ xi.
        Analogously, the matrix Bn shows the share of total investment of each type i that
is sold to sector j:
        Bnt = square matrix of investment coefficients bnij at time t, where bnij ≡ nijxj / xi.
        Following Leontief (1953), I can now define a row vector π, where the rate of
TFP growth for sector j over period T is given by:


(1)     TFPGRTjT ≡ πjT = −(Σi pjTΔaijT + wTΔℓjT + Σi iTΔkijT ) / pjt0


where Δ refers to the change over period T, pjT is the average price of sector j over period
T, wT is the average wage over period T, iT is the average rate of profit over period T, and
pjt0 is sector j’s price at the beginning of the period (t0).
        R&D intensity is introduced into the model as follows. Let


(2)     RDXjT ≡ rjT = RDjT / XjT


which shows the amount of R&D expenditure (RD) in constant US dollars per constant
dollar of gross output in sector j.
        Forward spillovers from R&D are estimated on the basis of trade flows between
sectors. I use two different formulations of R&D spillovers. The first assumes that the




                                                                                              11
amount of information gained from supplier i’s R&D is proportional to its importance in
sector j’s input structure (that is, the magnitude of aij) and to sector i’s R&D intensity:


(3)        RDINDAjt ≡ Σi a0ijT RDjt / GDPjt


where the matrix A0 is identical to the matrix A, except that the diagonal of the matrix is
set to zero in order to prevent double-counting of R&D expenditures. For period T, the
average values of a0ij and the ratio RDj / GDPj are used.
           The second approach assumes that the amount of R&D that spills over from
sector i to sector j is proportional to the share of output that sector i sells to sector j. This
approach was used by Terleckyj (1974, 1980). Then the alternative measure of indirect
R&D, RDINDB, is given by:2


(4)        RDINDBjt ≡ Σi b0ijT RDit / GDPjt


A similar approach was used by Scherer (1982), except that his measure of indirect R&D
is distributed proportionally to the number of patents issued by sector i which fall into
sector j’s industrial classification. In principle, Scherer’s measure is identical to RDINDA
except that indirect R&D is distributed proportionally to patents instead of sales.
           The difference between the two measures, RDINDA and RDINDB, depends on
different theories of knowledge transfers. According to RDINDA, if Sector A buys 15
percent of its total output from Sector B, then 15 percent of Sector B’s R&D is carried
forward to Sector A. In this case, knowledge transfer depends on how important B’s
inputs are in Sector A’s input structure. On the other hand, according to RDINDB, if
Sector B sells 15 percent of its output to Sector A, then 15 percent of Sector B’s R&D is
carried forward to Sector A.
           Another source of borrowed R&D is new investment. In the first case, it is
assumed that the information gain is proportional to the annual investment flow per unit
of output:



2
    The matrix B0 is used instead of B again to avoid double-counting of industry j’s own R&D.


                                                                                                 12
(5)     RDKINDAjt ≡ Σi nijT RDjt / GDPjt


In the second case, it is assumed that the information gain from the R&D performed in
the capital-producing sector i to sector j is proportional to the share of new investment
that sector i sells to sector j:


(6)     RDKINDBjt ≡ Σi bnijT RDit / GDPjt


        It is also possible to construct estimates of direct productivity spillovers, what I
call “TFP spillovers,” in analogous fashion to the approach for R&D spillovers. The
rationale is that TFP growth is an indicator of “successful” R&D and therefore there may
be a “contagion” effect between industries with a rapid rate of technological gain and
those buying from these industries. TFP spillovers are measured by:


(7)     TFPINDAjt ≡ Σi a0ijt πit


which is a measure of sector j’s indirect knowledge gain from technological change in its
supplying sectors. In this case, it is assumed that the information gained from supplier i’s
TFP is proportional to its importance in sector j’s input structure. An alternative measure
is:


(8)     TFPINDBjt ≡ Σi b0ijt πit


where it is assumed that the knowledge gain from sector j’s TFP growth is proportional to
the percentage of sector i’s output that is sold to sector j.
        In sum, I have now introduced six different measures of possible inter-sectoral
spillover effects. Are there ones that are preferable to others? With regard to RDINDA
versus RDINDB (as well as RDKINDA versus RDKINDB), each has its own rationale.
As discussed above, with regard to the two measures, RDINDA and RDINDB, each
relies on a different theory of knowledge transfers. The selection of a preferred one will
depend on the outcome of an empirical investigation of their relative importance and



                                                                                               13
statistical significance in explaining industry level TFP growth (“the proof is in the
pudding,” as the old expression goes).
          In contrast, both inter-industry spillovers (such as RDINDA) and spillovers from
new investment (such as RDKINDA) may each contribute separately as factors in
accounting for industry level TFP growth. Here, too, the choice of a preferred measure
will depend on the results of an empirical investigation. With regard to the difference
between R&D spillovers (such as RDINDA) and direct TFP spillovers (such as
TFPINDA) each has its own rationale. If R&D is the medium through which knowledge
is transferred between sectors, then the former is to be preferred but if direct
technological change is the medium, the latter is to be preferred. Once, again, empirical
investigation of the relative importance of each in explaining industry level TFP growth
will lead to a preferred choice.
          I also introduce several measures of inter-sectoral linkages. These have been
developed in the input-output literature. The first is the average value of the input-output
value coefficients, a*ij:


(9)       LINK1i = Σj a*ij / (ν – 1), j ≠i


where ν is the number of sectors. The second index is the row sum of the value inverse
matrix:


(10)      LINK2i = Σj [(I – A*)-1]ij


This measure shows the total increase in output in sector i that would be forthcoming to
meet a dollar increase in the demand for the output of each sector of the economy. This
index expresses the extent to which the system of industries in an economy draws upon
industry i in order to expand production. The third is given by:


(11)      LINK3i = Σj [(I – B’)-1]ij




                                                                                          14
The column sum of the (I – B’) inverse matrix shows the total output of user industries
needed to absorb an additional dollar of sector i’s output,


III. Data Sources and Methods
         The principal data are 85-sector input-output tables for the U.S. for years 1958,
1967, 1977, 1987, 1997, and 2007. Theses are produced by the Bureau of Economic
analysis (and are available at: http://www.bea.gov/industry/.) I have decided to use 10-
year intervals (or approximately 10 year periods) in order to avoid much of the cyclical
variation in TFP growth over the business cycle. The last five of these years are near
peaks of the business cycle in the U.S. However, unfortunately, 1958 is a recession year.3
The first five of these tables are so-called benchmark tables. However, the 2007 table is
one of the annual updates of the 2002 benchmark table. The 1958 table is available only
in single-table format.4 The 1967, 1977, 1987, 1997, and 2007 data are available in
separate make and use tables.5
         Two types of employment data were used. The first is Full-Time Equivalent
Employees (FTEE) and the second is Persons Engaged in Production (PEIP). Both were
obtained on the industry level from the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, National
Income and Product Accounts, Internet [http://www.bea.gov/national/nipaweb/], Tables
6.5 and 6.8. [[http://www.bea.gov/bea/dn2/home/annual_industry.htm].
         Investment data refer to non-residential fixed investment in constant (2000)
dollars. The source is: U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, National Income and Product
Accounts, Internet [http://www.bea.gov/bea/dn2/home/annual_industry.htm].
         Capital stock figures are based on chain-type quantity indexes for net stock of
fixed capital in constant (2000) dollars, year-end estimates. Equipment and structures,
including information technology equipment, are for the private (non-government) sector
only. Source: U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, CD-ROM NCN-0229, "Fixed

3
 There is also little that can be done to correct for the business cycle trough in 1958.
4
 The single-table format relies on the so-called BEA transfer method. See Kop Jansen and ten Raa (1990)
for a discussion of this method and its associated methodological difficulties.
5
 Details on the construction of the input-output tables can be found in the following publications: 1967 --
U.S. Interindustry Economics Division (1974); 1977 -- U.S. Interindustry Economics Division (1984); and
1987 -- Lawson and Teske (1994).



                                                                                                         15
Reproducible Tangible Wealth of the United States, 1925-97," and the Internet
[http://www.bea.gov/bea/dn2/home/annual_industry.htm]. For technical details, see Katz
and Herman, (1997).
       Investment flows by industry and by type of equipment or structures are for the
private (non-government) sector only. The source is: U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis,
CD-ROM NCN-0229, "Fixed Reproducible Tangible Wealth of the United States, 1925-
97," and the Internet [http://www.bea.gov/bea/dn2/home/annual_industry.htm].
       R&D expenditures performed by industry include company, federal, and other
sources of funds. Company-financed R&D performed outside the company is excluded.
"Private" refers to privately-funded R&D performed in company facilities including all
sources except federally financed R&D. "Basic" refers to basic research performed in
company facilities; "applied" refers to applied research performed in company facilities;
and "development" refers to development R&D performed in company facilities. Series
on the industry level run from 1957 to 2008. The sources are: National Science
Foundation, Research and Development in Industry, (Arlington, VA: National Science
Foundation), various years, and the Internet
[http://www.nsf.gov/sbe/srs/nsf01305/htmstart.htm].
       Data on full-time equivalent scientists and engineers engaged in R&D per 10,000
full-time equivalent employee, SCIENG, are also available. Series on the both the
aggregate and industry level run from 1957 to 2008. The sources are: National Science
Foundation, Research and Development in Industry, (Arlington, VA: National Science
Foundation), various years, and the Internet
[http://www.nsf.gov/sbe/srs/nsf01305/htmstart.htm].
       These data were used to construct labor coefficients, capital coefficients, sectoral
price deflators, and R&D coefficients. In addition, the deflator for transferred imports
was calculated from the NIPA import deflator, that for the Rest of the World industry was
calculated as the average of the NIPA import and export deflator, and the deflator for the
inventory valuation adjustment was computed from the NIPA change in business
inventory deflator. The source is U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, National Income
and Product Accounts, available on the Internet (see above).




                                                                                           16
           Altogether, five difference data sources are used in the empirical implementation
of the work: (i) input-output tables, (ii) industry capital stock, (iii) industry employment,
(iv) industry level price deflators, and (v) industry level R&D expenditures. In order to
make the various data sources consistent, I aggregated the original input-output data to 45
sectors (see Appendix Table 1 for a listing of the sectors).


IV. Regression Models and Results
           The basic regression model used in the empirical analysis is:


(12)       TFPGRTjT = β0 + β1 RDXjT +β2 INDjT + Σk ζkDkT + εjT


where β0, β1, β2, and ζk are coefficients, DkT are time dummy variables, and εjT is a
stochastic error term. IND refers to the various measures of indirect or embodied R&D
and TFP (RDINDA, RDINDB, TFPINDA, TFPINDB, etc.). We assume that the terms εjT
are independently distributed but may not be identically distributed. The regression
results reported below use the White procedure of a heteroschedasticity-consistent
covariance matrix. It is also assumed that a.j are independent – that is, the technology of
each industry is independent of that of other industries. In both cases, the sample is a
pooled cross-section time-series data set that consists of 45 industries in four time periods
(1958-1967, 1967-1977, 1977-1987, and 1987-1997) and 33 sectors in 1997-2007.6
Though ideally it would be useful to separate out a between sector effect from a within
sector effect, as in Verspagen (1997), this is not possible in the present application
because of the different sector scheme in the 1997-2007 period.
           The coefficient b1 is normally interpreted as the rate of return to R&D under the
assumption that the (average) rate of return to R&D is equalized across sectors.7 The


6
  The reason for the smaller number of industries in the last period is due to the adoption of the North
American Industrial Classification System (NAICS) after 1997, as opposed to the Standard Industrial
Classification (SIC) system in the preceding years. Moreover, as noted in the footnote to Table 3, since
investment by kind is not available for public administration for the computation of RDKINDA and
RDKINB, the number of sectors is reduced by one when these variables are used in the regression.
7
    See, for example, Mansfield (1980) or Griliches (1980).




                                                                                                           17
coefficient b2 is, correspondingly, usually interpreted as the indirect return to R&D and
the sum of the two is considered to be the total or social rate of return to R&D.
          Another set of regressions will look at the effects of industry level productivity
growth and industry level R&D expenditures on linkage structure per se The regression
specifications are of the form:


(13)      LINK1jT = γ0 + γ1 RDXjT + γ2 TFPGRTjT + Σk ξkDkT + εjT


          The descriptive statistics, shown in Appendix Table 2, are, first, of interest.
Average TFP growth across sectors shows the familiar pattern, with a marked slowdown
between 1958-1967 and the next two periods and then an acceleration in the 1987-1997
and the 1997-2007 periods. R&D intensity remained relatively stable over the five time
periods, averaging 0.012. The mean value of SCIENG, on the other hand, trended upward
over the five time periods, particularly in the 1997-2007 period. RDINDA shows no clear
time trend, though there is a sharp dip in the 1997-2007 period. RDINDB likewise shows
no clear pattern of time, though in this case there is sharp increase in its value in the last
period.
          The time path for TFPINDA and TFPINDB generally follows the same trend as
TFPGRT, with a fall off in value in the 1967-1977 and the 1977-1987 periods and then a
pick up in the last two periods. In contrast, the mean value of RDKINDA and that of
RDKINDB both tend to trend downward over time. The linkage measures, LINK1,
LINK2, and LINK3, are generally stable over time, though LINK1 does show a rise in
the 1997-2007 period while the other two linkage measures fall off in the last period.
          I next present the results on embodied R&D from Wolff and Nadiri (1993) and
Wolff (1997). In the first paper, we found a rate of return to R&D of about 10 percent
among manufacturing industries alone and about 20 percent among all industries over the
period from 1947 to 1977 (see Table 1). Fifty industries were used in the full sample. The
coefficient of RDX was significant at the five percent level in all specifications.
RDINDA did not prove statistically significant but had a positive coefficient in both
specifications. RDKINDA was not statistically significant in the manufacturing sample
(in fact, its coefficient was negative) but its coefficient was positive and significant at the



                                                                                               18
five percent level among all sectors. The coefficient of TFPINDA was positive and
significant at the five percent level among manufacturing industries but was positive
though not significant among all industries. The variables RDINDB and RDKIND were
not statistically significant.
        [Place Table 1 about here]
        Wolff (1997), using a sample of 68 industries over the period 1958 to 1987,
estimated a rate of return to R&D of about 11 percent among all industries (see Table 2).
The variable RDX was significant at the five percent level. RDINDA was significant at
the 10 percent level and its coefficient, the indirect return to R&D, was estimated to be
0.43. The social rate of return was therefore estimated to be 53 percent. The alternative
form of embodied R&D, RDINDB, was also significant at the ten percent level, with an
estimated coefficient of 0.41. In these regressions, the dominant variable was TFPINDA,
whose estimated coefficient was 1.30 and was significant at the one percent level. The
size of the effect and the significance level of the coefficient of TFPINDA were found to
be greater in Wolff (1997) than in Wolff and Nadiri (1993). In contrast, the estimated
coefficient of TFPINDB was 0.15 but not significant. The R2 statistic ranged from 0.060
to 0.096 (with TFPINDA) and the adjusted R2 statistic from 0.045 to 0.078 (again with
TFPINDA).
        [Place Table 2 about here]
        Regression results from the current study are shown in Table 3 based on pooled
cross-section data covering the period from 1958 to 2007. The estimated coefficients of
RDX range from 0.22 to 0.25, about twice the level of Wolff (1997), and are uniformly
significant at the one percent level. The estimated coefficient of RDINDA is 0.366 and
is significant at the one percent level (see Specification 2). As a result, the direct rate of
return to R&D is 22 percent, the indirect rate of return to R&D is 37 percent, and the
social rate of return to R&D is 59 percent in this specification. This compares to a 53
percent estimated social rate of return in Wolff (1997).
                [Place Table 3 about here]
        The coefficient of RDINDB is now only 0.022 and insignificant. This result
contrasts to Wolff (1997), where the coefficient of RDINDB was 0.41 and statistically
significant. It now appears that the input measure of embodied R&D, as reflected in



                                                                                             19
RDINDA, overwhelming dominates the sales-embodied R&D measure RDINDB, as
originally proposed by Terleckyj. In other words, it appears that the knowledge
transmitted by the R&D embodied in an industry’s inputs depends on the importance of
that input in the production structure of the industry rather than the share of the output of
the supplying industry sold to that industry.
        The estimated coefficient of TFPINDA is 0.713, smaller than its coefficient in
Wolff (1997), and its significance level is 10 percent, compared to one percent in Wolff
(1997). In contrast, the estimated coefficient of TFPINDB is only 0.064 and not
statistically significant.
        In contrast to Wolff and Nadiri (1993) and Wolff (1997), the coefficient of
RDKINDA is 0.849 and is now statistically significant at the five percent level among all
industries. In contrast, the coefficient of RDKINDB is not statistically significant. When
both RDINDA and RDKINDA are included together, both remain statistically significant,
the former at the one percent level and the latter at the ten percent level. The direct rate of
return to R&D is now 25 percent, the indirect return is 35 percent, and the social rate of
return is 60 percent. However, there is an added return to R&D from that embodied in
investment goods. It is perhaps best to think of this added return as the productivity gain
per dollar of investment. On the basis of the average investment over the period, this
added return to R&D works out to be 0.23 per dollar of investment.
        The constant term, which might be interpreted as the pure rate of technological
progress, varies from 0.0049 to 0.0110. In my preferred regression, Specification (8), its
value is 0.0049, about half a percentage point per year. The period dummy variables are
generally not significant. In comparison to the period 1958-1967, the excluded period, the
dummy variables generally increase over time. In Specification (8), they rise from
-0.0075 for period 1967-1977 to 0.0052 for period 1997-2007. The R2 statistic ranges
from 0.056 to 0.121 and the adjusted R2 statistic from 0.034 to 0.090. The best fit is
provided by Specification (8).
        In Table 4, the sample of industries is restricted to the 21 manufacturing industries
in the data. Whereas in Wolff and Nadiri (1993), both RDX and TFPINDA were found to
be statistically significant, in the present application neither RDX nor any of the spillover
variables are statistically significant. However, the estimated direct return to R&D is



                                                                                            20
about 11 percent, about the same as was found in Wolff and Nadiri (1993) within
manufacturing.
        [Place Table 4 about here]
        I next look at whether there is any evidence that the indirect effects of embodied
R&D or TFP have increased over time, as speculated in the introduction to the paper. I
use five approaches to analyze this issue. In the first, I use single period data to estimate
the effects of R&D on TFP growth. As shown in the first five columns of Table 5, no
clear pattern emerges, with the estimated coefficient of RDINDA falling and then rising
between subsequent periods. Likewise, the estimated coefficient of RDKINDA also falls
and then rises between adjacent periods. In most cases, the coefficients of RDINDA and
RDKINDA are insignificant in the single period estimations. These results, by the way,
suggest that for the full pooled time-series cross-industry regressions, most of the
explanatory power lies “within sector” as opposed to “between sector.”
        In the second method, I divide the sample into two periods: 1958-1987 and 1987-
2007 (last two columns of Table 5). Here, the results are much clearer. Here the
coefficients of both RDINDA and RDKINDA are both larger in the second period, as is
the coefficient of RDX. The results suggest that spillover effects were stronger in the “IT
period” of 1987-2007 in comparison to 1958-1987. The goodness of fit is also better for
the second period, with the R2 statistic and the adjusted-R2 statistic considerably higher.
However, a Chow test does not indicate that the econometric results of the two periods
are statistically different, with a F-value of 1.33, significant at only the 0.26 level.
        [Place Table 5 about here]
        [Place Table 6 about here]
        The third method consists of successively adding new periods to the 1958-1967
sample to reach the 1958-2007 sample. As shown in the first five columns of Table 6, the
coefficient estimates as well as the significance levels of RDX, RDINDA, and
RDKINDA generally increase with the addition of each new period. The R2 statistic and
the adjusted-R2 statistic also tend to increase. These results also suggest a strengthening
of the R&D spillover effect over time. The fourth method is to include interactive terms
between RDINDA and period dummy variables. As shown in the last column of Table 6,
the results are inconclusive as to whether the R&D spillover effect has risen over time.



                                                                                            21
        In the fifth method, I decompose average TFP growth over both the 1958-1987
and the 1987-2007 periods using the coefficient estimates shown in the last two columns
of Table 5 and the average values of each of the explanatory variables over their
respective periods. There was a noticeable increase of average TFP growth between the
two periods from 0.89 to 1.39 percent per year. However, there was a relatively small
change in the average values of the explanatory variables between the two periods. The
mean value of RDX rose slightly from 0.118 to 0.128, that of RDINDA fell slightly from
0.0093 to 0.0085, and that of RDKINDA also fell somewhat from 0.0039 to 0.0031. The
main change were the sizeable increases in the coefficient values, as we saw above. As a
result, whereas RDX accounted for 20.7 percent of TFP growth in the 1958-1987 period
(computed by multiplying the mean value of RDX by its coefficient estimate and then
dividing by the mean value of TFP growth), its contribution almost doubled to 40.3
percent in the 1987-2007 period. In contrast, the contribution of RDINDA rose much
less, from 26.0 to 30.1 percent, and that of RDKINDA actually slipped a bit, from 28.4 to
27.5 percent. The total contribution of R&D spillovers (the sum of RDINDA and
RDKINDA) increased somewhat, from 54.3 to 57.6 percent.
        The first set of regressions as shown in Table 3 are now repeated with the variable
SCIENG, the number of full-time equivalent scientists and engineers engaged in R&D
per 10,000 full-time equivalent employees, substituted for RDX. The results are even
stronger with SCIENG. The coefficients of SCIENG are all significant at the one percent
level, with higher t-statistics than the corresponding RDX variable (see Table 7). The
coefficient estimates and t-statistics of RDINDA and RDKINDA are higher than the
corresponding ones in the first set of regressions. In Specification 8, in particular, the
coefficient of RDKINDA is now significant at the five percent level, as opposed to the
ten percent level in the original regression. The R2 statistic and the adjusted-R2 statistic
are all substantially higher than the corresponding statistics in the original set of
regressions. In the case of Specification 8, the R2 is now 0.159 as opposed to 0.121. One
reason for the better fit provided by SCIENG in comparison to RDX is that there are
fewer missing values in the manufacturing industries.8


8
  I repeated the same analysis to determine whether there is any evidence that R&D spillover effects had
increased over time using SCIENG instead of RDX. The results were virtually the same. The individual


                                                                                                           22
         [Place Table 7 about here]


         A. Linkage Measures
         In the last piece of analysis, I consider the effects of TFP growth and R&D
intensity on the size of forward linkages. The rationale is that more technologically active
industries should acquire new customer industries and expand their ties with existing
customer industries. This should show up as both increased values of input coefficients
from the innovating industry and a greater number of positive input coefficients from this
industry.
         Results from Wolff and Nadiri (1993), covering the period from 1947 to 1997, are
first shown in Table 8. Within the manufacturing sector itself, neither RDX nor TFPGRT
showed any statistically significant effect on the size of their industry’s LINK1 index.
However, among all sectors of the economy, both RDX and TFPGRT were positively
and significantly associated with higher values of both LINK1 and LINK2, and RDX
(though not TFPGRT) was positively and significantly related to LINK3. The early
results clearly indicated a positive relation between the degree of technological activity of
a sector and its degree of forward linkage.
         [Place Table 8 about here]


         New results, for the 1958-2007 period, are shown in Table 9. Neither RDX nor
TFPGRT have a significant relation to LINK1. Indeed, the estimated coefficient of RDX
is negative. Results are quite similar for the linkage measure LINK2. In the case of
LINK3, both RDX and TFPGRT are again statistically insignificant but in this case the
estimated coefficient of RDX is positive and that of TFPGRT is negative. The apparent
reason why neither RDX nor TFPGRT bear no significant relationship to forward
linkages is that the forward linkages themselves remain almost unchanged over time (see
Appendix Table 2).

period regressions showed no clear pattern. A comparison of regression results from periods 1958-1987
with 1987-2007 showed much higher and more significant coefficients on RDINDA and RDKINDA for the
later period. However, once again, the Chow test did not indicate that the two sets of regressions were
statistically different. Adding data from successive periods to the 1958-1967 period to reach the full 1958-
2007 sample generally showed successively greater and more significant coefficients on RDINDA and
RDKINDA as the sample was expanded. Including interactive terms between RDINDA and period dummy
variables revealed no clear pattern.


                                                                                                         23
       [Place Table 9 about here]


Conclusion
       I speculated at the outset of the paper that technological spillover effects may
have become more important over time as IT penetrated the U.S. economy. The rationale
is that IT may speed up the process of knowledge transfer and make these knowledge
spillovers more effective.
       I estimated first of all that the direct rate of return to R&D is 22 percent and the
indirect rate of return to R&D (RDINDA) is 37 percent. The rate of return to R&D
estimates are higher than in my previous studies. The indirect rate of return to R&D is
now significant at the one percent level, in comparison to insignificant coefficients in
Wolff and Nadiri (1993) and a 10 percent significance level in Wolff (1997) (also see
Table 10 for a comparison of results from the current study with those from the older two
studies.) The newly estimated social rate of return to R&D is 59 percent, and this
compares to a 53 percent social rate of return estimated in Wolff (1997).
       [Place Table 10 about here]
       In contrast to Wolff and Nadiri (1993) and Wolff (1997), the coefficients of R&D
embodied in new investment (RDKINDA) are now statistically significant at the five
percent level among all industries and the coefficient estimates are higher. When both
RDINDA and RDKINDA are included together, both remain statistically significant, the
former at the one percent level and the latter at the ten percent level. The direct rate of
return to R&D is now 25 percent, the indirect return is 35 percent, and the social rate of
return is 60 percent. There is also an added return to R&D from that embodied in
investment goods, which I estimate to 0.23 per dollar of investment. All in all, the direct
and indirect returns to R&D are at least as high in the later period as estimated here as in
the earlier periods as estimated in Wolff and Nadiri (1993) and Wolff (1997).
       Separate regressions on the 1958-87 and the 1987-2007 periods and the addition
of successive periods to the sample also suggest a strengthening of the R&D spillover
effect over time, particularly as between the 1958-1987 and the 1987-2007 periods. The
coefficient estimates as well as the significance levels of RDX, RDINDA, and
RDKINDA generally increase with the addition of each new period, as do the R2 and the



                                                                                              24
adjusted-R2 statistics. A decomposition of TFP growth in the two periods also indicated a
higher contribution from R&D spillovers in the later period than the earlier one. These
results suggest a strengthening of the R&D spillover effect over time, as I speculated in
the introduction to the paper.
       Direct TFP spillovers (TFPINDA) now appear to be less important than in Wolff
and Nadiri (1993) and Wolff (1997). The coefficient estimates and significance levels are
smaller than in the prior work. Moreover, in contrast to the earlier work, R&D spillovers
now appear to be more important than direct TFP spillovers (as gauged by the
significance level of the respective coefficients).
       In contrast to the Wolff and Nadiri (1993), no statistically significant relation now
appears between forward linkages and either RDX or TFPGRT. The apparent reason is
that in this application, measures of forward linkages are relatively unchanged over time.




                                                                                            25
References
       Acharta, Ram C., and Wolfgang Keller (2008), “Estimating the Productivity
Selection and Technology Spillover Effects of Imports,” NBER Working Paper No.
14079, October.
       Adams, James D., and Adam B. Jaffe (1996), “Bounding the effects of R&D:
Investigation Using Matched Establishment-Firm Data,” RAND Journal of Economics,
Vol. 27, pp. 700-721.
       Bartelsman, Eric J., Ricardo J. Cabbalero, and Richard K. Lyons (1991), “Short
and Long Run Externalities,” NBER Working Paper No. 3810, August.
       Bernstein, Jeffrey I., and M. Ishaq Nadiri (1989), “Research and development and
intra-industry spillovers: an empirical application of dynamic duality,” Review of
Economic Studies, Vol. 56, pp. 249-269.
       Brown, M., and A. Conrad (1967), “The influence of research on CES production
relations,” in M. Brown (ed.), The Theory and Empirical Analysis of Production, Studies
in Income and Wealth, Vol. 3, New York: Columbia University Press for the NBER.
       Cameron, G. (1996), “Innovation and Economic Growth,” London School of
Economics Centre for Economic Performance Discussion paper no. 277.
       Coe, David T., and Elhanan Helpman (1995), “International R&D Spillovers,”
European Economic Review, Vol. 39, pp. 859-887.
       Eaton, Jonathan, and Samuel Kortum (1996), ''Trade in Ideas: Patenting and
Productivity in the OECD'', Journal of International Economics, Vol. 40, pp. 251-278.
       Eaton, Jonathan, and Samuel Kortum (1999), “International Patenting and
Technology Diffusion: Theory and Measurement,” International Economic Review, Vol.
40, pp. 537-570.
       Griliches, Zvi (1979), “Issues in Assessing the Contribution of Research and
Development to Productivity Growth, Bell Journal of Economics, Vol. 10, pp. 92-116.
       Griliches, Zvi (1980), "R&D and the Productivity Slowdown," American
Economic Review, Vol. 70, pp. 343-347.
       Griliches, Zvi (1992), “The Search for R&D Spillovers,” Scandinavian Journal of
Economics, Vol. 94, pp. 29-47.




                                                                                        26
       Jaffe, Adam B. (1986), “Technology Opportunity and Spillovers of R&D:
Evidence from Firms’ Patents, Profits, and Market Value, American Economic Review,
Vol. 76, pp. 984-1001.
       Jaffe, Adam, Manuel Trajtenberg, and Rebecca Henderson (1993), ''Geographic
Localization of Knowledge Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations,'' Quarterly
Journal of Economics, Vol. 108, pp. 577-598.
       Katz, Arnold J. and Shelby W. Herman, 1997, "Improved Estimates of Fixed
Reproducible Tangible Wealth, 1929-95," Survey of Current Business, May, pp. 69-92.
       Keller, Wolfgang (1998), ''Are international R&D spillovers trade related?
Analyzing spillovers among randomly matched trade partners,'' European Economic
Review, Vol. 42, pp. 1469-1481.
       Keller, Wolfgang (2002), “Geographic Localization of International Technology
Diffusion,” American Economic Review, Vol. 92, No. 1, pp. 120-142.
       Kop Jansen, Pieter, and Thijs ten Raa (1990), "The Choice of Model in the
Construction of Input-Output Matrices," International Economic Review, Vol. 31, pp.
213-227.
       Lawson, Anne M. (1997), "Benchmark Input-Output Accounts for the U.S.
Economy, 1992," Survey of Current Business, Vol. 77, pp. 36-83.
       Leontief, Wassily (1953), Studies in the Structure of the American Economy,
1919-29, New York: Oxford University Press.
       Lychagin, Sergey, Joris Pinske, Margaret E. Slade, and John Van Reenen (2010),
“Spillovers in Space: Does Geography Matter? NBER Working Paper No. 16188, July.
       Maddison, Angus (1982), Phases of Capitalist Development, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
       Madsen, Jakob B. (2007), “Technology spillover through trade and TFP
convergence: 135 years of evidence for the OECD countries,” Journal of International
Economics, Vol. 72, pp. 464-480.
       Mairesse, Jacques, and Pierre Mohnen (1990), “Rechereche-developpment et
productivité: un sorvoi de lat literature econometrique, Economie et Statistique, Vol. 237-
238, pp. 99-108.




                                                                                        27
         Mansfield, Edwin (1980), "Basic Research and Productivity Increase in
Manufacturing," American Economic Review, 70 (5), December, 863-873.
         Mohnen, Pierre (1990), “New Technology and Interindustry Spillovers,
Science/Technology/Industry Review, Vol. 7, pp. 131-147.
         Mohnen, Pierre (1992), The Relationship between R&D and Productivity Growth
in Canada and Other Major Industrialized Countries, Ottawa: Canada Communications
Group.
         Nelson, Richard R., and Sydney G. Winters (1982), Evolutionary Theory of
Economic Change, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
         Oppenlander, K.M., and L. Schulz (1981), ”Innovation Test: A New Survey of the
IFO Institute,” paper presented at the 15th CIRET Conference, Athens, Greece.
         Orlando, Michael J. (2004), “Measuring Spillovers from Industrial R&D: On the
Importance of Geographic and Technological Proximity,” RAND Journal of Economics,
Vol. 35, pp. 777-786.
         Ornaghi, Carmine (2006), “Spillovers in Product and Process Innovation:
Evidence from Manufacturing Firms,” International Journal of Industrial Organization,
Vol. 24, pp. 349-380.
         Park, Walter G. (1995), “International R&D spillovers and OECD Economic
Growth,” Economic Inquiry, Vol. 23, pp. 571-591.
         Pavitt, Keith (1984), “Sectoral Patterns of Technical Change: Towards a
Taxonomy and Theory,” Research Policy, Vol. 13, pp. 343-373.
         Rosenberg, Nathan (1982), Inside the Black Box: Technology and Economics,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
         Rosenberg, Nathan, and C.R. Frischtak (1984), “Technological innovation and
long waves,” Cambridge Journal of Economics, Vol. 8, pp. 7-24.
         Scherer, Frederic M. (1982), “Interindustry Technology Flows and Productivity
Growth, Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 64, pp. 627-634.
         Sjöholm, Fredrik (1996), ''International transfer of knowledge: the role of
international trade and geographic proximity'', Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, Vol. 132, pp.
97-115.




                                                                                         28
       ten Raa, Thijs, and Edward N. Wolff (1991), "Secondary Products and the
Measurement of Productivity Growth" Regional Science and Urban Economics, Vol. 21,
pp. 581-615.
       Terleckyj, Nestor W. (1974), Effects of R&D on the Productivity Growth of
Industries: An Exploratory Study, (Washington, DC: National Planning Association).
       Terleckyj, Nestor W. (1980), “Direct and Indirect Effects of Industrial Research
and Development on the Productivity Growth of Industries,” in J.W. Kendrick and B.
Vaccara, eds., New Developments in Productivity Measurement, (New York: National
Bureau of Economic Research).
       U.S. Interindustry Economics Division (1974), "The Input-Output Structure of the
U.S. Economy: 1967," Survey of Current Business, Vol. 54, No. 2, February, pp. 24-56.
       U.S. Interindustry Economics Division (1984), "The Input-Output Structure of the
U.S. Economy, 1977," Survey of Current Business, Vol. 64, No. 5, May, pp. 42-84.
       Verspagen, Bart (1997), “Estimating International Technology Spillovers using
Technology Flow Matrices,” Weltwirtschaftliches Arhiv, Band 133, Heft 2, pp. 226-248.
       Wolff, Edward N., "Spillovers, Linkages, and Technical Change", Economic
Systems Research, Vol. 9, No. 1, March 1997, pp. 9-23.
       Wolff, Edward N., and M. Ishaq Nadiri, "Spillover Effects, Linkage Structure,
and Research and Development", (with M.I. Nadiri), Structural Change and Economic
Dynamics, Vol. 4, No. 2, December 1993, 315-331.
       Xu, Bin, and Jianmao Wang (1999) ''Capital Goods Trade and R&D Spillovers in
the OECD'', Canadian Journal of Economics, Vol. 32, pp. 1258-12




                                                                                       29
30
Table 1. Pooled time-Series Cross-Industry Regressions of Industry TFP Growth
On R&D Intensity, Embodied R&D, and Embodied TFP Growth, 1947-1977

Independent                                                 Specification
Variables                   (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)
                                                                                                                                       -
Constant                0.0041         0.0084    *    0.0047           0.0029        0.0000        -0.0030        -0.0010        0.0003
                         (1.33)         (2.07)         (1.42)           (0.99)        (0.01)         (0.07)         (0.27)        (0.07)

RDX                      0.106    *     0.103    *     0.111       *   0.106     *   0.188     *    0.173     *    0.208     *   0.189     *
                         (2.21)         (2.39)         (2.26)          (2.28)        (2.31)         (2.13)         (2.53)        (2.31)

RDINDA                                  0.143                                                       0.076
                                        (1.59)                                                      (1.23)

RDKINDA                                                -0.008                                                      0.092     #
                                                       (0.51)                                                      (1.73)

TFPINDA                                                                0.889     *                                               0.114
                                                                       (2.48)                                                    (0.25)

R2                        0.222         0.244           0.224         0.273        0.062          0.070             0.075         0.063
Adjusted R2               0.179         0.193           0.172         0.224        0.041          0.049             0.049         0.037
Standard Error           0.0125        0.0124         0.0126         0.0122       0.0243         0.0243            0.0242        0.0244
Sample                 Manuf.         Manuf.         Manuf.        Manuf.        All           All                All            All
Sample Size                  95             95             95            95          250            250               250           250
Source: Wolff and Nadiri (1993).
Note: The sample consists of pooled cross-section time-series data, with observations on each of 19
(or 50) industries in 1947-1958, 1958-63, 1963-67, 1967-72, and 1972-77. Time dummy variables
for the last four periods are included but the coefficient estiamtes are not shown.
The estimation uses the White procedure for a heteroschedasticity-consistent
covariance matrix. The absolute value of the t-statistic is in parentheses below the coefficient.

Significance levels: # - 10% level; * - 5% level; ** - 1% level.




                                                                                                                                               31
Table 2. Pooled time-Series Cross-Industry Regressions of Industry TFP Growth
On R&D Intensity, Embodied R&D, and Embodied TFP Growth, 1958-1987

Independent                                                    Specification
Variables                    (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)           (5)
Constant                  0.004    #      0.002          -0.001            0.002         0.004
                          (1.84)          (0.62)          (0.37)           (0.67)        (1.62)

RDX                       0.126    **     0.101    **     0.112    **     0.102     **   0.124     **
                          (3.32)          (2.50)          (3.00)          (2.51)         (3.28)

RDINDA                                    0.429    #
                                          (1.76)

TFPINDA                                                   1.300    **
                                                          (2.80)

RDINDB                                                                    0.408     #
                                                                          (1.66)

TFPINDB                                                                                  0.146
                                                                                         (0.91)

DUM6777                   -0.003         -0.003           0.002           -0.003         -0.003
                          (1.10)         (0.89)           (0.48)           (0.91)         (0.99)

DUM7787                   0.000           0.001           0.004           0.001          0.000
                          (0.06)          (0.32)          (1.19)          (0.29)         (0.07)

R2                        0.060           0.074           0.096           0.073           0.064
Adjusted R2               0.046           0.056           0.078           0.054           0.045
Standard Error          0.0168          0.0167           0.0166          0.0168          0.0168
Sample Size                 204             204             204             204             204
Source: Wolff (1997).
Note: The sample consists of pooled cross-section time-series data, with observations on each of 68




                                                                                                        32
industries in 1958-67, 1967-77 and 1977-87.
The estimation uses the White procedure for a heteroschedasticity-consistent
covariance matrix. The absolute value of the t-statistic is in parentheses below the coefficient.

Significance levels: # - 10% level; * - 5% level; ** - 1% level.




                                                                                                    33
Table 3. Pooled time-Series Cross-Industry Regressions of Industry TFP Growth
On R&D Intensity, Embodied R&D, and Embodied TFP Growth, 1958-2007

Independent                                           Specification
Variables           (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)           (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)
Constant        0.0111    **   0.0096    *    0.0110 *        0.0066        0.0107    *    0.0059         0.0092    #    0.0049
                 (2.64)         (2.33)         (2.25)          (1.37)        (2.45)         (1.14)         (1.96)         (0.98)

RDX               0.227   **   0.222     **   0.227     **    0.202     *   0.227     **   0.254     **   0.235     **   0.248     **
                 (2.91)        (2.93)         (2.85)          (2.56)        (2.90)         (3.17)         (2.96)         (3.17)

RDINDA                         0.366     **                                                                              0.350     **
                               (3.42)                                                                                    (3.24)

RDINDB                                        0.022
                                              (0.04)

TFPINDA                                                       0.713     #
                                                              (1.84)

TFPINDB                                                                     0.064
                                                                            (0.42)

RDKINDA                                                                                    0.849     *                   0.768     #
                                                                                           (2.01)                        (1.86)

RDKINDB                                                                                                   0.222
                                                                                                          (1.26)

                      -              -              -              -                             -              -              -
DUM6777         0.0079         0.0196    #    0.0078         0.0044         0.0076         0.0045         0.0063         0.0075
                 (1.35)         (1.85)         (1.34)         (0.73)         (1.29)         (0.73)         (1.04)         (1.24)

                     -              -              -              -              -              -              -              -
DUM7787         0.0068         0.0095    #    0.0067         0.0047         0.0067         0.0045         0.0053         0.0075




                                                                                                                                        34
                       (1.16)         (1.66)         (1.10)        (0.80)      (1.15)         (0.75)         (0.88)   (1.26)

                            -              -              -              -                                                  -
DUM8797               0.0015         0.0047         0.0014         0.0011      0.0016        0.0003         0.0000    0.0035
                       (0.26)         (0.82)         (0.23)         (0.19)      (0.03)        (0.04)          0.00     (0.60)

DUM9707               0.0011         0.0012         0.0011         0.0008      0.0013        0.0067         0.0019    0.0052
                       (0.18)         (0.20)         (0.18)         (0.13)      (0.20)        (0.81)         (0.29)    (0.79)

R2                   0.0564         0.1070         0.0564          0.0717       0.0573          0.0743       0.0631   0.1205
Adjusted R2          0.0336         0.0810         0.0290          0.0446       0.0298          0.0466       0.0351   0.0897
Standard Error       0.0276         0.0269         0.0276          0.0274       0.0276          0.0276       0.0278   0.0270
Sample Size             213            213             213            213          213             208          208      208
Note: The sample consists of pooled cross-section time-series data, with observations on each of 45
industries in 1958-1967, 1967-1977, 1977-1987, and 1987-1997 and on each of 33 industries in 1997-2007.
Investment by type is not available for the public administration sector. As a result, the number of sectors
is reduced by one when RDKINDA and RDKINDB are used in the regression.
The estimation uses the White procedure for a heteroschedasticity-consistent
covariance matrix. The absolute value of the t-statistic is in parentheses below the coefficient.

Significance levels: # - 10% level; * - 5% level; ** - 1% level.




                                                                                                                                35
Table 4. Pooled time-Series Cross-Industry Regressions of Industry TFP Growth on R&D
Intensity, Embodied R&D, and Embodied TFP Growth, Manufacturing Industries, 1958-2007

Independent                                          Specification
Variables            (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)            (7)
Constant         0.0190    **   0.0181     *   0.0121        0.0172    *   0.0167     *   0.0191     #   0.0145     #
                  (2.77)         (2.59)         (1.42)        (2.09)        (2.37)         (1.80)         (1.76)

RDX               0.110          0.111          0.066        0.112          0.113          0.110          0.103
                 (1.15)          (1.15)         (0.65)       (1.16)         (1.18)         (1.13)         (1.07)

RDINDA                           0.141
                                 (0.60)

RDINDB                                          1.469
                                                (1.33)

TFPINDA                                                      0.191
                                                             (0.38)

TFPINDB                                                                     0.267
                                                                            (1.28)

RDKINDA                                                                                    -0.047
                                                                                            (0.02)

RDKINDB                                                                                                   1.744
                                                                                                          (0.97)

DUM6777         -0.0052         -0.0062        -0.0046      -0.0042        -0.0033        -0.0054        -0.0027
                  (0.58)          (0.67)         (0.51)       (0.45)         (0.36)         (0.52)         (0.29)

DUM7787          0.0063         -0.0072        -0.0019      -0.0057        -0.0064        -0.0064        -0.0042
                  (0.70)          (0.79)         (0.20)       (0.63)         (0.71)         (0.66)         (0.46)




                                                                                                                        36
DUM8797                -0.0088         -0.0100        -0.0030      -0.0088      -0.0098       -0.0088       -0.0068
                         (0.98)          (1.80)         (0.31)       (0.97)       (1.09)        (0.94)        (0.73)

DUM9707                 0.0049          0.0040        0.0064       0.0038       0.0052         0.0037        0.0058
                         (0.41)          (0.42)        (0.67)       (0.40)       (0.56)         (0.34)        (0.61)

R2                     0.0363          0.0399        0.0539         0.0378        0.0528          0.0363      0.0458
Adjusted R2           -0.0139         -0.0207       -0.0059        -0.0229       -0.0070        -0.0245      -0.0144
Standard Error         0.0291          0.0292        0.0290         0.0292        0.0290          0.2925      0.0291
Sample Size               102             102            102           102           102             102         102
Note: The sample consists of pooled cross-section time-series data, with observations on each of 45
industries in 1958-1967, 1967-1977, 1977-1987, and 1987-1997 and on each of 33 industries in 1997-2007.
Investment by type is not available for the public administration sector. As a result, the number of sectors
is reduced by one when RDKINDA and RDKINDB are used in the regression.
The estimation uses the White procedure for a heteroschedasticity-consistent
covariance matrix. The absolute value of the t-statistic is in parentheses below the coefficient.

Significance levels: # - 10% level; * - 5% level; ** - 1% level.




                                                                                                                       37
Table 5. Pooled time-Series Cross-Industry Regressions of Industry TFP Growth
On R&D Intensity and Embodied R&D by Selected Period, 1958-2007

Independent                                           Period
Variables           1958-67       1967-77      1977-87       1987-97          1997-07         1958-87        1987-07
Constant             0.0071        0.0059      -0.0077        0.0027          -0.0004          0.0072         -0.0051
                      (1.35)        (1.05)       (1.14)        (0.35)           (0.03)          (1.57)          (0.65)

RDX                    0.120        0.117         0.276          0.073          1.151    **     0.157    #     0.436     **
                      (1.15)        (0.73)        (1.49)         (0.39)         (4.14)          (1.89)         (2.69)

RDINDA                0.523         -0.182        0.553    **    0.490    *    -1.771           0.251    *     0.489     *
                      (0.54)         (0.91)       (2.93)         (2.69)         (0.82)          (2.03)         (2.47)

RDKINDA               0.548         0.448         1.444          0.591          5.409           0.657          1.222
                      (1.59)        (0.28)        (1.18)         (0.61)         (1.19)          (1.61)         (1.19)

DUM6777                                                                                       -0.0073
                                                                                                (1.37)

DUM7787                                                                                       -0.0071
                                                                                                (1.36)

DUM9707                                                                                                       0.0115
                                                                                                               (1.38)

R2                    0.1000        0.0314        0.2398         0.1621         0.3829         0.0953        0.1642
Adjusted R2           0.0325       -0.0412        0.1828         0.0992         0.3168         0.0594        0.1171
Standard Error        0.0173        0.0239        0.0267         0.0296         0.0320         0.0234        0.0323
Sample Size               44             44           44             44             32             93            76
Note: The sample consists of pooled cross-section time-series data, with observations on each of 45
industries in 1958-1967, 1967-1977, 1977-1987, and 1987-1997 and on each of 33 industries in 1997-2007.
Investment by type is not available for the public administration sector. As a result, the number of sectors
is reduced by one when RDKINDA and RDKINDB are used in the regression.
The estimation uses the White procedure for a heteroschedasticity-consistent




                                                                                                                              38
covariance matrix. The absolute value of the t-statistic is in parentheses below the coefficient.

Significance levels: # - 10% level; * - 5% level; ** - 1% level.




                                                                                                    39
Table 6. Pooled time-Series Cross-Industry Regressions of Industry TFP Growth
On R&D Intensity and Embodied R&D by Selected Period and with Interactive Term, 1958-2007

Independent                                         Period
Variables           1958-67     1958-77        1958-87        1958-97         1958-07         1958-07
Constant             0.0071      0.0102    *    0.0072         0.0071          0.0049          0.0062
                      (1.35)      (2.42)         (1.57)         (1.53)          (0.98)          (0.80)

RDX                    0.120      0.139           0.157   #      0.134   #       0.248   **      0.257   **
                      (1.15)      (1.63)         (1.89)         (1.74)          (3.17)          (3.21)

RDINDA                0.523      -0.168          0.251    *     0.353    **     0.350    **     0.022
                      (0.54)      (1.01)         (2.03)         (3.54)          (3.24)          (0.02)

RDKINDA               0.548       0.505          0.657          0.637    #      0.768    #      0.776    #
                      (1.59)      (1.30)         (1.61)         (1.66)          (1.86)          (1.89)

RDINDA x                                                                                       -0.215
DUM6777                                                                                        (0.16)

RDINDA x                                                                                         0.549
DUM7787                                                                                         (0.40)

RDINDA x                                                                                         0.472
DUM8797                                                                                         (0.35)

RDINDA x                                                                                         0.291
DUM9707                                                                                         (0.14)

DUM6777                         -0.0048        -0.0073        -0.0082         -0.0075         -0.0024
                                  (0.99)         (1.37)         (1.46)          (1.24)          (0.27)

DUM7787                                         0.0071        -0.0079         -0.0075         -0.0115
                                                 (1.36)         (1.45)          (1.26)          (1.33)




                                                                                                              40
DUM8797                                                                     -0.0037           -0.0035          -0.0069
                                                                              (0.68)            (0.60)           (0.80)

DUM9707                                                                                        0.0052          0.0039
                                                                                                (0.79)          (0.35)

R2                          0.1000           0.0890            0.0953          0.1140             0.1205       0.1568
Adjusted R2                 0.0325           0.0451            0.0594          0.0825             0.0897       0.1095
Standard Error              0.0173           0.0205            0.0234          0.0249             0.0270       0.0267
Sample Size                     44               88               132             176                208          208
Note: The sample consists of pooled cross-section time-series data, with observations on each of 45
industries in 1958-1967, 1967-1977, 1977-1987, and 1987-1997 and on each of 33 industries in 1997-2007.
Investment by type is not available for the public administration sector. As a result, the number of sectors
is reduced by one when RDKINDA and RDKINDB are used in the regression.
The estimation uses the White procedure for a heteroschedasticity-consistent
covariance matrix. The absolute value of the t-statistic is in parentheses below the coefficient.

Significance levels: # - 10% level; * - 5% level; ** - 1% level.




                                                                                                                          41
Table 7. Pooled time-Series Cross-Industry Regressions of Industry TFP Growth
On SCIENG, Embodied R&D, and Embodied TFP Growth, 1958-2007

Independent                                             Specification
Variables           (1)            (2)            (3)               (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)
Constant        0.0080    *    0.0095    *    0.0111      *     0.0069         0.0109    *    0.0054         0.0092    *    0.0043
                 (2.27)         (2.36)         (2.22)            (1.45)         (2.58)         (1.10)         (2.03)         (0.89)

SCIENG          0.0332    **   0.0394    **   0.0389      **    0.0361    **   0.0388    **   0.0423    **   0.0394    **   0.0427    **
                 (3.77)         (4.23)         (4.00)            (3.74)         (4.02)         (4.28)         (4.00)         (4.43)

RDINDA                         0.378     **                                                                                 0.364     **
                               (3.61)                                                                                       (3.44)

RDINDB                                        0.007
                                              (0.01)

TFPINDA                                                         0.654     #
                                                                (1.72)

TFPINDB                                                                        0.029
                                                                               (0.19)

RDKINDA                                                                                       0.925     *                   0.850     *
                                                                                              (2.23)                        (2.10)

RDKINDB                                                                                                      0.223
                                                                                                             (1.29)

                      -              -              -                 -              -              -              -              -
DUM6777         0.0047         0.0110    #    0.0082            0.0050         0.0081         0.0046         0.0067         0.0077
                 (0.90)         (1.97)         (1.43)            (0.84)         (1.40)         (0.76)         (1.12)         (1.29)

                     -              -              -                 -              -                             -              -
DUM7787         0.0042         0.0107    #    0.0079            0.0059         0.0078         0.0056         0.0065         0.0086




                                                                                                                                           42
                      (0.81)         (1.91)         (1.32)         (1.02)       (1.37)        (0.94)         (1.09)   (1.48)

                           -              -              -               -           -             -              -         -
DUM8797              0.0047         0.0073         0.0040          0.0034      0.0040        0.0029         0.0025    0.0063
                      (0.81)         (1.29)         (0.65)          (0.59)      (0.70)        (0.49)         (0.42)    (1.09)

                           -              -              -               -           -             -              -         -
DUM9707              0.0090         0.0100         0.0100          0.0095      0.0099        0.0067         0.0098    0.0071
                      (1.52)         (1.52)         (1.47)          (1.40)      (1.45)        (0.96)         (1.40)    (1.03)

R2                   0.0805        0.1441          0.0900         0.1029        0.0902          0.1090       0.0944   0.1588
Adjusted R2          0.0628        0.1192          0.0635         0.0768        0.0637          0.0824       0.0674   0.1294
Standard Error       0.0272        0.0263         0.0271          0.0269        0.0271          0.0271       0.0273   0.0263
Sample Size             213            213            213            213           213             208          208      208
Note: The sample consists of pooled cross-section time-series data, with observations on each of 45
industries in 1958-1967, 1967-1977, 1977-1987, and 1987-1997 and on each of 33 industries in 1997-2007.
Investment by type is not available for the public administration sector. As a result, the number of sectors
is reduced by one when RDKINDA and RDKINDB are used in the regression.
The estimation uses the White procedure for a heteroschedasticity-consistent
covariance matrix. The absolute value of the t-statistic is in parentheses below the coefficient. Key:

SCIENG: Full-time equivalent scientists and engineers engaged in R&D per 10,000 full-time equivalent employees.

Significance levels: # - 10% level; * - 5% level; ** - 1% level.




                                                                                                                                43
Table 8. The Effect of R&D Intensity and Productivity Growth on Forward Linkage Structure,
1947-1977

Independent                                           Dependent Variable
Variables              LINK1          LINK1           LINK1        LINK1             LINK2          LINK2          LINK3
Constant               0.0122     *   0.0123     **    0.0093 **    0.0094      **     1.957   **     1.986   **     2.437   **
                       (13.01)         (6.78)         (16.17)        (7.76)          (31.52)        (15.14)        (32.43)

RDX                      0.031                         0.081       *                  6.594    *                    6.835    #
                         (1.09)                        (2.86)                         (2.15)                        (1.84)

TFPGRRT                                -0.011                          0.042    *                    3.961    **
                                        (0.02)                         (2.59)                        (2.24)

R2                       0.013         0.007          0.032          0.028         0.018           0.021             0.013
Adjusted R2              0.002         0.000          0.028          0.008         0.014           0.017             0.010
Standard Error          0.0075        0.0077         0.0085         0.0086         0.921           0.927             1.114
Sample                 Manuf.       Manuf.          All           All            All            All                All
Sample Size                 95            95            250            250           250             250               250
Source: Wolff and Nadiri (1993).
Note: The sample consists of pooled cross-section time-series data, with observations on each of 19
(or 50) industries in 1947-1958, 1958-63, 1963-67, 1967-72, and 1972-77.

Significance levels: # - 10% level; * - 5% level; ** - 1% level.




                                                                                                                                  44
Table 9. The Effect of R&D Intensity and Productivity Growth on Forward Linkage Structure,
1958-2007

Independent                                            Dependent Variable
Variables               LINK1           LINK1          LINK2         LINK2          LINK3          LINK3
Constant                0.0105     **    0.0097   **      1.608 **     1.574   **     2.137   **     2.180   **
                        (13.41)         (12.86)         (36.72)      (36.89)        (26.11)        (27.51)

RDX                      -0.033                          -0.022                       0.017
                          (1.19)                         (1.43)                      (0.59)

TFPGRT                                   0.025                        0.430                         -1.698
                                         (1.00)                       (0.31)                        (0.65)

R2                         0.007        0.005          0.010           0.001          0.002          0.002
Adjusted R2                0.002        0.000          0.005          -0.005         -0.003         -0.003
Standard Error           0.0097        0.0968        0.5437           0.5464          1.016          1.015
Sample Size                  213          213            213             213            213            213
Note: The sample consists of pooled cross-section time-series data, with observations on each of 45
industries in 1958-1967, 1967-1977, 1977-1987, and 1987-1997 and on each of 33 industries in 1997-2007.
See text for definitions of LINK1, LINK2, and LINK3.

Significance levels: # - 10% level; * - 5% level; ** - 1% level.




                                                                                                                  45
Table 10. Summary of Findings from Earlier Studies and Current Study
On R&D Intensity, Embodied R&D, and Embodied TFP Growth, 1947-1977

Independent     Wolff and         Wolff and           Wolff        Current          Current
Variables      Nadiri (1993)a    Nadiri (1993)a      (1997)b        Studyc          Studyd
                                                                 Signif. at
RDX            Signif. at        Signif. at        Signif. at    1%             Not Signif.
               5% level          5% level          1% level      or 5% level

SCIENG                                             Signif. at    Signif. at
                                                   1% level      1% level

RDINDA         Not Signif.       Not Signif.       Signif. at    Signif. at     Not Signif.
                                                   10% level     1% level

                                                                 Signif. at
RDKINDA        Not Signif.       Signif. at                      5%             Not Signif.
                                 10% level                       or 10% level

TFPINDA        Signif. at        Not Signif.       Signif. at    Signif. at     Not Signif.
               5% level                            1% level      10% level

RDINDB                                             Signif. at    Not Signif.    Not Signif.
                                                   10% level

TFPINDB                                            Not Signif.   Not Signif.    Not Signif.


RDKINDB                                                          Not Signif.    Not Signif.


                                                        All            All
Sample         Manufacturing All Industries         Industries      Industries   Manufacturing
Sample Size          95                 95              204            213             102
a. The sample consists of pooled cross-section time-series data, with observations on each of 19




                                                                                                   46
(or 50) industries in 1947-1958, 1958-63, 1963-67, 1967-72, and 1972-77.
b. The sample consists of pooled cross-section time-series data, with observations on each of 68
industries in 1958-67, 1967-77 and 1977-87.
c. The sample consists of pooled cross-section time-series data, with observations on each of 45
industries in 1958-1967, 1967-1977, 1977-1987, and 1987-1997 and on each of 33 industries in 1997-2007.
d. The sample consists of pooled cross-section time-series data, with observations on each of 45
industries in 1958-1967, 1967-1977, 1977-1987, and 1987-1997 and on each of 33 industries in 1997-2007.




                                                                                                          47
Appendix Table 1. Classification of 45-Sector Schema and Concordance with
the BEA 85-Order Input-Output Sectors

                                                    BEA         1987
             45- Sector Classification              85-Order    SIC
Number        Name                                  Codesa      Codes
         1    Agriculture, forestry, and fishing    1-4         01-09
         2    Metal mining                          5-6         10
         3    Coal mining                           7           11,12
         4    Oil and gas extraction                8           13
         5    Mining of nonmetallic                 9-10        14
              minerals, except fuels
       6      Construction                          11,12       15-17
       7      Food and kindred products             14          20
       8      Tobacco products                      15          21
       9      Textile mill products                 16-17       22
      10      Apparel and other textile products    18-19       23
      11      Lumber and wood products              20-21       24
      12      Furniture and fixtures                22-23       25
      13      Paper and allied products             24-25       26
      14      Printing and publishing               26          27
      15      Chemicals and allied products         27-30       28
      16      Petroleum and coal products           31          29
      17      Rubber and miscellaneous              32          30
              plastic products
      18      Leather and leather products          33-34       31
      19      Stone, clay, and glass products       35-36       32
      20      Primary metal products                37-38       33
      21      Fabricated metal products,            13,39-42    34
              including ordnance
      22      Industrial machinery and              43-52       35
              equipment, exc. electrical




                                                                            48
       23   Electric and electronic equipment                     53-58         36
       24   Motor vehicles and equipment                          59            371
       25   Other transportation equipment                        60-61         37
       26   Instruments and related products                      62-63         38
       27   Miscellaneous manufactures                            64            39
       28   Transportation                                        65            40-42,44-47
       29   Telephone and telegraph                               66            481,482,489
       30   Radio and TV broadcasting                             67            483,484
       31   Electric, gas, and sanitary services                  68            49
       32   Wholesale trade                                       69A           50-51
       33   Retail trade                                          69B,74        52-59
       34   Banking; credit and investment                        70A           60-62,67
            companies
       35   Insurance                                             70B           63-64
       36   Real estate                                           71B           65-66
       37   Hotels, motels, and lodging places                    72A           70
       38   Personal services                                     72[part]      72
       39   Business and repair services except                   73C,          73,76
            auto                                                  72[part]
       40   Auto services and repair                              75            75
       41   Amusement and recreation services                     76            78-79
       42   Health services, including hospitals                  77A           80
       43   Educational services                                  77B[part]     82
       44   Legal and other professional                          73A,73B,      81,83,84,86
            services and non-profit organizations                 77B[part]     87,89
        45 Public Administration                                   78,79,84      43b
a. Bureau of Economic Analysis 85-sector industrial classification system for input-output data
(1987 version).
b. U.S. postal service only.




                                                                                                  49
Appendix Table 2. Mean Values and Standard Deviations of Variables by Time Period

                                                  Time Period
Variables           1958-2007   1958-1967   1967-1977   1977-1987   1987-1997   1997-2007
TFPGRT
 1. Mean              0.0107      0.0140      0.0058      0.0071      0.0126      0.0151
 2. Std. Dev.         0.0280      0.0175      0.0232      0.0292      0.0309      0.0383
 3. (Sample Size)      (213)       (45)        (45)        (45)        (45)        (33)
RDX
 1. Mean              0.0122      0.0124      0.0111      0.0119      0.0131      0.0125
 2. Std. Dev.         0.0243      0.0287      0.0232      0.0225      0.0249      0.0221
 3. (Sample Size)      (213)       (45)        (45)        (45)        (45)        (33)
SCIENG
 1. Mean               13.8         7.3         7.5         9.9        14.0        36.0
 2. Std. Dev.          21.8        11.4        11.5        15.5        22.5        33.3
 3. (Sample Size)     (213)        (45)        (45)        (45)        (45)        (33)
RDINDA
 1. Mean              0.0092      0.0043      0.0117      0.0118      0.0131      0.0040
 2. Std. Dev.         0.0177      0.0032      0.0186      0.0217      0.0245      0.0028
 3. (Sample Size)      (213)       (45)        (45)        (45)        (45)        (33)
RDINDB
 1. Mean              0.0033      0.0049      0.0037      0.0017      0.0011      0.0056
 2. Std. Dev.         0.0040      0.0053      0.0025      0.0012      0.0008      0.0060
 3. (Sample Size)      (213)       (45)        (45)        (45)        (45)        (33)
TFPINDA
 1. Mean              0.0051      0.0068      0.0019      0.0039      0.0062      0.0072
 2. Std. Dev.         0.0053      0.0048      0.0045      0.0047      0.0047      0.0064
 3. (Sample Size)      (213)       (45)        (45)        (45)        (45)        (33)
TFPINDB
 1. Mean              0.0060      0.0071      0.0023      0.0062      0.0090      0.0054
 2. Std. Dev.         0.0128      0.0104      0.0108      0.0146      0.0148      0.0121
 3. (Sample Size)      (213)       (45)        (45)        (45)        (45)        (33)
RDKINDA
 1. Mean              0.0037      0.0062      0.0021      0.0034      0.0047      0.0016
 2. Std. Dev.         0.0049      0.0078      0.0024      0.0035      0.0048      0.0013




                                                                                            50
  3. (Sample Size)         (208)          (44)         (44)           (44)           (44)         (32)
RDKINDB
  1. Mean                 0.0048         0.0096       0.0021        0.0025         0.0027        0.0080
  2. Std. Dev.            0.0115         0.0213       0.0024        0.0023         0.0023        0.0128
  3. (Sample Size)         (208)          (44)         (44)           (44)           (44)         (32)
LINK1
  1. Mean                 0.0100         0.0095       0.0095        0.0096         0.0095        0.0128
  2. Std. Dev.            0.0097         0.0084       0.0084        0.0086         0.0090        0.0141
  3. (Sample Size)         (196)          (41)         (41)           (41)           (41)         (32)
LINK2
  1. Mean                  1.557         1.573        1.578          1.576          1.562        1.493
  2. Std. Dev.             0.546         0.499        0.507          0.523          0.535        0.671
  3. (Sample Size)         (205)          (41)         (41)           (41)           (41)         (41)
LINK3
  1. Mean                  2.114         2.244        2.185          2.126          2.105        1.910
  2. Std. Dev.             1.019         1.152        1.075          1.016          0.990        0.856
  3. (Sample Size)         (205)          (41)         (41)           (41)           (41)         (41)
Note: The sample consists of pooled cross-section time-series data, with observations on each of 45
industries in 1958-1967, 1967-1977, 1977-1987, and 1987-1997 and on each of 33 industries in 1997-2007.
Investment by type is not available for the public administration sector. As a result, the number of sectors
is reduced by one when RDKINDA and RDKINDB are used in the regression.




                                                                                                               51
