                                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 THE EFFECT OF EVALUATION ON PERFORMANCE:
EVIDENCE FROM LONGITUDINAL STUDENT ACHIEVEMENT DATA OF MID-CAREER TEACHERS

                                                Eric S. Taylor
                                                John H. Tyler

                                            Working Paper 16877
                                    http://www.nber.org/papers/w16877


                          NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                     Cambridge, MA 02138
                                         March 2011




    Authors are listed alphabetically. The authors would like to thank Susan Moore Johnson, Eric Bettinger,
    Susanna Loeb, and seminar participants at Wellesley College, Stanford University, and the NBER
    Education Program meeting for helpful comments on previous drafts of this paper. The research reported
    here was supported in part by the Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education, through
    Grant R305C090023 to the President and Fellows of Harvard College. The opinions expressed are
    those of the authors and do not represent views of the Institute, the U.S. Department of Education,
    or the National Bureau of Economic Research. We also gratefully acknowledge the Center for Education
    Policy Research at Harvard University, the Joyce Foundation for their generous support of this project,
    as well as the cooperation and support of the Cincinnati Public Schools.

    NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
    reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
    NBER publications.

    © 2011 by Eric S. Taylor and John H. Tyler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
    two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
    is given to the source.
The Effect of Evaluation on Performance: Evidence from Longitudinal Student Achievement
Data of Mid-career Teachers
Eric S. Taylor and John H. Tyler
NBER Working Paper No. 16877
March 2011
JEL No. I21,J24,M59

                                               ABSTRACT

The effect of evaluation on employee performance is traditionally studied in the context of the principal-agent
problem. Evaluation can, however, also be characterized as an investment in the evaluated employee’s
human capital. We study a sample of mid-career public school teachers where we can consider these
two types of evaluation effect separately. Employee evaluation is a particularly salient topic in public
schools where teacher effectiveness varies substantially and where teacher evaluation itself is increasingly
a focus of public policy proposals. We find evidence that a quality classroom-observation-based evaluation
and performance measures can improve mid-career teacher performance both during the period of
evaluation, consistent with the traditional predictions; and in subsequent years, consistent with human
capital investment. However the estimated improvements during evaluation are less precise. Additionally,
the effects sizes represent a substantial gain in welfare given the program’s costs.


Eric S. Taylor
Stanford University
eswt@stanford.edu

John H. Tyler
Box 1938
21 Manning Walk
Brown University
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
john_tyler@brown.edu
Introduction

        Employers evaluate employees partly to encourage better job performance. Evaluation-

induced improvements may, however, be transient if the incentives only operate on behavior that

contributes to an evaluation score. By contrast, the effects may be more likely to persist if the

evaluation spurs employees’ investment in human capital. While distinct, these mechanisms are

not mutually-exclusive which complicates any investigation of the effect of evaluation on

performance.

        Economics has built a substantial body of research, both theoretical and empirical, on

performance evaluation and employee responses (see Prendergast 1999 and Gibbons 2005 for

reviews). The literature, however, focuses on the predictions of principal-agent, contract-

incentive models of the proximate effects. There is much less evidence on how information from

an evaluation contributes to investments in human capital. In this paper we study a sample of

mid-career public school teachers where we can measure performance in periods before, during,

and after evaluation.

        Thoughtful consideration of performance evaluation is particularly timely for American

public school teachers and their employers. In recent years evaluating teacher effectiveness has

become a dominant theme in American education reform efforts, an emphasis motivated in no

small part by the apparently large variation in teacher productivity as measured by ability to

promote student achievement growth. Estimates of the standard deviation in teacher

effectiveness range between 0.10 and 0.25 student-level standard deviations in math with

somewhat smaller differences reported for English language arts (see Hanushek and Rivkin 2010

for a review).1 Coupling the large variation in teacher effectiveness with research documenting


1
 Pioneering work in this area was done by Hanushek (1971) and Murnane and Phillips (1981). More recent
examples include Aaronson, Barrow, and Sander (2003), Rockoff (2004), Rivkin, Hanushek, and Kain (2005), and

                                                      1
the long-run labor market effects of achievement differences (Chetty et al. 2010, Hanushek

2010), the recent emphasis on teacher evaluation should come as no surprise.

         Advocates believe robust teacher evaluation could improve average teacher performance,

citing both the incentives of evaluation per se and the potential contribution to teachers’ human

capital development. To date, however, there is little empirical evidence to support either of

these propositions.2 In any case, existing evaluation programs, widely viewed as mostly

perfunctory, do not appear up to the task (Johnson 1990, Donaldson 2009, Weisburg et al. 2009).

         In this paper we address two questions: First, does evaluation improve teacher

performance, as measured by student achievement gains, during the evaluation period? Second,

does past evaluation improve teacher performance in periods after the teacher is no longer being

evaluated?

         We use data from the Cincinnati Public Schools, who’s long-running Teacher Evaluation

System (TES) is considered much more well-developed than most existing teacher evaluation

programs (Fairman et al. 2009, Johnson 2010). TES evaluates teachers’ professional practice

through multiple, detailed classroom observations and a review of work products (but not student

test scores). We compare within teacher differences in performance over time for a sample where

the timing of evaluation is plausibly exogenous.

         We focus on classroom observation based evaluation for two reasons. First, much has

been written about the potential use of test-score based measures in teacher evaluation,

particularly in selective retention policies (Gordon, Kane, and Staiger 2006, Glazerman et al.

Kane, Rockoff, and Staiger (2006). And while estimates across researchers and settings are relatively consistent,
there remain questions about the empirical identification (Rothstein 2010, Kodel and Betts 2009, Kane and Staiger
2008, Todd and Wolpin 2003).
2
  One exception is Golhaber and Anthony (2007) who study the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards
teacher certification process; as a side note the authors find that, if anything, teachers applying for NBPTS
certification perform less well during the school year that they are applying for certification. A second is Rockoff et
al. 2010, which studies how principals use new information on teacher performance to update their appraisals and
make human resource decisions.

                                                          2
2010, Staiger and Rockoff 2010, Golhaber and Hansen 2010). Classroom observation measures

have received little attention by comparison,3 though the two approaches are increasingly

partnered in policy proposals. Second, the inherent focus on observable practice increases the

chances that classroom observation based evaluation will lead to persistent changes in

performance through improved skill. Test-score measures provide little, if any, prescription for

changes in performance.

           We find that high-quality, classroom-observation-based evaluation improves mid-career

teacher performance both during the period of evaluation and in subsequent years, though the

estimated improvements during evaluation are not always robust. Specifically, students assigned

to a teacher after she participates in TES score about 10 percent of a standard deviation higher in

math than similar students taught by the same teacher prior to TES participation. Effects of this

size represent a potentially substantial gain in welfare given the program’s costs.



Teacher Performance Evaluation in Cincinnati

           The data for our analysis come from the Cincinnati Public Schools. In the 2000-2001

school year Cincinnati launched the Teacher Evaluation System (TES), a practice-based

evaluation system that gathers data from both classroom observations and from work products

such as teacher lesson plans, evidence of professional development activities, and family contact

logs. During the year-long TES evaluation process, teachers are typically observed and scored

four times: three times by an assigned peer evaluator—high-performing, experienced teachers

who are external to the school—and once by the principal or other school administrator. Both

peer evaluators and administrators complete an intensive TES evaluator training course, and

must accurately score videotaped teaching examples to check inter-rater reliability. Teachers are
3
    A notable exception is the large scale Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation study currently in progress (2010).

                                                           3
informed of the week during which the first observation will occur, with all other observations

being unannounced.

        Teachers are evaluated on dozens of specific skills and practices covering classroom

management, instruction, content knowledge, and planning, among other topics. Evaluators use a

scoring rubric, based on Charlotte Danielson’s Enhancing Professional Practice: A Framework

for Teaching (1996), which describes performance of each skill and practice at four levels:

“Distinguished”, “Proficient”, “Basic”, and “Unsatisfactory.” For example, standard 3.4.B

addresses the use of questions in instructional settings:

       Distinguished: “Teacher routinely asks thought-provoking questions at the evaluative,
        synthesis, and/or analysis levels that focus on the objectives of the lesson. Teacher seeks
        clarification and elaboration through additional questions. Teacher provides appropriate
        wait time.”

       Proficient: “Teacher asks thought-provoking questions at the evaluative, synthesis, and/or
        analysis levels that focus on the objectives of the lesson. Teacher seeks clarification
        through additional questions. Teacher provides appropriate wait time.”

       Basic: “Teacher asks questions that are relevant to the objectives of the lesson. Teacher
        asks follow-up questions. Teacher is inconsistent in providing appropriate wait time.”

       Unsatisfactory: “Teacher frequently asks questions that are inappropriate to objectives of
        the lesson. Teacher frequently does not ask follow-up questions. Teacher answers own
        questions. Teacher frequently does not provide appropriate wait time.” 4

        Peer evaluators and administrators provide written feedback to the teacher within ten

days of each classroom observation, and meet with the teacher personally soon after their first

classroom observation. Owing to union-negotiated guidelines, the evaluator is instructed to not

offer suggestions for improvement outside the official rubric language in the feedback and

during the conference. Thus an evaluator may point out the stated characteristics of higher-level




4
 The complete TES rubric is available on the Cincinnati Public Schools website: http://www.cps-
k12.org/employment/tchreval/stndsrubrics.pdf.

                                                       4
performance in a given area and reference details of the observation, but should not give an

example from, for example, a different teachers’ evaluation.

           At the end of the year a final summative score in each of four domains of practice is

calculated and presented to the evaluated teacher.5 For beginning teachers (those evaluated in

their first and their fourth years) the consequences of a poor evaluation could be non-renewal of

their contract, and a successful evaluation is required before receiving tenure. For tenured

teachers, the consequences of the evaluation include determining eligibility for promotions or

additional tenure protection, or, if the evaluation was poor, placement in the peer assistance

program with only a small risk of termination.

           Teachers only undergo TES evaluation periodically; typically the first year as a new hire,

the fourth year after being hired, and every five years after that point. However, teachers hired

before the TES program began in 2000-01 were “phased in” to the program. That is, the first

year these veteran teachers received a TES evaluation was in the middle of their career and

determined by a pre-agreed schedule. These mid-career teachers are the focus of our analysis: we

observe their performance before, during, and after the TES evaluation process; and the timing of

their evaluation is plausibly exogenous. We return to these characteristics in the discussion of

our empirical strategy.

           Data provided by the Cincinnati Public Schools identify the year(s) in which a teacher

was evaluated by TES, the dates when each observation occurred, and the scores. We combine

these TES data with additional administrative Cincinnati data that allow us to match teachers to

students and student test scores.



Theoretical Framework
5
    For more details on the scoring process see Kane et al. (forthcoming).

                                                            5
Personnel Economics and the Proximate Effects of Evaluation

         A broad literature, largely situated in personnel economics, explores the role of

evaluation and performance measurement in employer-employee relationships. The authors of

this literature have developed nuanced models to address varied principal-agent conditions (for

reviews see Prendergast 1999, Gibbons 2005, and Lazear and Oyer forthcoming). However, as

Dixit (2002) has discussed, the underlying assumptions often do not hold in public sector labor

markets, including teaching (see also the discussion in Neal 2011).6 Nevertheless, the general

intuition behind many of these models can still be instructive in public sector settings such as

education.

         The extent to which evaluation affects performance, the models from personnel

economics generally suggest, is a function of two key dimensions: (i) how performance is

measured or evaluated, and (ii) what action is taken with the resulting information. Our

discussion here will address these two dimensions with regard to the TES program, and teacher

evaluation more generally, including how these dimensions shape predictions for our empirical

analysis.

         With regard to the first dimension, Holstrom (1979), Holmstrom and Milgrom (1991),

Baker (1992), and others discuss how employee behavior is affected when performance

measures are imperfect or incomplete. In such circumstances, employees may take actions that

improve their performance score at the expense of actual performance or performance in other

important areas.



6
  Status quo teacher employment arrangements are consistent with Dixit’s (2002) analysis. The prevailing teacher
compensation contracts are based on seniority and highest degree earned; far from efficient mechanisms for
motivating performance (Ballou and Podgursky 2002). Some school systems have or are experimenting with
alternative compensation schemes but with noted difficulty (Neal 2011). Additionally, teacher evaluation falls short
of traditional employee monitoring models (Shapiro and Stiglitz 1984); most importantly, few teachers are
terminated as a result of annual reviews (Weisberg et al. 2009).

                                                         6
        Classroom-observation-based evaluations, including Cincinnati’s TES, are at best

incomplete measures of teaching that produces gains in student achievement and attainment.

Additionally, unlike many other teacher evaluation programs, Cincinnati’s teachers are only

subject to TES evaluation every few years. If, as theory predicts, teachers prioritize actions that

improve their evaluation score, these characteristics of TES suggest two predictions. First, during

an evaluation, teachers will prioritize behaviors that increase their TES score. Thus TES

evaluation will only affect student achievement outcomes to the extent the TES rubric criteria

produce higher achievement.7 Empirical evidence suggests teachers who score higher on the TES

rubric do produce greater student achievement gains (Kane et al. forthcoming, Milanowski

2004a, 2004b, Holtzapple 2003).

        A second prediction, which we test in this paper, is that TES evaluation will only affect

teacher behavior, and thus student achievement, during the TES evaluation year. That is,

performance may improve while a teacher is being evaluated, but fall again once the evaluation

period ends. The periodic structure of TES evaluation (e.g., one year on TES followed by four

years off) creates the opportunity to test this prediction empirically.8 This periodic structure is

not, however, common in status quo teacher evaluation.9 In the following section on human

capital models, we explore reasons why performance in non-TES years may nevertheless be

affected.




7
  In this paper we only analyze data from TES program, thus we cannot explore the role of variation in different
measures’ relationship to the output of interest.
8
  This periodic structure may result in even larger effects on performance during the TES year, compared to a
program in which teachers were evaluated annually. A teacher’s TES score will have some influence over her career
for five years. Thus, she might rationally choose to “borrow” effort from future years; increasing her performance
above her steady state during the TES year at the expense of falling below that steady state in future years.
9
  For example, the District of Columbia Public Schools recently instituted a similar classroom-observation program
with an extensive rubric and trained peer evaluators (District of Columbia Public Schools 2010), but in DC teachers
are evaluated every school year.

                                                         7
         We now turn to the second underlying dimension. Here the key prediction is that

employee performance will respond to evaluation to the extent that the information created by

the evaluation affects, positively or negatively, the employee’s own welfare (Lazear and Oyer

forthcoming). While we do not observe variation in TES’s (expected) effect on individual

welfare, a sense of the general stakes is important to forming an expectation about the average

effects on performance which we can measure.

         These relationships are traditionally studied with relatively straightforward incentive

mechanisms, especially performance measures tied to monetary compensation or the threat of

termination (Prendergast 1999, Gibbons 2005). However, first, pay-for-performance incentives

are rare in teacher contracts (Neal 2011), and Cincinnati is no exception. Second, while many

teacher contracts nominally threaten termination the empirical risk is small (Weisberg et al.

2009); again TES is not an exception (TNTP 2009).10

         While not tied to compensation, there are potential consequences, positive and negative,

attached to teachers’ TES evaluations that might well affect their welfare and thus their desire to

perform well during the evaluation. First, low scoring teachers—those rated as “Basic (2)” or

“Unsatisfactory (1)” in any one of four domains (see previous section for a description) –are

placed on “intervention” status. Teachers on intervention must undergo a year-long process of

intensive assistance from a mentor, another full TES evaluation with more frequent classroom

observations (i.e., six formal plus two informal versus the regular four formal), along with other

miscellaneous meetings and writing assignment. These actions are designed to help the teacher

improve, but do place extra burden and scrutiny on teachers whose TES scores are low.


10
  The risk of termination is often severely curtailed by other dimensions of the employment contract. However,
there is some evidence teacher performance would respond to potential termination. When Chicago school
principals were given greater flexibility to fire teachers, teacher effort, as measured by the number of absences,
increased (Jacob 2010).

                                                          8
Additionally, a teacher on intervention who does not show sufficient improvement can be

dismissed.11

        Second, and on the positive side, teachers who achieve particularly high TES scores—

values higher than those required for basic tenure—can apply for “lead teacher status.”12 Lead

teacher status in Cincinnati is a coveted title. It opens up additional job opportunities such as

department chair, curriculum specialist, or TES evaluator; these roles are associated with

professional advancement and bring extra compensation. Other lead teachers remain in strictly

classroom teacher roles, but again the status confers a sense of extra job security and comes with

an extra $6,000 to $6,500 annual salary supplement.

        In addition to the direct uses of TES scores just discussed, teachers’ TES evaluations

could impact their welfare in broader ways by affecting their reputation. Fama (1980) and

Holmstrom (1999) study situations in which current performance evaluations affect an

employee’s future labor market outcomes by contributing to her reputation. In these “career

concerns” models employees may rationally choose to improve their performance during an

evaluation, even if the formal consequences of that evaluation in the current job are weak.

        “Career concerns” motivations may be particularly salient for teachers (Dixit 2002), even

though monetary compensation generally does not vary from school to school within a market.

In particular, evaluation may implicitly affect decisions that do differentiate teachers’ net utility:

which students a teacher is assigned, whether a transfer request is granted, or selection for

informal leadership promotions. There is empirical evidence that both teachers’ and principals’


11
   New teachers must score “Proficient (3)” or higher in all four domains before they are granted tenure; however,
our study analyses a sample of tenured teachers. These and other details about the TES program in this paper are
drawn from the authors’ interactions with the TES staff and from the programs’ handbooks which were coauthored
by the Cincinnati Public Schools and the Cincinnati Federation of Teachers.
12
   Lead teachers must have scored “Distinguished (4)” in the Teaching for Learning domain—the core pedagogical
and content knowledge measures, also score “Distinguished” in one other domain, and not score lower than
“Proficient (3)” in any domain.

                                                         9
decisions in school to school transfers are influenced by teacher effectiveness (Boyd et al.

forthcoming). However, direct evidence on how classroom observation data impacts these beliefs

and decisions appears to be lacking.13 Our sample is, however, entirely mid-career teachers, and

career concerns models suggest that such performance measure effects will be stronger for newer

and less experienced employees.14



Human Capital Growth through Evaluation

         In contrast to the proximate effects discussed thus far, evaluation may contribute to

lasting improvements in performance if the information generated facilitates a new investment in

employee skill development. In other words, under the right conditions employee evaluation

could function as a particular form of on-the-job training—an investment in employee human

capital (Becker 1993). This mechanism for evaluation affecting performance has been much less

studied.

         Evaluation provides information, with more or less clarity, on an individual employee’s

performance relative to some normative or positive criteria. This new information reduces one

important cost in the human capital investment calculus; namely, where to invest and, in some

evaluation systems, how to improve. All else equal, a reduction in this cost should lead to greater

investment in skill development. Thus, we would predict an increase in performance in years

following evaluation relative to years preceding evaluation. In many empirical settings the

frequency of evaluation (e.g., annually or quarterly) leaves little room to test this prediction; our

data from Cincinnati’s TES program are an exception.



13
   Rockoff et al. (2010) did find that principals’ updated their beliefs about individual teachers when they received
new student-test-score-based information on teacher performance.
14
   See Gibbons and Murphy (1992) and Chevalier and Ellison (1999).

                                                          10
        To improve performance, however, a first order condition is that the changes inferred by

the evaluation information must actually positively affect performance, and not harm

performance or simply rearrange the deck chairs. While rational employers should believe their

evaluative criteria predict productivity, there is often little empirical evidence, especially in

teaching. A lack of evidence is the norm for classroom-observation-based evaluation programs,

though the TES measures are an exception having been shown to predict student achievement

growth (Kane et al. forthcoming, Milanowski 2004a, 2004b, Holtzapple 2003).

        But even good information can be poorly communicated or disregarded. Literature on

teachers suggests a few characteristics that should improve the probability of take up. First,

feedback should be intentionally prescriptive and should identify how change might proceed

(Milanowski and Hememan 2001, Kimball 2002, Milanowski 2004). Second, the criteria against

which individuals are being judged should be well-defined and should clearly differentiate levels

of practice. Milanowski (2001) suggests that when done well the descriptive language of an

evaluation rubric alone can provide useful information, even to those who have not been

formally evaluated. Unfortunately, the criteria in teacher evaluations are often constructed to

minimize differentiation (Donaldson 2009). Third, feedback may be most effective when it

comes from multiple sources, particularly from the employee’s peers (Seifert, Yukl and

McDonald 2003). Multi-source evaluations, often called “360 degree feedback” have become

popular in many sectors, though the evidence on their relative effectiveness is mixed.15

        Measured against these dimensions, Cincinnati’s TES program is relatively well designed

to foster teacher performance-improving skill development, at least when compared to other

teacher evaluation programs. If Cincinnati’s teachers do respond to TES by working to improve

15
  In their meta-analysis Kluger and DNisi (1996) found only small improvements, and negative effects one-third of
the time. Luthans and Peterson (2003) and Smither et al. (2003) find more positive effects, but the treatments also
included coaching and workshops.

                                                        11
their skill level, then we should see improved performance in years after participation in TES

even if the teacher is not actively being evaluated. Performance might also improve during the

TES evaluation year if the changes inferred by feedback are easy to adopt quickly.



Empirical Strategy

         Our objective is to estimate the extent to which a teacher’s participation in TES improves

her performance or effectiveness in promoting student achievement growth. Using annual district

administrative data on students, teachers, and classes in the 2003-04 through 2009-10 school

years we estimate the following specification:

         (1)

where          is the math achievement of student i taught by teacher j in school year t, as measured

by the end-of-year state test.16 Throughout the paper test scores have been standardized (mean

zero, standard deviation one) within test administration (grade-level, school-year) using the

district distribution. The variable                        is equal to one if teacher j participated in TES

during school year t and zero otherwise (i.e., T=t where T represents the year teacher j

participated in TES). Similarly                     is equal to one if teacher j participated in some past

school year (i.e., t>T). The coefficients of interest capture differences in the achievement of

students taught during,        , or after,    , teacher participation in TES compared to students taught

before participation (the implicit left-out category, i.e., t<T).

16
  Between 2002-03 and 2009-10 Cincinnati students, in general, took end of year exams in reading and math in
third through eighth grades. Over the course of 2003-04 to 2005-06 the state switched tests from the State
Proficiency Test (SPT) and its companion the Off Grade Proficiency Test (OGPT) to the Ohio Achievement Test
(OAT). In all cases we standardize (mean zero, standard deviation one) test scores by grade and year. In tested
grades and years we have math test scores for 93 percent of students (ranging from 83 percent to 97 percent in any
particular grade and year) and reading scores for 94 percent of students (ranging from 83 percent to 98 percent in
any particular grade and year). Our empirical strategy requires both an outcome test (e.g., end of year test in school
year t) and a baseline test (e.g., end of year test in school year t-1). Thus, our analysis sample will exclude some
entire grade-by-year cohorts for whom the state of Ohio did not administer a test in school year t or t-1.

                                                          12
           Our specification also includes a teacher fixed effect, represented in equation 1 by               . We

prefer the resulting within-teacher estimates of               and     for two primary reasons. First, existing

evidence suggests that both inexperienced and experienced teachers vary greatly in their ability

to promote student achievement (see reviews in Hanushek and Rivkin 2010, Gordon, Kane and

Staiger 2006). To the extent high (low) ability teachers are more likely to participate in TES

(e.g., through differential attrition from the district, or volunteering for the program) simple

cross-sectional estimates would be biased. Second, the teacher fixed effect will account for time-

invariant, non-random differences in the assignment of students to specific teachers. Some

teachers may year after year be asked to teach classes with high (low) potential for achievement

gains (e.g., through principal favoritism, or school assignment).

           However, not all the dynamics of student-teacher assignment need be time-invariant. To

account for variation in students assigned to a given teacher from year to year, we include a

vector of observable student characteristics,                . Most notably,         captures the student’s prior

achievement including the main effect of the prior year math test score, the score interacted with

each grade-level, and fixed effects for each test (i.e., grade-by-year fixed effects). When the

baseline score was missing for a student, we imputed with the grade-by-year mean, and included

an indicator for missing baseline score.17 Additionally,                   includes separate indicators for

student gender, racial/ethnic subgroup, special education classification, gifted classification,

English proficiency classification, and whether the student was retained in grade.

           And while teacher effectiveness varies across careers, there is evidence of returns to

experience on average especially early in the career (Gordon, Kane and Staiger 2006).

Accordingly we include controls for the teacher’s years of experience and years of experience


17
     Our estimates are robust to excluding students with missing baseline test scores.

                                                            13
squared, represented by          . Our estimates are robust to, alternatively, specifying

with a series of indicator variables for categorized experience-levels. Lastly we include a vector

of grade-level by school-year fixed effects,   , to account for secular trends in student test scores

within each grade level which would be confounded with our before, during, and after strategy.

       We estimate equation 1 using the sample of teachers (and their students) who were hired

by Cincinnati Public Schools between 1993-94 and 1999-2000—before the implementation of

the TES program in 2000-01—but who were eventually required to participate in TES according

to a schedule which “phased-in” veteran teachers. The phase-in schedule, determined during the

TES program’s planning stages and detailed in table 1, delayed the participation of teachers

already working in the district as of the 1999-2000 school year. The delay allows us to observe

student achievement for this sample of teachers’ classes before they participated in TES; as

implied above, these before years serve as our counterfactual.

       The pattern of scheduled participation years for our sample creates relatively exogenous

variation in the timing of teachers’ TES participation. Thus, for example, a teacher hired in 1998-

99 would participate in 2007-08 which for the average teacher would be their tenth year

teaching; while a teacher hired the prior year in 1997-98 would participate in 2005-06, their ninth

year (see table 1). This variation allows us to identify the returns to experience and overall

temporal trends, if any, separately from the year of TES participation. Had the TES program

designers decided to build the phase-in schedule based on experience level this separation would

likely not have been possible. While we can and do control for teacher experience, the existing

literature suggests the marginal returns to experience are relatively small beyond year five (see

for example Rockoff 2004), and as reported later our estimates are not substantively changed by

the exclusion of experience controls.


                                                 14
                 Table 1: Timing of First Scheduled TES Participation for Veteran Teachers

                                                                       Experience at Time
                                                 Scheduled First         of Scheduled
                 Teacher Contract Year          Participation Year       Participation*

                 1999-2000                          2006-07                  8 years
                 1998-99                            2007-08                  10 years
                 1997-98                            2005-06                  9 years
                 1996-97                            2006-07                  11 years
                 1995-96                            2007-08                  13 years
                 1994-95                            2008-09                  15 years
                 1993-94                            2009-10                  17 years

                 *Note: “Experience” is the expected value. Teachers who take a leave of
                 absence, or began employment at CPS with prior experience would have
                 different levels of experience.



       Table 2 reports descriptive characteristics for the teachers and students included in our

estimation sample (column 2), and for those excluded from our sample (column 1). The excluded

group is composed of teachers (and their assigned students): (a) hired in 1992-93 or earlier, (b)

hired in 2000-01 or later, and (c) hired between 1993-94 and 1999-2000 who did not remain

teaching in the district. The first excluded group, those hired in 1992-93 or earlier, will be

phased-into the program during future school years. The second excluded group, teachers hired

since 2000-01, are required to participate in TES during their first year working in the district;

this requirement holds for both true novices and veterans moving to the district from elsewhere,

and prohibits a before-TES counterfactual observation.

       Our analysis sample is, as expected given its selection using the phase-in schedule, more

likely to be mid-career: as reported in table 2 column 2, 83.4 percent of our observations are

teachers in their fifth through 19th year of teaching, compared to just 47.9 percent of the other

teachers in the district who are not in our estimation sample. Students taught by our analysis

teachers have similar baseline test scores in both math (a mean of 0.072 versus 0.054, a test of


                                                    15
the difference yields a p-value of 0.06), and reading (a mean of 0.066 versus 0.072, a test of the

difference yields a p-value of 0.53). Additionally, analysis sample teachers were slightly more

likely to be teaching earlier grades, but had similar students in terms of demographic and

program participation characteristics.

       Most but not all teachers hired between 1993-94 and 1999-2000 participated in TES

during their scheduled phase-in year reported in table 1. We extend our main estimates in two

ways to address two different potential motivations for of non-compliance. First, about 25

percent of teachers in our sample participated early; they volunteered to participate in TES

before their scheduled phase-in year. Many teachers who requested to participate early—

especially those who participate many years early—did so to fulfill the requirements for

obtaining “lead teacher status” (eligibility for certain valued positions with greater

compensation). Thus in many cases volunteering should be a signal of some latent characteristic

that may be positively correlated with teacher effectiveness. Accordingly, in one robustness

check, we estimate the coefficients of interest separately for volunteers and non-volunteers.

       Table 2 provides descriptive statistics for our analysis sample (column 2) separated into

scheduled participants (column 3) and volunteer participants (column 4). On average, the

students of volunteer participants begin the school year with higher achievement—a difference

of 0.041 standard deviations in math (p=0.02) and 0.069 in reading (p<0.01). This difference

may be in partly influenced by slightly fewer special education and English language learner

students. Volunteers also are noticeably more likely to be teaching earlier grade levels.

Volunteers and scheduled participants, however, have similar experience profiles.

       Second, about one in five of our sample participated one year early or one year late

relative to their scheduled phase-in year. These early participants still had to volunteer (and are



                                                 16
included in table 2 column 4), but may have had different motives for volunteering. For example,

a teacher aware they will be required to participate next year may volunteer to participate this

year if they feel their currently assigned class of students is an unusually positive draw. Although

TES is an evaluation of teaching practice, students may affect the teacher’s TES score (Kane et

al. forthcoming). And, though more difficult to accomplish than volunteering for early

evaluation, teachers may have worked to delay their TES participation for symmetric reasons.

Also, teachers’ evaluations could be delayed a year or two if the teacher was on leave, if there

were too few evaluators available in a particular year, or for other idiosyncratic reasons.

       Thus, in a second robustness check, we estimate equation 1 using two-stage least squares

where we instrument for the timing of TES participation, i.e.                   and             ,

using the teacher’s scheduled participation year. Specifically, our excluded instruments are a

vector of indicator variables for the interaction of teacher contract year and school year, t. In

these estimates we exclude nine teachers who volunteered to participate four or more years early.

       We conclude this section with two final notes. First, some teachers hired between 1993-

94 and 1999-2000 stopped teaching in the district before their scheduled TES participation year.

It is possible the decision to leave was influenced by the prospect of having to participate in TES.

Perhaps, for example, a teacher self-aware of his own limited effectiveness may have chosen to

leave the district rather than face formal evaluation. If such correlated attrition occurred, our

within teachers strategy will still produce internally valid estimates of the effect on the “treated”

teachers, but the attrition would suggest potential general equilibrium effects of the TES program

as a whole.




                                                 17
         Second, about 33 percent of our sample teachers do not appear in our sample after their

TES participation year.18 In this context attrition means no longer teaching math in grades 4-8 in

years with state math tests. Thus teachers may attrit without separating from the district, and

indeed at least 91 percent of attriters were still employed by the district after TES participation

but in roles outside our sample (e.g., teaching other grades or subjects, or working outside of

classrooms). If, however, this attrition is correlated (positively or negatively) with the effect of

TES participation on performance than our estimates will be biased. We discuss this issue further

in the next section and offer bounds for our estimates.



Results

         We find that, on average, participation in the Teacher Evaluation System (TES), a high-

quality classroom observation based approach, improves mid-career teachers’ effectiveness in

promoting student achievement growth in math. Teacher performance improves both during the

school year the teacher is being evaluated and in the years after evaluation, though the estimated

improvements during evaluation are not always robust.

         Table 3 columns 1 through 5 report the coefficients of interest estimated using variations

on equation 1 and the sample described in the previous section. Column 1 reports the

uncontrolled differences in mean math achievement levels for students assigned to teachers

during and after TES participation relative to students assigned to teachers before participation.

The differences are small and not significant. However, the essentially descriptive statistics in

column 1 ignore any non-random assignment of students across teachers or across years within



18
  An additional 7 percent of our sample, teachers hired in 1993-94, participated in TES during the 2009-10 school
year, and thus our data cannot observe them after participation. As with attriters these cases contribute to estimating
other coefficients.

                                                          18
teachers, and thus inferences based on column 1 risk under (or over) stating the influence of TES

participation.

       When we estimate differences within teachers (column 2 which adds teacher fixed

effects), students assigned to a teacher during the year the teacher is undergoing TES evaluation

score 0.072 standard deviations higher in math, on average, than students assigned to the same

teacher in years before she participated in TES. And students assigned to teachers in years after

the teacher participates in TES score 0.111 standard deviations higher in math on average. In

other words, we would expect students’ test scores to be higher if their teacher has participated in

TES.

       The differences reported in table 3 could, however, be artifacts of changes over time in

the type of students assigned to a teacher, or in the teacher’s experience level. However, when

we add controls for observable student characteristics (column 3) and then controls for teacher

experience (column 4), the estimates remain similar. With student and teacher experience

controls, math achievement is 0.062 standard deviations higher in the year of TES participation,

and 0.113 standard deviations higher in subsequent years.

       The stability of estimates across columns 2 and 3 may surprise readers who are aware of

the typical variation in average incoming student achievement across teachers and classes.

Indeed for the estimation sample, cross-teacher differences account for about one-quarter of the

variation in baseline math test scores. Despite the variation across teachers, we observe little

variation within teachers over time. To explore this idea further, Table 4 reports a series of

simple regressions with baseline student characteristics as outcomes and indicators for our within




                                                 19
teacher periods of interest,                      and                in equation 1 terms, as predictors.

Most coefficients are small and not statistically significantly different from zero.19

        Returning to our primary estimates of interest in table 3, for column 5 we add an

indicator for the school year immediately prior to the year the teacher participated in TES (i.e.,

t=(T-1)); accordingly the reported coefficients are now differences relative to students taught two

or more years prior to TES participation (i.e., t<(T-1)). Separating out the year prior to

participation allows us to test whether teachers who were about to participate in TES were

already on an upward trajectory. As reported in column 5, the coefficient on prior year is positive

(0.033 standard deviations) but not statistically significantly. Additionally, the coefficients of

interest are somewhat larger than in the previous models. These results suggest that teachers may

have been on an upward trajectory not captured by the returns to experience, but we cannot rule

out that the slight trend we estimate is the result of chance.

        The estimates in table 3 column 4 suggest that a student taught by a mid-career post-

evaluation teacher will score about 0.1113 standard deviations higher in math than a similar

student taught by the same teacher before the teacher was evaluated by TES. If those two

students began their respective years with the teacher at the 50th percentile of math achievement,

the first student would score about 4.5 percentile points higher at the end of the year.

Additionally, a student taught in the year the teacher participates in TES will score 0.062

standard deviations higher than students taught before participation.20



19
   While student assignment patterns may not be correlated with TES participation timing, the accumulated
experience of any individual teacher will be correlated—each teacher’s experience level after TES participation
must necessarily be greater than his experience before participation. However, most existing evidence suggests that
the marginal returns to experience are small after the first five years teaching (Rockoff 2004, Gordon, Kane and
Staiger 2006), and essentially none of the teachers in our sample have fewer than five years experience by 2003-04
when our observations begin.
20
   For comparison, the standard deviation in total teacher effect on match achievement for our analysis sample is
about 0.22. The magnitude is on the high-end of estimates obtained by other researchers using a similar empirical

                                                        20
Attrition Following Evaluation

        The estimates in table 3, columns 1-5 are potentially sensitive to teacher attrition. Given

TES is an evaluation program, teachers who scored low may be more likely to separate from the

district after their TES year. As it turns out, teachers who scored high may also be more likely to

leave teaching for a promotion since high TES scores are explicitly used by the district in some

promotion decisions. But attrition correlated with high or low TES scores per se is not

necessarily a problem given our teacher fixed effects strategy; our estimates measure the average

teacher improvement (decline) in post-TES years compared to each teacher’s own pre-TES

years. Our estimates would, however, be affected by attrition that is correlated with the trajectory

of change in teacher effectiveness after TES participation. For example, teachers who did not

benefit from TES participation may be more likely to leave which would lead to positive bias in

our estimates.

        Columns 6 and 7 of table 3 replicate columns 4 and 5 respectively except that the sample

is limited to the 61 teachers whom we explicitly observe after TES participation. The story does

not dramatically change under this restricted sample, though the estimates are less precise. The

similarity supports the notion that our empirical strategy is relatively robust to attrition correlated

with levels of effectiveness.

        Still, attrition correlated with TES-induced change in effectiveness remains a concern. To

get a sense of the magnitude of the potential bias we can make different assumptions about the

post-TES performance of attrtiers and update our estimate of average performance in post-TES

years. First, assume that the performance of the attriter teachers was unaffected by TES


strategy in other settings, but mostly over a broader range of teacher experience levels (see Hanushek and Rivkin
2010).

                                                        21
participation; their unobserved post-TES performance was (or would have been) the same as

their pre-TES performance. Thus, if we could estimate equation 1 using the sample of attriters

we would expect the coefficient on “Years After” to be zero. Under this first assumption our

updated estimate of the post-TES performance boost—the true coefficient on “Years After”—

would be about 58 percent as large as what is reported in table 3.21 For example, the coefficient

from column 4, 0.113, would become 0.066 student level standard deviations, smaller but still a

meaningful improvement.

         Alternatively, the performance of the attriter teachers may have been negatively affected

by TES participation. However, the selection would have to have been fairly strong to erase the

positive estimates reported in table 3. Our updated estimate of the overall post-TES performance

boost would be zero only if the negative effect for attriters was 1.4 times larger in absolute value

than the positive estimated effect.



Deviations from the Phase-in Schedule

         The estimates in table 3 do not make a distinction between teachers who participated in

the TES evaluation process early, late, or when their scheduled phase-in year came up. We

explore the sensitivity of our estimates to such deviations in tables 5 and 6. In table 5 column 2

we estimate our coefficients of interest separately for scheduled participants and volunteer

participants.22 Volunteering may signal some latent characteristic positively correlated with


21
   The scalar 0.58 is simply the weight afforded to the sample that does not attrit in the weighted average given by:
                                              0.58 ∗               0.42 ∗ 0
Of course under different assumptions about the effect of TES participation on attriters’ performance the zero above
could be positive or negative. Also, the weights 0.58 and 0.42 are based on the counts of teachers, but we find the
similar proportions when we weight the attriters and non-attriters by the number of students they taught in years
before TES participation (when we observe everyone teaching). Student-weighted attrition rates range from 0.37 to
0.42.
22
   Econometrically, we interact the variables of interest both with an indicator for volunteer, vol, and also with an
indicator for scheduled participant, sch. In equation 1 notation:

                                                         22
teacher effectiveness, and possibly also correlated with growth from TES participation. The

coefficients for scheduled participants—non-volunteers—remain similar to the combined

estimates (column 1 which simply repeats table 3 column 5) though slightly smaller. In other

words, the estimates in table 3 are not driven by more effective teachers who volunteer to be

evaluated.

         However, the point estimates in column 2 for volunteer participants are larger. The

results for volunteers suggest two things. First, volunteering is indeed likely a signal of latent

ability. Students taught by TES volunteers score one-tenth to one-twelfth of a standard deviation

better in math beginning in at least the year of TES participation. Second, even though they are

unlikely to be representative, the estimated coefficients in column 2 suggest volunteers may also

be improving as a result of TES participation. The coefficients increase from 0.053 to 0.161 and

then to 0.226; a positive trajectory though not as steep as for non-volunteers.

         Table 6 reports two-stage least squares estimates where we instrument for the timing of

TES participation, i.e.                       and                in equation 1, using the teacher’s scheduled

participation year as determined by her hire cohort. In all table 6 estimates we exclude nine

teachers who volunteered four or more years before their scheduled phase-in year on the

assumption that they were most clearly signaling their high ability. Columns 1 and 4 provide

ordinary least squares estimates similar to table 3 for this sample, and columns 2 and 5 report the

joint significance F-statistics for the excluded instruments in stage one. The instrumented

estimates in columns 3 and 6 are generally larger, though only the improvement in years after

TES evaluation remains statistically significant.



                               ∗                         ∗                          ∗                 ∗

The inclusion of teacher fixed effects precludes estimating a main effect of vol.

                                                          23
Heterogeneous Effects

        Last, as shown in table 7, we find some evidence that the effects of TES participation are

not uniform. The change in teacher performance from before to after evaluation is larger for both

teachers who received relatively low TES scores (panel A) and teachers whose TES scores grew

the most during TES participation (panel B). In table 7 panel A, we interacted our indicator for

past TES participation,                , with indicators for quartile of overall TES score received

during the year of participation, T. This overall TES score is the average of more than two dozen

teaching practices scored in four separate classroom observations.23 The difference between

average math student achievement after TES participation versus before participation was largest

for teachers with bottom-quartile TES scores: 0.279 student-level standard deviations.

        Similarly in table 7 panel B, the estimated difference is largest for teachers in the top two

quartiles of TES score growth: 0.183 for the quartile of largest growth and 0.229 for the quartile

of second largest growth, though we cannot reject that these coefficients are equal. This TES

score growth is the change in overall TES score from the first to the last classroom observation

during the TES year.



Discussion

        The estimates presented here—greater student achievement gains even in years following

TES evaluation—are consistent with the hypothesis that teachers develop human capital as a

result of participating in the evaluation process, at least in terms of promoting math achievement.

As additional support for this hypothesis, we find that teachers who were least skilled at the time

of their evaluation benefit most from the evaluation process.


23
  These two dozen teaching practices are collectively known as TES Domains 2 and 3. See Kane et al.
(forthcoming) for more information about the process, rubric, and scores.

                                                      24
       By contrast, we do not find the kind of transitory boost in performance during the year of

TES evaluation that would support models where teachers only adjust their behavior when

actively under evaluation. There is, however, some evidence of improvement during the

evaluation period. The estimated performance improvement of around 10 percent of a standard

deviation is not trivial. Hill et al. (2008) estimate that average annual gains in math achievement

from fourth through eighth grade range from 56 to 30 percent of a standard deviation with larger

gains in the earlier grades to which our sample is weighted.

       A natural comparison for these effects would be teacher professional development

programs (in-service training often delivered in formal classroom settings). Unfortunately,

despite the substantial budgets allocated to such programs, there is little rigorous evidence on

their effects (see Yoon et al. 2007 for an extensive review).

       There are, however, other estimates from the general literature on teacher human capital

development. First, among extant evidence the largest gains in teacher effectiveness occur as

teachers gain on-the-job experience in the first three to five years. Rockoff (2004) reports gains

of about 0.10 standard deviations over the first two years of teaching when effectiveness is

measured by math computation gains; when measured by math concepts the gains are about half

as big and not statistically significant. Second, Jackson and Bruegmann (2009) study the effect of

working around more effective colleagues, and find that better teacher peers improves a teacher’s

own performance. A one standard deviation increase in teacher-peer quality was associated with

0.04 standard deviation increase in math achievement. Additionally, the effects both accumulated

over time and persisted even after the working relationships ended. The TES program’s use of

peer evaluators may capture some of the same benefits.




                                                25
         While our estimates are consistent with human capital gains, much of the causal story

remains unclear. First, even if teachers’ actions changed after evaluation we do not know what

their expectations were when the evaluation process began. For example, some teachers may

have begun the TES participation year planning to adhere to the TES rubric only during

evaluation, or not expecting to learn much from the process; but found the feedback helpful and

ultimately adjusted their behavior long run. Second, we cannot say what teachers changed about

their behavior, nor which changes were most important to student achievement growth.

Following the TES rubric’s explicit suggestions for best practices is only one possible

mechanism. Alternatively, the general peer- and self-scrutiny may have uncovered opportunities

for improvement in areas not addressed by the TES rubric.

         Additionally, while our focus in this paper has been on math achievement, in similar analyses of

reading achievement we do not find significant differences in student achievement associated with TES

participation.24 For reading, the coefficients of interest are close to zero and not statistically significant.

Several studies now have found less variation in teachers’ effects on reading achievement

compared to the variation in teachers’ effects on math achievement (Hanushek and Rivkin 2010).

Some have hypothesized that these smaller reading teacher differences could arise because

students learn reading in many settings at school and at home outside a formal reading class. If

teachers have less influence on reading achievement variation, then changes in teacher practices

may have smaller returns.



Evaluation Costs and Returns




24
  Results based on reading instead of math test scores for all tables included in this paper are available from the
authors upon request.

                                                          26
         Finally, before concluding we turn briefly to the costs of the TES evaluation program in

comparison to the gains estimated in this paper. The TES program carries two important types of

cost: (a) the salaries of TES evaluators and staff, and other direct program costs; and (b) the

student achievement losses incurred by allocating effective, experienced classroom teachers to

evaluator roles.

         Given the a-typically intense nature of the TES evaluation process, it should not be

surprising that the budget expenditure is relatively large. From 2004-05 to 2009-10 the district

budget directly allocated between $1.8M and $2.1M per year to the TES program, or about

$7,000-7,500 per teacher evaluated (Cincinnati Public Schools 2010). However, these figures do

not include time spent by the teachers being evaluated. By comparison the district formal

professional development budget (excluding TES) is approximately $695 per teacher.

         The district also incurs a cost in terms of lost student achievement. The TES program

selects effective, experienced classroom teachers to serve as full-time evaluators. The teaching

positions they vacate will, presumably, be filled with less-effective, likely novice teachers.25

Viewing evaluation from a human capital development perspective, the net loss in

productivity—the production of student achievement—from these substitutions is a central cost

of the investment (Becker 1962).

         To make the discussion concrete, assume that TES evaluators are drawn from the top

quartile of the district’s teacher effectiveness distribution, and their replacements from the

bottom quartile. In Cincinnati a student in the classroom of a 75th percentile teacher would score

about 0.16 standard deviations higher than if he had instead been assigned to the classroom of a



25
  From the perspective of the school district, the replacement is always a new hire. While a principal may be able to
replace a peer evaluator with a veteran who transfers from elsewhere in the district, the district will need to replace
that transfer with a new hire.

                                                          27
25th percentile teacher.26 Thus the expected student achievement “cost” of one evaluator is

approximately 0.16 multiplied by the number of students she would have been teaching instead

of serving as an evaluator. Using Hanushek’s (2010) estimates, this loss in student achievement

would translate to approximately $300,000 in lost student lifetime earnings for each class of 20

students the evaluator would have otherwise taught.27 The average TES evaluator caseload is

about 20-25teachers per year making the cost per teacher evaluated about $12,000-15,000 in lost

student lifetime earnings.

         While substantial, these costs nevertheless compare favorably to the estimated returns.

Using the estimates in table 3 column 4, students taught by a teacher who has previously

participated in the TES evaluation will score 0.113 standard deviations higher than they

otherwise would have. Again following Hanushek (2010), this achievement boost predicts an

additional $200,000 in student lifetime earnings for each class of 20 students taught.28 Thus

even if the effect of evaluation lasted just one school year, the returns would be approximately

$177,500-181,000 per teacher evaluated ($200,000 minus $7,000-7,500 in salary costs and

$12,000-15,000 in lost student achievement induced costs). Additionally, our estimates suggest

the returns would continue at least over the first few years following a teacher’s TES evaluation.
29
     The net gain is smaller but still positive at the lower bound estimate of 0.066 under

pessimistic attrition assumptions.

Conclusion

26
   Kane et al. (forthcoming) estimate the standard deviation in overall teacher effect in Cincinnati at 0.12 student-
level standard deviations in math. This variation is consistent with, but on the small side of estimates from other
districts (Hanushek and Rivkin 2010).
27
   Hanushek’s estimate of the difference between a 25th and 75th percentile teacher is larger, a little over $500,000
(figure 1) but he assumes a wider distribution of teacher effectiveness.
28
   The distribution of teacher effectiveness among our sample of mid-career teachers is somewhat wider than the
district overall. The standard deviation is approximately 0.22, making the coefficient of 0.113 about half of a
standard deviation.
29
   Even if Hanushek’s estimates are off by an order of magnitude our calculus would still likely support the TES
investment.

                                                          28
        The estimates presented here are consistent with the hypothesis that employee evaluation

programs, at least in the case of teachers, can improve performance even after the evaluation

period ends. One likely mechanism for such productivity growth is that the feedback provided in

the evaluation spurs employee investments in human capital development.

        In particular, we find higher student achievement in classrooms taught during the

evaluation year and especially in the years following evaluation. Our estimates suggest that a

student taught by a teacher after that teacher participates in the TES evaluation program will

score about 10 percent of a standard deviation higher in math than a similar student taught by the

same teacher before the teacher participated in TES. If those two students began their respective

years with the teacher at the 50th percentile of math achievement, the first student would score

about 4.5 percentile points higher at the end of the year.

        Advocates of teacher evaluation should, however, take caution when extrapolating these

results to other programs and proposals. First, Cincinnati’s investment in the Teacher Evaluation

System is substantial: a detailed rubric describing practices shown to correlate positively with

student achievement, multiple observations and feedback opportunities over the course of an

entire school year, regular evaluator training. If the district’s teachers are using evaluation

feedback to improve their skills, the effect is likely sensitive to the quality and reputation of the

feedback. Second, we do not find effects of TES evaluation on students’ reading achievement.

Third, the teachers in our analysis sample were all beyond their fifth year of teaching when they

participated in the evaluation. The effects may be larger (smaller) for teachers earlier in (or very

late in) their career.

        Our results suggest optimism that well-structured teacher evaluation programs can

improve the average effectiveness of mid-career teachers at least in mathematics. And,



                                                  29
importantly, that such a program can net substantial returns. Thus gains from evaluation need not

only come through selective termination of teachers who score low. However, the dimensions of

“well-structured” remain elusive; a critical gap in a time when many new evaluation systems are

under development. The entire sector would be well served by K-12 systems willing to

experimentally vary the components of their evaluation system (including the timing of teacher

participation), and measure any resulting differences in teacher effectiveness.




                                                30
                                            References

Aaronson, Daniel, Lisa Barrow, and William Sander. 2003. “Teachers and Student Achievement

       in the Chicago Public Schools.” Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Working Paper WP-

       2002-28.

Baker, George P. 1992. “Incentive Measures and Performance Measurement.” Journal of

       Political Economy, 100(3):598-614.

Becker, Garry S. 1962. “Investment in Human Capital: A Theoretical Analysis.” Journal of

       Political Economy 70(5): 9-49.

Becker, Gary S. 1993. Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis with special

       Reference to Education, Third Edition. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press.

Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. 2010. “Learning About Teaching: Initial Findings from the

       Measures of Effective Teaching Project.” MET Project Research Paper.

Boyd, Don, Hamilton Lankford, Susanna Loeb, Matthew Ronfeldt, and James Wyckoff.

       Forthcoming. “The Role of Teacher Quality in Retention and Hiring: Using Applications-

       to-Transfer to Uncover Preferences of Teachers and Schools.” Journal of Policy Analysis

       and Management.

Chetty, Raj, John Friedman, Nathaniel Hilger, Emmanuel Saez, Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach,

       and Danny Yagan. 2010. “How Does Your Kindergarten Classroom Effect Your

       Earnings? Evidence from Project STAR.” National Bureau of Economic Research

       Working Paper 16381.

Chevalier, Judith and Glenn Ellison. 1999. “Career Concerns of Mutual Fund Managers.” The

       Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(2):389-432.

Cincinnati Public Schools. 2010. “Superintendent’s 2010-11 General Fund Budget.” (Also
       similar documents for 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008 and 2009.)

Danielson, Charlotte. 1996. Enhancing Professional Practice: A Framework for Teaching.

       Alexandria, Va.: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development.

Dixit, Avinash. 2002. "Incentives and Organizations in the Public Sector: An Interpretative

       Review." The Journal of Human Resources, 37(4): 696-727.

Donaldson, Morgaen. L. 2009. “So long, Lake Wobegon? Using teacher evaluation to raise

       teacher quality.” Center for American Progress.

Fairman, Sarah Edith, Susan Moore Johnson, Mindy Sick Munger, John P. Papay, and Emily

       Kalejs Qazilbash. 2009. "Teachers Leading Teachers: The Experiences of Peer

       Assistance and Review Consulting Teachers." Paper presented at the annual meeting of

       the American Educational Research Association, San Diego, April 2009.

Fama, Eugene F. 1980. “Agency Problems and the Theory of the Firm.” Journal of Political

       Economy, 88(2):288-307.

Gibbons, Robert. 2005. “Incentives Between Firms (and Within).” Management Science, 51(1):

       2-17

Glazerman, Steven, Susanna Loeb, Dan Goldhaber, Douglas Staiger, Stephen Raudenbush, and

       Grover Whitehurst. 2010. “Evaluating Teachers: The Important Role of Value-Added.”

       Brown Center on Education Policy. Washington, DC.: Brookings Institution.

Goldhaber, Dan and Emily Anthony. 2007. “Can Teacher Quality Be Effectively Assessed?”

       Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(1): 134-150.

Goldhaber, Dan and Michael Hansen 2010. “Assessing the Potential of Using Value-Added

       Estimates of Teacher Job Performance for Making Tenure Decisions,” National Center

       for Analysis of Longitudinal Data in Education Research, Working Paper 31.
Gordon, Robert, Thomas J. Kane, and Douglas O. Staiger. 2006. “Identifying Effective Teachers

       Using Performance on the Job.” Hamilton Project Discussion Paper. Washington, DC.:

       Brookings Institution.

Hanushek, Eric A. 1971. "Teacher Characteristics and Gains in Student Achievement:

       Estimation Using Micro Data." The American Economic Review 61(2): 280-288.

Hanushek, Eric A. 2010. “The Economic Value of Higher Teacher Quality.” National Bureau of

       Economic Research Working Paper 16606.

Hanushek, Eric A., and Steven G. Rivkin. 2010. “Using Value-Added Measures of Teacher

       Quality.” American Economic Review 100(2):267-271.

Harkins, S. G. 2006. "Mere Effort as the Mediator of the Evaluation-Performance Relationship."

       Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 91(3): 436-455.

Hill, Carolyn J., Howard S. Bloom, Alison Rebeck Black, and Mark W. Lipsey. 2008.

       “Empirical Benchmarks for Interpreting Effect Sizes in Research.” Child Development

       Perspectives, 2(3): 172-177.

Holmstrom, Bengt. 1979. “Moral Hazard and Observability.” Bell Journal of Economics, 10(1):

       74-91.

Holmstrom, Bengt. 1999. “Managerial Incentive Problems: A Dynamic Perspective.” Review of

       Economic Studies, 66(1):169-182.

Holmstrom, Bengt. and Paul Milgrom. 1991. “Multitask Principal-Agent Analyses: Incentive

       Contracts, Asset Ownership, and Job Design,” Journal of Law, Economics, and

       Organization, 7(Sp): 24-52.

Holtzapple, Elizabeth. 2003. “Criterion-Related Validity Evidence for a Standards-Based
       Teacher Evaluation System.” Journal of Personnel Evaluation in Education, 17(3):207-

       219.

Jacob, Brian A. 2010. “Do Principals Fire the Worst Teachers?” National Bureau of

       Economic Research Working Paper 15715.

Jackson, C. Kirabo, and Elias Bruegmann. 2009. “Teaching Students and Teaching Each Other:

       The Importance of Peer Learning for Teachers.” American Economic Journal: Applied

       Economics, 1(4):1-27.

Johnson, Susan Moore. 1990. Teachers at Work: Achieving Success in Our Schools. New York,

       Basic Books.

Johnson, Susan Moore. 2010. Personal communication.

Kane, Thomas J., Jonah E. Rockoff, and Douglas O. Staiger. 2008. “What Does Certification

       Tell Us About Teacher Effectiveness? Evidence from New York City.” Economics of

       Education Review 27(6):615-631.

Kane, Thomas J., and Douglas O. Staiger. 2008. “Estimating Teacher Impacts on Student

       Achievement: An Experimental Evaluation.” National Bureau of Economic Research

       Working Paper 14601.

Kane, Thomas J., Eric S. Taylor, John H. Tyler, and Amy L. Wooten. Forthcoming. "Identifying

       Effective Classroom Practices Using Student Achievement Data." Journal of Human

       Resources.

Kimball, S. M. 2002. "Analysis of Feedback, Enabling Conditions and Fairness Perceptions of

       Teachers in Three School Districts with New Standards-Based Evaluation Systems."

       Journal of Personnel Evaluation in Education, 16(4): 241-268.
Koedel, Corey. and Julian R. Betts. 2009. “Does Student Sorting Invalidate Value-Added

       Models of Teacher Effectiveness? An Extended Analysis of the Rothstein Critique.”

       University of Missouri, Working Paper 0902.

Kluger, Avraham N. and Angelo DeNisi. 1996. "The Effects of Feedback Interventions on

       Performance: A Historical Review, a Meta-Analysis, and a Preliminary Feedback

       Intervention Theory." Psychological Bulletin, 119(2): 254-284.

Lazear, Edward P. and Paul Oyer. Forthcoming. “Personnel Economics.” In The Handbook of

       Organizational Economics, Robert Gibbons and D. John Roberts (eds.). Princeton, N.J.:

       Princeton Universty Press.


Luthans, F. and S. J. Peterson. 2003. "360-degree feedback with systematic coaching: Empirical

       analysis suggests a winning combination." Human Resource Management, 42(3): 243-

       256.

Milanowski, Anthony. 2004a. “The Relationship Between Teacher Performance Evaluation

       Scores and Student Achievement: Evidence from Cincinnati.” Peabody Journal of

       Education 79(4):33-53.

Milanowski, Anthony. 2004b. “Relationships Among Dimension Scores of Standards-Based

       Teacher Evaluation Systems, and the Stability of Evaluation Score-Student Achievement

       Relationships Over Time.” Consortium for Policy Research in Education, University of

       Wisconsin Working Paper Series TC-04-02.

Milanowski, A. T. and H. G. Heneman. 2001. "Assessment of Teacher Reactions to a Standards-

       Based Teacher Evaluation System: A Pilot Study." Journal of Personnel Evaluation in

       Education, 15(3): 193-212.

Murnane, Richard. J., and Barbara R. Phillips. 1981. “What Do Effective Teachers of Inner-City
       Children Have in Common?” Social Science Research, 10(1):83-100.

Neal, Derek. 2011. “The Design of Performance Pay in Education.” National Bureau of

       Economic Research Working Paper 16710.

The New Teacher Project. 2009. “Human Capital Reform in Cincinnati Public Schools:

       Strengthening Teacher Effectiveness and Support.” New York City, N.Y.: The New

       Teacher Project.

Prendergast, Canice. 1999. “The Provision of Incentives in Firms.” Journal of Economic

       Literature, 37(1): 7-63.

Rivkin, Steven G., Eric A. Hanushek, and John Kain. 2005. “Teachers, Schools and Academic

       Achievement.” Econometrica 73(2):417-458.

Rockoff, Jonah E. 2004. “The Impact of Individual Teachers on Student Achievement: Evidence

       from Panel Data.” American Economic Review 94(2):247-252.

Rockoff, Jonah E., Douglas O. Staiger, Thomas J. Kane, and Eric S. Taylor. 2010. “Information

       and Employee Evaluation: Evidence from a Randomized Intervention in Public Schools.”

       National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 16240.

Rothstein, Jesse. 2010. “Teacher Quality in Educational Production: Tracking, Decay, and

       Student Achievement.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 25(1):175-214.

Seifert, C. F., G. Yukl, et al. 2003. "Effects of Multisource Feedback and a Feedback Facilitator

       on the Influence Behavior of Managers Toward Subordinates." Journal of Applied

       Psychology, 88(3): 561-569.

Smither, J. W., M. London, et al. 2003. "Can Working With an Executive Coach Improve

       Multisource Feedback Ratings Over Time? A Quasi-Experimental Field Study."

       Personnel Psychology, 56(1): 23-44.
Staiger, Douglas O. and Jonah E. Rockoff. 2010. "Searching for Effective Teachers with

       Imperfect Information." The Journal of Economic Perspectives 24: 97-117.

Todd, Petra E. and Kenneth I. Wolpin. 2003. “On the Specification and Estimation of the

       Production Function for Cognitive Achievement” Economic Journal, 113(485).

Weisberg, Daniel, Susan Sexton, Jennifer Mulhern, and David Keeling. 2009. The Widget Effect:

       Our National Failure to Acknowledge and Act on Teacher Effectiveness. New York City,

       N.Y.: The New Teacher Project.

Yoon , Kwang Suk, Teresa Duncan, Silvia Wen-Yu Lee, Beth Scarloss, Kathy L. Shapley. 2007.

       “Reviewing the Evidence on How Teacher Professional Development Affects Student

       Achievment.” Issues & Answers Report, REL 2007–No. 033. Washington, DC: U.S.

       Department of Education, Institute of Education Sciences, National Center for Education

       Evaluation and Regional Assistance, Regional Educational Laboratory Southwest.
         Table 2: Observable Student and Teacher Characteristics of Estimation Sample
                                            Not In              Main Estimation Sample
                                          Estimation                  Scheduled      Volunteer
                                           Sample         Total      Participation Participation
                                              (1)          (2)            (3)           (4)
Student Characteristics
   Baseline Math Score                      0.072         0.054         0.043          0.084
     Standard Deviation                    (1.009)       (0.938)       (0.941)        (0.930)
   Baseline Reading Score                   0.066         0.072         0.054          0.123
     Standard Deviation                    (1.000)       (0.937)       (0.950)        (0.899)
   Grade 4                                  22.0%        25.9%          22.3%          36.1%
   Grade 5                                  16.8%        26.0%          22.5%          36.0%
   Grade 6                                  13.0%        18.7%          21.2%          11.6%
   Grade 7                                  25.6%        17.5%          20.0%          10.2%
   Grade 8                                  22.5%        12.0%          14.0%           6.2%
   Male                                     50.4%        48.1%          47.2%          50.4%
   Racial/Ethnic Minority                   76.1%        79.7%          79.1%          81.1%
   White                                    23.8%        20.4%          20.9%          18.9%
   Special Education                        19.1%        17.7%          18.2%          16.5%
   English Language Learner                  2.6%         3.0%           3.6%           1.5%
   Gifted & Talented                         9.8%        11.4%          11.8%          10.1%
   Retained in Grade                         1.1%         0.7%           0.8%           0.7%
Number of Students                         44,648        14,208         10,503         3,705

Teacher Characteristics
   First Year Teaching                       0.9%         0.0%           0.0%           0.0%
   1 Year Experience                         2.0%         0.0%           0.0%           0.0%
   2 Years Experience                        2.6%         0.0%           0.0%           0.0%
   3 Years Experience                        3.0%         0.0%           0.0%           0.0%
   4 Years Experience                        4.2%         0.9%           0.8%           1.3%
   5-9 Years Experience                     19.2%        15.6%          14.2%          20.1%
   10-19 Years Experience                   28.7%        67.8%          68.4%          66.3%
   20 or More Years Experience              39.5%        15.6%          16.6%          12.5%
   Contract Year 1992 or earlier            36.9%         0.0%           0.0%           0.0%
   Contract Year 1993                        1.6%         8.6%          10.0%           4.0%
   Contract Year 1994                        1.8%        18.1%          15.0%          28.0%
   Contract Year 1995                        0.9%         3.8%           3.7%           4.0%
   Contract Year 1996                        0.9%        13.3%          16.3%           4.0%
   Contract Year 1997                        0.5%        21.0%          23.7%          12.0%
   Contract Year 1998                        0.5%        21.9%          18.8%          32.0%
   Contract Year 1999                        1.2%        13.3%          12.5%          16.0%
   Contract Year 2000 or later              44.9%         0.0%           0.0%           0.0%
Number of Teachers                           561          105             80             25
                           Table 3: Estimated Differences in Math Achievement for Students Taught During and
                                      After TES Participation (Compared to Students Taught Before)


                                                                                                                        Only Teachers Observed
                                                                                 Full Sample                              After Participationa
                                                            (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)
School Year Relative to Year of TES Participation (Years Prior Omitted)
   Year Immediately Prior                                                                                     0.033                      -0.027
                                                                                                            (0.042)                     (0.048)
   Year of Participation                                   -0.012       0.072+      0.063+       0.062+      0.086+        0.107*        0.085
                                                          (0.087)      (0.043)     (0.036)      (0.036)     (0.045)        (0.046)      (0.061)
   Years After                                              0.047       0.111*      0.116*       0.113*      0.145*        0.130*        0.104
                                                          (0.106)      (0.054)     (0.047)      (0.048)     (0.060)        (0.059)      (0.079)
Teacher Fixed Effects                                                     Y           Y            Y           Y              Y            Y
Teacher Experience Controls                                                                        Y           Y              Y            Y
Student-level Controls                                                                Y            Y           Y              Y            Y
Teacher Clusters                                            105          105          105         105          105            61           61
Student Observations                                      14,208       14,208       14,208      14,208       14,208        11,107       11,107
Adjusted R-squared                                         0.013        0.245        0.576       0.576        0.576         0.579        0.579
Note: Each column represents a separate student-level specification predicting math test score as a function of grade-by-year fixed effects, and
the indicated covariates. Student-level controls include prior year achievement (main effect, interaction with grade level, and indicator for
missing value) and indicators for gender, race/ethnicity subgroup, special education classification, English language learner classification,
gifted and talented classification, and students retained in grade. Clustered (teacher) standard errors in parentheses.
a
  The excluded attriters include (i) any teacher who does not teach grades 4-8 math in years with state tests after TES participation, as well as
(ii) teachers who participated in TES in 2009-10, the last year in out data.
** indicates p<0.01, * p<0.05, and + p<0.10.
                            Table 4: Within Teacher Variation in Assigned Student Characteristics Relative to TES Participation Timing
                                                              Baseline                          Racial/                                            English
                                                              Math Test                          Ethnic                           Special         Language          Gifted &         Retained
                                                               Score              Male          Minority           White         Education         Learner          Talented         in Grade
                                                                 (1)               (2)            (3)               (4)             (5)              (6)               (7)              (8)

School Year Relative to Year of TES Participation (Years Prior Omitted)

   Year of Participation                                         -0.046          0.011            -0.046           0.046            0.019            -0.001           0.025            -0.001
                                                                (0.042)         (0.014)          (0.033)          (0.033)          (0.015)          (0.004)          (0.025)          (0.004)
   Years After                                                   -0.038          0.001            -0.005           0.005            0.007            0.011            0.010            -0.002
                                                                (0.045)         (0.016)          (0.020)          (0.020)          (0.014)          (0.007)          (0.016)          (0.005)

Teacher Clusters                                                  105              105             105              105              105              105              105              105
Student Observations                                            14,208           14,208          14,208           14,208           14,208           14,208           14,208           14,208
R-squared                                                        0.192            0.035           0.241            0.241            0.131            0.227            0.130            0.015
Note: Each column represents a separate student-level specification predicting the student characteristic indicated as a function of the indicated covariates, teacher experience, and teacher
fixed effects. Clustered (teacher) standard errors in parentheses.
** indicates p<0.01, * p<0.05, and + p<0.10.
   Table 5: Separating Estimated Effects for Teachers Who Volunteered to Particiate in TES
                                     Ahead of Schedule

                                                                                    (1)            (2)
School Year Relative to Year of TES Participation (Years Prior Omitted)
   Year Immediately Prior                                                          0.033
                                                                                  (0.042)
   Year Immediately Prior * Scheduled Participant                                                0.035
                                                                                                (0.046)
   Year Immediately Prior * Volunteer Participant                                                0.053
                                                                                                (0.072)
   Year of Participation                                                           0.086+
                                                                                  (0.045)
   Year of Participation * Scheduled Participant                                                 0.077+
                                                                                                (0.045)
   Year of Participation * Volunteer Participant                                                  0.161
                                                                                                (0.103)
   Years After                                                                     0.145*
                                                                                  (0.060)
   Years After * Scheduled Participant                                                           0.127*
                                                                                                (0.059)
   Years After * Volunteer Participant                                                           0.226*
                                                                                                (0.106)
Teacher Clusters                                                                    105            105
Student Observations                                                              14,208         14,208
Adjusted R-squared                                                                 0.576          0.576
Note: Each column represents a separate student-level specification predicting math test score. Besides the
coefficients reported, the specification is the same as in table 3 including teacher fixed effects, teacher
experience controls, and student controls.Clustered (teacher) standard errors in parentheses.
** indicates p<0.01, * p<0.05, and + p<0.10.
                    Table 6: IV Estimates of Differences in Math Achievement for Students Taught During and
                                                     After TES Participation

                                                                        First-Stage F-                               First-Stage F-
                                                                           test on                                      test on
                                                                          Excluded                                     Excluded
                                                              OLS       Instruments         IV             OLS       Instruments         IV
                                                              (1)             (2)           (3)            (4)             (5)           (6)
School Year Relative to Year of TES Participation (Years Prior Omitted)
   Year Immediately Prior                                                                                 0.030          45.16         0.131
                                                                                                         (0.042)                      (0.095)
   Year of Participation                                     0.054          13.05         0.052           0.077+         13.05         0.127
                                                            (0.037)                      (0.078)         (0.046)                      (0.092)
   Years After                                              0.094*         114.54        0.150*           0.124*        114.54        0.251**
                                                            (0.046)                      (0.061)         (0.058)                      (0.089)
Teacher Clusters                                               96                            96             96                            96
Student Observations                                        13,111                        13,111         13,111                        13,111
Adjusted R-squared                                           0.587                         0.586          0.587                         0.586
Note: The estimation sample excludes teachers who volunteered to participate four or more years before their scheduled year. Columns 1, 3,
4 and 6 each represent a separate student-level specification predicting math test score. Besides the coefficients reported, the specification is
the same as in table 3 including teacher fixed effects, teacher experience controls, and student controls. The excluded instruments are a
vector of dummary variables for each interaction of teacher hire cohort (which determined TES participation schedule) and school year.
Clustered (teacher) standard errors in parentheses.
** indicates p<0.01, * p<0.05, and + p<0.10.
        Table 7: Heterogeneity in Estimated Difference in Math Achievement for Students Taught After TES Participation

                                 (A)                                                                         (B)
                    Quartile of Overall TES Score                               Quartile of the Change in Overall TES Score from First to Last
                                                                                               Observation During the TES Year
                                                                (1)                                                                          (2)
School Year Relative to Year of TES Participation                           School Year Relative to Year of TES Participation
 (Years Prior Omitted)                                                       (Years Prior Omitted)
   Year Immediately Prior                                      0.023            Year Immediately Prior                                     0.033
                                                              (0.043)                                                                     (0.042)
   Year of Participation                                       0.082+           Year of Participation                                      0.086+
                                                              (0.045)                                                                     (0.046)
   Years After * Bottom Quartile TES Score                    0.279**           Years After * Top Quartile TES Score Change                0.183+
                                                              (0.089)                                                                     (0.098)
   Years After * 2nd Quartile TES Score                         0.116           Years After * 3rd Quartile TES Score Change               0.229**
                                                              (0.088)                                                                     (0.084)
   Years After * 3rd Quartile TES Score                        0.122+           Years After * 2nd Quartile TES Score Change                 0.110
                                                              (0.065)                                                                     (0.094)
   Years After * Top Quartile TES Score                         0.090           Years After * Bottom Quartile TES Score Change              0.029
                                                              (0.087)                                                                     (0.075)
Teacher Clusters                                                105         Teacher Clusters                                                 105
Student Observations                                          14,208        Student Observations                                           14,208
Adjusted R-squared                                             0.577        Adjusted R-squared                                              0.577

Note: Each column represents a separate student-level specification predicting math test score. Besides the coefficients reported, the
specification is the same as in table 3 including teacher fixed effects, teacher experience controls, and student controls. Clustered (teacher)
standard errors in parentheses.
** indicates p<0.01, * p<0.05, and + p<0.10.
