                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    MONETARY AND FISCAL STIMULI, OWNERSHIP STRUCTURE, AND CHINA'S
                          HOUSING MARKET

                                         Yongheng Deng
                                         Randall Morck
                                            Jing Wu
                                         Bernard Yeung

                                       Working Paper 16871
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w16871


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2011




We thank Takatoshi Ito, Andrew Rose, Shin-ichi Fukuda, Jiandong Ju, Lu Hsin Chang, and participants
in the NBER 21st Annual East Asian Seminar on Economics, the 8th Hong Kong Institute for Monetary
Research Conference, NUS Business School seminar, and National Taiwan University seminar for
helpful comments. We would also like to thank Jia He, Mingying Xu, and Yibo Zhao for outstanding
research assistance. Randall Morck thanks the Social Sciences Research Council for partial funding.
 Jing Wu thanks the National Natural Science Foundation of China for financial support (71003060).
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Yongheng Deng, Randall Morck, Jing Wu, and Bernard Yeung. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Monetary and Fiscal Stimuli, Ownership Structure, and China's Housing Market
Yongheng Deng, Randall Morck, Jing Wu, and Bernard Yeung
NBER Working Paper No. 16871
March 2011
JEL No. E02,E52,G01,G21,G3,G38,P27,P34

                                             ABSTRACT

In the recent financial crisis, macroeconomic stimuli produced mixed results across developed economies.
In contrast, China's stimulus boosted real GDP growth from an annualized 6.2% in the first quarter
of 2009 trough to 11.9% in the first quarter of 2010. Amidst this phenomenal response, land auction
and house prices in major cities soared. We argue that the speed and efficacy of China's stimulus derives
from state control over its banking system and corporate sector. Beijing ordered state-owned banks
to lend, and they lent. Beijing ordered centrally-controlled state-owned enterprises (SOEs) to invest,
and they invested. However, our data show that much of this investment was highly leveraged purchases
of real estate. Residential land auction prices in eight major cities rose about 100% in 2009, controlling
for quality variation. Moreover, higher price rises occur these SOEs are more active buyers. We argue
that these centrally-controlled SOEs overbid substantially, fueling a real estate bubble; and that China's
seemingly highly effective macroeconomic stimulus package may well have induced costly resource
misallocation.


Yongheng Deng                                       Jing Wu
National University of Singapore                    National University of Singapore
NUS Business School                                 and Tsinghua University
Singapore 119613                                    irswj@nus.edu.sg
ydeng@nus.edu.sg
                                                    Bernard Yeung
Randall Morck                                       National University of Singapore
Faculty of Business                                 Mochtar Riady Building
University of Alberta                               15 Kent Ridge Drive
Edmonton, AB T6G 2R6                                BIZ 1, Level 6, #6-19
CANADA                                              Singapore 119245
and NBER                                            bizdean@nus.edu.sg
randall.morck@ualberta.ca
1.        Introduction


The 2008 financial crisis that originated in the U.S. triggered a global recession.

Central banks and governments worldwide reacted with monetary and fiscal policy

interventions.      Researchers at the Brookings Institute estimate fiscal stimuli in the

G-20 countries reaching US$692 billion in 2009 – roughly 1.4% of their combined

2008 gross domestic product (GDP) and about 1.1% of global GDP (Prasad and Sorkin

2009).      IMF (International Monetary Fund 2009) estimates are similar, and peg

China's package at about 2% of its 2009 GDP.

          These government actions renewed debate about the efficacy of such stimuli

as remedies for recession.         Feldstein (2009) sees credit markets in U.S. and some

other developed countries as too deeply wounded by the subprime mortgage crisis

to be able (or willing) to advance credit in response to interest rate reductions by

monetary authorities.        If so, monetary stimulation alone ought not to work, even in

the short-run.       When monetary policy's effectiveness is uncertain, fiscal stimuli –

tax cuts, government spending hikes, or both - can come to the rescue if the

Keynesian multiplier exceeds one.            Christine Romer, the chair of U.S. President

Obama's Council of Economic Advisers, estimates the U.S. stimulus achieving a

multiplier of about 1.6,1 but other prominent economists, such as Robert Barro2

and John Cochrane3, estimate a multiplier below one.


1
    Christine Romer. "On the Advance Estimate of GDP for the Fourth Quarter of 2009," Jan 29, 2010.
    www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2010/01/29/advance-estimate-gdp-fourth-quarter-2009. .
2
    Robert Barro, "The Stimulus Evidence One Year On," Wall Street Journal, Feb 23, 2010.
3
    John H. Cochrane, "Fiscal Stimulus, Fiscal Inflation, or Fiscal Fallacies?" Feb 27, 2009.
    faculty.chicagobooth.edu/john.cochrane/research/Papers/fiscal2.htm.
                                                      2
       The literature provides mixed theoretical and empirical evidence on the

efficacy of stimulus packages in developed economies.              Early empirical work

reports multipliers above one (Rotemberg and Woodford 1992; Blandchard and

Perotti 2002; Gali, Lopez-Salido and Valles 2007), but more recent work reports

multipliers near or below unity, challenging the wisdom of all the recent government

stimuli.   Barro and Redlick (2009) discount earlier multiplier estimates as biased

because of business cycle endogeneity, and argue that a focus on defense spending

allows a cleaner estimate – which turns out to be below one under most conditions.

This accords with estimates by Edelberg, Eichenbaum and Fisher (1999), Burnside,

Eichenbaum and Fisher (2004), and others.      Ramey (2009) estimates the multiplier

as lying between 0.6 and 1.1, and criticizes larger estimates as biased due to model

misspecification.   Freedman et al. (2009) show a wide range of short-run (two years)

multipliers, ranging from 0.2 to 2.2 in the United States; but stress that government

spending hikes almost always beget fiscal deficits and therefore reduce long run

output.    The efficacy of tax cuts is also uncertain.     Barro and Redlick (2009)

estimate that a one percentage point cut in the mean marginal tax rate raises the

subsequent year's GDP growth rate by about 0.6%.           However, Feldstein (2009)

estimates a much weaker response - a marginal propensity to consume from tax cuts

of only 0.13.   Debates in other countries echo that in the U.S.

       The Chinese government's stimulus in the wake of the 2008 crisis wrought a

large and almost immediate response.       Beijing announced its stimulus package in

the 4th quarter in 2008 and annualized real GDP growth rates in the four quarters of

                                               3
2009 rose steadily and substantially: 6.2%, 7.9%, 9.1% and 10.7%, respectively; and

11.9% in the first quarter of 2010.

          China's stimulus contained both monetary and fiscal elements.                    In the 4th

quarter of 2008, the government announced a monetary policy shift from

"moderately tight" to "moderately loose".              The annualized real money supply (M2)

growth rate rose from 14.9% in 2008 Q4 to 26.2% in 2009 Q1 and then 30.4% in

2009 Q2, while the annualized real growth rate in total loan balances rose from 13.1%

to 27.9% and then 33.9% in the same intervals (Figure 1).                      In comparison, the

average real annual growth rates in M2 and loan balances from 2000 to 2008

averaged 14.5% and 11.8%, respectively.                     The fiscal stimulus, a government

spending package of RMB4 trillion (about US$586 billion) began in November 2008

and was to be spent over the next two to three years.4                 Thereafter, the annualized

real growth rate in fixed capital assets investment rose from 20.27% in 2008 Q4 to

29.42% in 2009 Q1 and then 38.03% in 2009 Q2 (Figure 2).                   Gross capital formation

contributed over 90% (a historic peak) of China's GDP growth in 2009.5



          ===Insert Figure 1 about here===



          ===Insert Figure 2 about here===




4
    Actual spending by the Chinese central government may well be less than announced figures. The
    official figure for 2009, announced in a March 2010 speech to the National Peoples' Congress by
    Premier Wen Jiaobao, is only RMB924.3 billion (ca US$135.4 billion). Even this may be too high:
    Prasad and Sorkin (2009) estimate that the central government spent only US$90.1 billion that year.
5
    Source: National Bureau of Statistics, “2010 Statistics Yearbook of China”. .
                                                        4
          The sheer magnitudes of China's stimulus package do not explain its

remarkable impact.           China's monetary policy was not distinctly extreme: its lowest

benchmark interest rate during the downturn period was 2.25%, and this was not

lower than in most other economies.                 Prasad and Sorkin (2009) classify the fiscal

stimulus packages of China, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, and the United States as

"large" compared to those of other G20 countries; but estimate America's fiscal

stimulus, US$841.2 billion or 5.9% of GDP, dwarfing China's comparatively paltry

US$204.3 billion or 4.8% of GDP.              The IMF (2009) estimates are more comparable:

4.8% and 4.4% of GDP for America's and China’s fiscal stimuli, respectively.               Thus

China's fiscal stimulus was clearly not larger than America's, and was probably

somewhat smaller.

          China's economic strength coming out of the global recession is also clearly

not due to an undervaluation of its currency stimulating exports.                  Despite the

recent debate over China's exchange rate policy, and irrespective of whether or not

a low RMB subsidizes exports, Chinese net exports fell 44.8% in 2009.              The Chinese

government estimates that this contracted the economy by roughly 3.9% of GDP.6

Thus, China's stimulus package took effect as the country's exports were falling

precipitously.

          We offer a new explanation of the effectiveness of China's stimulus package

based on the corporate governance of its banks and major non-financial enterprises.

Specifically, we propose that the extraordinarily fast and large response to the


6
    Source: National Bureau of Statistics, “2010 Statistics Yearbook of China”.
                                                          5
government's stimulus policies reflects the central government's direct control over

major banks and largest non-financial enterprises, all of which are state-owned

enterprises (SOEs).     China's SOE banks increased lending dramatically and

immediately upon the government's announcement of its stimulus policies, and

China's state-owned non-financial enterprises launched vast new investment plans

at exactly the same time.

       We argue that these lending and investment decisions generally do not seek

to optimize the firm-level financial interests of China’s banking and nonfinancial

SOEs, as microeconomic theory posits should occur in a market economy.

Rather, they reflect direct political control by the government over banks and

corporate borrowers.     If so, the speed and efficacy of China's stimulus policies may

well be part of what is sometimes called the "policy burden" (Lin, Cai and Li, 1998;

Lin and Tan, 1999; Lin and Li, 2008) or "multitasking" (Bai et al, 2000; Bai, Lu and Tao,

2006) the government assigns to SOEs.        Such direct intervention in bank lending

and corporate investment decisions may let China's government lift its economy out

of a low-level equilibrium more neatly than other countries could manage.        But the

drafting of banks and non-financial in a forced march towards higher GDP may also

misallocate capital, inducing a recovery without lasting economic foundations.

       Major lending initiatives require substantial due diligence and financial

analysis by banks, and major capital spending initiatives entail substantial planning

and preparation by enterprises.      This requires expertise, time, and resources –

especially in a rapidly changing economic environment.       Ordered to boost lending,

                                               6
China's SOE bank managers were understandably reluctant to lend to private-sector

entrepreneurs, and so proffered loans to nonfinancial SOEs, whose official

connections substantially reduce their perceived default risk.

        Major capital investment outlays also require intricate cost-benefit studies,

forecasts of important parameters like demand and factor costs, and risk analysis.

This too requires expertise, time, and resources – especially in an uncertain

economic environment.     China's SOE managers, ordered to boost investment, were

understandably hesitant to make intrinsically largely irreversible investments in

property, plant, and equipment.        Instead they needed quick and reversible

investments.   We show that they poured the proceeds of their loans from SOE

banks into real estate purchases, which count as corporate investments in official

statistics.

        Consistent with this, the State-owned Assets Supervision and Administration

Commission (SASAC) of the State Council (federal government) reports numerous

SOEs, especially very large SOEs controlled directly by the central government

(hereinafter "C-SOEs"), suddenly expanding housing development activities in 2009.

Using parcel-level land auction data, and adjusting for parcel quality using location

and physical attribute data, we find a 97.4% increase in real land prices in eight

major Chinese cities in 2009.    The fraction of the total value of residential land

purchases made by C-SOEs jumped from 15% prior to 2008 to 23% in 2009 and 33%

in 2010 Q1.    We further estimate that, controlling for land parcel attributes and

time fixed effects, C-SOEs paid 16% more than other land buyers.    Moreover, these

                                              7
effects are evident after the government's stimulus package announcement, but not

before.     These findings are consistent with C-SOEs overpaying for land in a

scramble to invest quickly – though the bid premium associated with C-SOEs' may be

partially attributable to lower capital costs, and might also be justifiable in that their

political connections might let C-SOEs glean greater revenue from development

projects than other developers could.

          The paper proceeds as follows.            The next section summarizes the

institutional background of banks, most of which are SOEs, and nonfinancial SOEs in

China, including various reforms and their current status.      Section 3 discusses the

banks and SOEs' rolethe roles of banking and nonfinancial SOEs in the stimulus

policies, and argues that an SOE channel is important to Chinese macroeconomic

policy.    Section 4 introduces the land transaction data for empirical tests, and

section 5 discusses our empirical results linking SOEs' bidding to real estate prices.

Section 6 discusses the social and economic implications of SOEs' bidding behavior in

land market.     Section 7 concludes.




2.        Institutional Background Regarding Chinese Banks and Large

          Non-financial Enterprises

2.1       Recent SOE Reform Policies


Since the founding of the People's Republic of China in 1949, or more precisely, since

the completion of its "Socialist Transformation" in 1956, SOEs' domination in all

                                                8
industrial sectors has been a key element of Socialism.             From 1956 until the recent

reform era, industrial facilities were parts of various government ministries, and thus

integral parts of the central, provincial, municipal, or local district governments.

Managers were appointed government bureaucrats charged with following Central

Plans and occasional direct orders from higher levels of government or Party

officials.7    In 1978, when economic reforms began, SOEs accounted for 78% of total

industrial output and 64% of urban employment, and during 1975-1980 SOEs

accounted for over 84% of new investment in industrial fixed assets (Chiu and Lewis,

2006; Brandt, Rawski and Sutton, 2008).8

          After the mid-1980s, reforming SOEs became a major policy focus, and actual

reforms occurred in three phases.              We briefly review the first two, which are

discussed in detail elsewhere (e.g. Qian, 2000; Chiu and Lewis, 2006; Brandt, Rawski

and Sutton, 2008).         Our focus is the third phase, which clarifies SOEs' role in the

government stimulus packages.

          The first phase, from the mid-1980s to the mid-1990s, expanded SOE

autonomy and surrounded CEOs with incentives.                   First, a "dual-track approach"

(shuang gui zhi) let SOEs produce beyond their quotas, sell the excess at market

prices, and keep the proceeds of this as corporate profits, while the government

continued setting quotas.         Later, a "contract responsibility system" (cheng bao zhi)

was introduced to most small- and medium-size SOEs, under which SOE managers

signed contracts with the government.                     These gave managers considerable
7
    For more details about SOEs during the planned economy era, see Chiu and Lewis (2006) and Brandt,
    Rawski and Sutton (2008).
8
    Most of the remaining was by local government-controlled collectives.
                                                      9
autonomy in running their SOEs, but the enterprises remained wholly owned by the

State.      Profits were shared between the enterprises and the State according to the

contracts.

           The second phase of SOE reforms started in 1994 and focused on ownership.

Guided by the slogan "grasp the big, let go the small" (zhua da fang xiao), many

small- and medium-size SOEs were assessed for reorganization, bankruptcy, debt

write-offs, merger into partnerships, leasing, contractual operation, or sales.

Larger SOEs remained state-owned as a shareholding system was introduced.

Some more profitable enterprises were even encouraged to list minority public floats

on domestic or international stock exchanges.

           Despite SOEs, especially large ones, having privileged access to inputs, capital,

and markets; many continued performing poorly at the end of the 20th century –

most likely because of a mixture of poor governance, under-developed management

skills, and heavy "policy burdens" that commandeered SOEs to fulfill government

policy agendas, distorting their production decisions and general operations (Lin and

Tan, 1999; Lin and Li, 2008).         The central government billed the decade from 1993

to 2002 as "the most difficult period for the SOEs." 9                   During the economic

downturn of 1998, more than two thirds of industrial SOEs ran deficits, and SOEs'

country-wide mean return on assets (ROA) was only about 0.7%.10                        SOEs were

called the "Achilles heel of China's otherwise remarkable economic performance"




9
     Source: "Thirty Years of SOE Reform", http://www.gov.cn/ztzl/2008-10/02/content_1110911.htm.
10
      Source: National Bureau of Statistics, China.
                                                      10
(Broadman, 2001) and "threaten[ed] to drag down the nation's entire economy"

(Steinfeld, 1998).

       The third phase of SOE reforms started in 2003, after the November 2002

16th National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP).        This era is the focus

of our study.    In this third phase, the government set about reforming property

rights and corporate governance in large SOEs.       One key reform was the formation

of a set of State-owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commissions (SASACs)

in March 2003 by the State Council of the People's Republic, China's analog of the

Privy Council in a Westminster system of government.

       The powers and responsibilities of the SASACs were defined in a May 2003

State Council document entitled "Interim Provisions on Supervision and

Administration of State-owned Assets of Enterprises" (Decree 378, 2003), and an

amended version of which became the 2008 Law on State-owned Assets of

Enterprises.    This assigned SASACs the legal liabilities and rights of investors holding

SOE shares on behalf of the State and the responsibility of guiding and supervising

further SOE reforms.

       As Figure 3 shows, the State Council SASAC is a ministry of the central

government in Beijing, and serves as a holding company for SOEs that were formerly

part of the central government.          These are called "central SOEs" (yang qi),

hereinafter C-SOEs.     At its founding in 2003, the State Council SASAC had charge

over 196 C-SOEs.     Mergers over subsequent years reduced their number to 142 by

the end of 2008, and 129 by the end of 2009.           The State Council SASAC is also

                                                11
charged with guiding and supervising the regional-level SASACs, which control other

SOEs that were formerly parts of provincial, city, or district governments: "local

SOEs" (di fang guo qi), hereinafter L-SOEs.



       ===Insert Figure 3 about here===



       The SASAC reforms "corporatized" SOEs into entities recognizable as joint

stock companies, with shares bestowing ownership rights and governance structures

regulated by Corporate Law, Securities Law, and related institutional structures.

These so-called "modern enterprise system" (xian dai qi ye zhi du) reforms

fundamentally changed SOEs in several ways.

       First, the SOEs became legal entities with owners.      This necessitated the

clarification of the property rights of both the SOEs and their shareholders.   State

assets formerly used by several SOEs had to be assigned to one SOE or divided

cleanly among more than one.       Because all shareholders in an SOE, including the

SASACs, were thenceforth to have identical rights, the final ownership structure –

the fractions of shares in each SOE owned by various ministries, government organs,

and levels of government had to be clarified so these could be assigned to the

corresponding SASACs.      Thereafter, a firm in China is officially classified as

state-owned or state-controlled only if the State, by dint of one and only one SASAC

or parent SOE, is its sole owner or majority (over 50% of shares) owner.

       Second, the reforms gave SOE managers meaningful autonomy over

day-to-day business decisions.    Before the SASAC reforms, all SOEs were integral
                                              12
parts of national, provincial, or local governments.            By recasting SOEs into distinct

entities, the reforms severed direct bureaucratic control over SOE operations.

Moreover, Premier Wen Jiabao promised at the founding of the State Council SASAC

that the SASACs would not become SOEs' "mothers-in-law" (po po) – a term

connoting overbearing meddling.

           Nonetheless, the SASACs equity blocks gave them strong control rights over

SOEs, with which they were to fulfill their fourfold supervision and administration

roles.      First, the SASACs were expected to affect top management decisions by

using their equity blocks to control SOE boards.            Second, the SASACs, especially the

State Council SASAC, were empowered to issue regulations and documents that

SOEs had to obey regarding development strategies, investment decisions, budgets,

audits, risk management processes, and so on. 11                     Third, the SASACs were

empowered to define, and redefine, each SOE's primary business activity.                       SOE

executives thus need prior SASAC approval for a shift in primary focus from one line

of business to another, though not to acquire control of a subsidiary in another

sector.      Finally and most importantly, top SOE executives were thenceforth hired,

renewed, and dismissed by the SASACs, though top appointments in C-SOEs also

required approval from the Organization Department of the Chinese Communist

Party (CCP).       The top positions that also require Party approval include the chair of

the board, chief executive officer (CEO), deputy CEO, and any other key position the

CCP Organization Department considers important.                   Most recently, the "Interim
11
      A 2008 State Council SASAC document entitled “Development of SASACs in the Past Five Years”
     reports that the State Council SASAC issued 19 regulations and 104 documents from 2003 to 2008,
     while local SASACs issued over 1,600 documents during that period.
                                                      13
Provisions on Management of Executives in C-SOEs", issued jointly by the Central

Committee of CCP and the State Council in December, 2009, enshrines the principle

of "absolute control of the executives by the Party" (dang guan gan bu).         Consistent

with its incontestable control of the economy's "commanding heights," the Party

thus retains direct control over SOEs by dint of directly controlling their top

executives' careers.

          This leads directly into the third important feature of the new system: SASACs

control over SOE top executives' incentives.           The State Council assigns SASACs the

responsibility to "evaluate the executives of the enterprises through legal

procedures, and grant rewards or punishments according to their performance."12

The SASACs consider this one of their major instruments for "improving" SOE

performance.       One of the first Documents the State Council SASAC issued after its

2003 founding was the "Interim Provisions on Performance Evaluations for

Executives of C-SOEs."       Revised twice, in 2006 and again in 2009, this Document

mandates that State Council SASAC conducts annual and triennial evaluations of

C-SOE top executives for use in determining the executives' compensations.

          The Document divides an executive's compensation into a "base salary",

typically about one third of the total, and a "bonus", the remaining roughly two

thirds.     Following the 2006 amendments, listed C-SOEs could also grant their top

executives shares as a third component of compensation, though few do so as yet.

The State Council SASAC reports the average annual salary, including both base

12
      Source: "Interim Provisions on Supervision and Administration of State-owned Assets of
     Enterprises" (State Council’s Decree 378, 2003).
                                                  14
salary and bonus, of C-SOE CEOs rising from RMB 350,000 in 2004 to about RMB

600,000 in 2009, a level considerably above that of top ministry-level civil servants in

the central government.13

           In theory, this directly links the income of an SOE's top executives to its

performance.          The SASAC assigns the executive a grade, with A the highest and E

the lowest, in his SASAC annual evaluation.               An A means a triple bonus, while an E

means no bonus at all.            Sixty percent of the bonus is paid immediately after the

annual evaluation, while the remainder is held in abeyance until the end of the

executive's term of office, typically three-years, and disbursed completely only if the

executive gets at least a C grade in the triennial evaluation.14                 In both evaluations,

the SASAC is to gauge the performance of the SOE under the executive's stewardship

in terms of absolute profits, economic value added (EVA), appreciation in asset

valuations, and annualized revenue growth rates in the SOE's primary line of

business.

           The grades an SOE executive attains also affect his subsequent career path.

But, as noted above, the SASAC makes recommendations regarding SOE executives'

promotions at their triennial evaluations.             The Organization Department of the CCP

then promotes, demotes, or laterally transfers the executive to his next position,

which is seldom with the same SOE (McGregor 2010).                     Rather, SOE executives' next

positions are typically at other SOEs or in government bureaucracies or Party organs.



13
      Source: speech by Mr Li Rongrong, director of State Council SASAC in Jan 9, 2010.
14
      See the latest version of "Interim Provisions on Performance Evaluations for Executives of C-SOEs"
     (State Council SASAC Document 22, 2009) for more details.
                                                         15
The Organization Department of the CCP ranks all government, Party, and SOE

positions so that promotions, demotions, and lateral transfers can be clearly defined.

        This subjects top executives to a loyalty test: career success depends on

adherence to CCP policies and harmonious cooperation advancing CCP priorities, or

perhaps more accurately, obedience to senior government and Party officials' orders.

A top SOE executive judged unresponsive to such direction risks not being promoted,

or even being demoted at the end of his three-year term ends – even if his SOEs

performs well.   Kato and Lang (2004), Bai and Xu (2005), Firth, Fung and Rui (2006),

Zhao, Yang and Bai (2007) find top executive turnovers in listed Chinese SOEs

significantly less related to ROA, ROS and other performance indicators than in other

listed firms.

        The SASAC reforms are problematic for two reasons.         First, the reforms

seemingly give SOE top executives greater autonomy by excising them from the

bureaucratic chain of command within a ministry.    However, SOE executives' career

prospects still depend on decisions by the Organization Department of the CCP,

which is charged with ensuring loyalty to Party and government policies.      Second,

the reforms explicitly link SOE executive bonuses to quantitatively measurable SOE

financial performance indicators: profits, EVA, asset value appreciation, and revenue

growth. (These are supplemented by share values in only a handful of listed SOEs.)

However, all four primary financial indicators measure short-term performance, and

SOE executives' bonuses and promotions depend on three annual evaluations and

one triennial evaluation by the relevant SASAC.    In almost all cases, three years of

                                             16
good performance locks in the executive's bonuses and justifies a promotion by the

CCP Organization Department to a higher position in a government bureaucracy or a

different SOE.   Policies that artificially inflated short-term performance and create

future problems are someone else's problem.

       In summary, the reforms sever SOE executives from the ministries that

formerly contained them, but preserve the Party's incontestable control over SOE

executives' careers.   The reforms tie SOE executive bonuses to SOE financial

performance measures, but only to measures of short-term performance.              The

overall effect of the reforms on the efficiency of resource allocation is thus quite

ambiguous.

       The overall effect of the SASAC reforms is thus a priori unclear.      SOE top

executives have greater autonomy than before, but are also likely under greater

pressure.    On the one hand, this pressure encourages better SOE performance

because top executive compensation is more explicitly tied to SOE performance and,

in the case of a few listed SOEs, share prices.     On the other hand, this pressure

subjects SOE top executives to more political interference because their career

prospects depend on their loyalty to the Party and the government.

       These dual criteria for evaluating SOE top executives – deliver profits and

serve the government – can align if, as Deng Xiaoping proclaimed, "to be rich is

glorious" (zhi fu guang rong).   But if government priorities shift away from this, SOE

performance and loyalty may conflict; and SOE top executives must balance dual

objectives: augmenting corporate performance for the sake of their near-term

                                              17
compensation, but obeying government directives to protect their longer term

careers.

        The balance in such cases is almost certainly strongly tilted towards

obedience to government directives, for the Organization Department of the CCP

remains overwhelmingly important to advancing or blocking SOE executives' careers

at all levels.   Risking the Organization Department's displeasure by defying political

directives to protect an SOE's financial bottom line would likely appeal to few

ambitious managers.

        We believe that China's recent stimulus package took effect within this

context. Top executives of SOE banks and nonfinancial SOEs obeyed government

orders to lend and to invest, respectively, but did so in ways that minimized damage

to their SOEs' near-term profitability.    Specifically, SOE bank executives lent, not to

private entrepreneurs, but to nonfinancial SOEs because the latter were unlikely to

fail in a macroeconomic downturn.          SOEs invested not in productivity-enhancing

corporate assets, but in real estate.     We posit that this response explains the speed

and scale of the stimulus package's impact.           To the extent that the stimulus

successfully corrected a market failure, this may well benefit macroeconomic

performance.      But if SOE executives' responses to the stimulus misallocated the

economy's savings, its longer term performance may be compromised.




                                                 18
2.2      Current Status of SOEs


To play a major role in effecting the central government's macroeconomic stimulus,

SOEs must be an economically significant part of the economy.            Despite the

ongoing reorganization and privatization of small- and medium-sized SOEs, which

has caused a steady decline in the number of SOEs over the past decade, SOEs retain

the commanding heights of the Chinese economy.

      The past three censuses by National Bureau of Statistics in China (Table 1) show

the number of SOEs, financial and nonfinancial, falling from 369,000 (12.19% of all

enterprises) in 2001 to 192,000 (5.91%) in 2004, and then 156,000 (3.15%) in 2008.

Over the same time span, the number of private enterprises nearly tripled, and the

number of joint-stock enterprises not explicitly controlled by the State rose by over

110%.     The State Council SASAC's statistics also show the number of non-financial

SOEs controlled by provincial-level or higher SASACs falling from 150,000 at the end

of 2003 to 115,115 at the end of 2009.



         ===Insert Table 1 about here===



         However, numbers alone do not gauge importance.        The Party's policy of

"grasping the big, letting go the small" (zhua da fang xiao) SOEs means that the

remaining stable of SOEs is successively narrowed to the very largest.   These mainly

include monopolies in the natural resources and infrastructure sectors (such as

mining, electricity, telecom, and fuels), and a few leading companies in some other


                                              19
important industries (such as real estate, construction, and car manufacturing).15

The 2008 Economic Census thus classifies only 3.15% of all enterprises as SOEs, but

these contained 30.53% of total enterprise assets (Table 2).                       Listed SOEs also

constituted 27.85% of the total market capitalization of the Shanghai and Shenzhen

stock markets at the end of 2009.             Thus, China's remaining SOEs are extraordinarily

large, and quite plausibly continue to play central roles in their industries and in the

national economy.



           ===Insert Table 2 about here===



           Moreover, these figures almost certainly greatly understate the true scope of

state control over nominally private sector and listed firms because many SOEs

control business groups.              These structures resemble large family controlled

pyramidal groups, in which an apex family firm controls a first tier of listed firms,

each of which controls other listed firms, each of which controls yet more listed

firms, and so on (La Porta et al. 1999; Morck, Stangeland, Yeung 2000).                     However,

the structures being organized in China feature an SOE, rather than a family firm, at

the apex.        A firm in the lower tiers may seem to lack any controlling shareholder

(and thus not explicated labeled as SOE), but the combined stakes of several SOEs or

SOE controlled firms may aggregate to a control block.

           The 142 C-SOEs still extant in 2008 controlled 19,250 other enterprises.                  Of

these, 8,524 are wholly state-owned; another 9,534 are listed as state-controlled;
15
      Source: State Council. "Guidelines of State-Owned Enterprises Reform" (Decree 97, 2006), Dec. 5,
     2006.
                                                        20
and the remaining 1,192 are explicitly grouped as non-SOEs.                     Of the 19,250

enterprises, State Council SASAC’s statistics count 235 as listed in mainland

exchanges and 71 as listed in Hong Kong.             By the end of 2009, the number of listed

C-SOE-controlled firms in the mainland and Hong Kong rose to 260 and 88,

respectively.16 According to the State Council SASAC's statistics, nonfinancial C-SOEs

accounted for about 40% of total nonfinancial SOE assets, over 60% of their sales,

and over 70% of their profits in 2009.

          In summary, despite their small and decreasing numbers, SOEs, especially

large C-SOEs, remain very significant economically.               That they could play a central

role in effecting China's macroeconomic stimulus package is quite plausible.




2.3       SOE Banks


State-owned banks dominated China's financial sector since 1949 (Allen, Qian and

Qian, 2005, 2008), and recent reforms have not altered this.                    Banking sector

reforms closely parallel those described above in connection with non-financial SOEs.

In 2003, as the SASACs were founded, the China Banking Regulatory Commission

(CBRC) was also founded to direct and supervise the operation of all banks.              Unlike

the SASACs, the CBRC does not hold shares in the SOEs it directs.             Rather, the major

shareholders in SOE banks are the Ministry of Finance and a C-SOE, the Central Huijin

Investment Ltd.




16
     Source: State Council SASAC, “2009 Annual Report,” Aug 3, 2010.
                                                       21
         The Central Huijin Investment Ltd was established in 2003 as a branch of the

State Association for Foreign Exchange (SAFE), an administrative agency subordinate

to the People's Bank of China.        The State Council authorized Central Huijin

Investment Ltd to buy equity in financial SOEs, thereby injecting capital to

compensate for their accumulated nonperforming loans problems.               In 2007,

Central Huijin Investment Ltd was corporatized as a subsidiary of CIC, China's newly

formed sovereign wealth fund (Pistor 2010).

         A fully owned subsidiary, Central Huijin constituted roughly one third of the

CIC's total assets in 2007.    However, the CIC has no governance powers: Central

Huijin's corporate charter specifies that its management and supervisory boards are

to be appointed directly by the State Council (Pistor 2010).   Ownership and control

thus appear fully separated.    However, in practice, the Organization Department of

the CCP actually appoints the top executives of Central Huijin and the CIC, and the

CIC's portfolio is de facto an investments arm of the CCP; perhaps reuniting

ownership and control at a more basic level (Huang 1996; Shih 2008; McGregor

2010).

         Within this institutional framework, the CBRC and the Ministry of Finance

issue documents, like those issued by the SASACs, directing SOE banks' governance.

For example, the "Interim Provisions on Performance Evaluation of State-owned and

State-Controlled Financial Enterprises", issued by the Ministry of Finance in 2009,

mandates the periodic evaluation of each SOE bank's profitability, asset appreciation,

asset quality and solvency for purposes of determining the salary, reappointment

                                              22
and promotion of each top executive.                  Also as with nonfinancial SOEs, SOE banks'

core executives are appointed, removed and re-assigned by the Organization

Department of the CCP.              Top executives at SOE banks thus confront the same dual

goals of good firm performance and loyalty to government dictates that other SOEs

contend with.

           The People's Bank of China, the country's central bank, classifies banks by

ownership structure.             Three important banks – the China Development Bank,

Export-Import Bank of China, and Agriculture Development Bank of China – are

classified as "policy banks."            These remain fully and directly owned by the state,

and are intended as tools for state intervention in the economy.                            Another four

major banks – the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China, China Construction Bank,

Agricultural Bank of China, and Bank of China – are classified as "state-owned

commercial banks."             These were corporatized and subsequently listed, but have

long histories of state control with the Ministry of Finance and Central Huijin

Investment Ltd holding sufficient equity blocks to lock in state control.                         Thirteen

other major banks are classified as "joint stock commercial banks."                      Eleven of these

have a C-SOE, L-SOE, or subnational government organ as their largest shareholder.17

Rural credit cooperation associations, city commercial banks, foreign banks, and

certain other financial institutions fall outside these categories.                   Thus, eighteen of




17
      The central government, either directly or via C-SOEs, is the largest shareholder in five of these: the
     Bank Of Communications, China Citic Bank, China Everbright Bank, Huaxia Bank and China
     Merchants Bank). The other six, with local governments as the largest shareholder, are the
     Industrial Bank, Guangdong Development Bank, Shanghai Pudong Development Bank, Evergrowing
     Bank, China Zheshang Bank and China Bohai Bank.
                                                           23
the twenty largest banks are directly State controlled and, at the end of 2009,

accounted for RMB58.58 trillion, or about 73% of total bank assets (Table 3).



       ===Insert Table 3 about here===




3.     China's SOE Macroeconomic Policy Channel


3.1    SOEs' Responses to Stimulus


Figure 4 shows how the global financial crisis hit China's finance sector.      China's

bankers' confidence index, based on the People's Bank of China's quarterly survey of

about 3,000 city- or higher-level bank branch managers, dropped sharply in 2008 Q4,

and bottomed out in 2009 Q1.

       Amid this drop in banker confidence, the government announced an

expansionary shift in monetary policy; and China's four state-owned commercial

banks and thirteen joint-stock commercial banks immediately initiated a huge

volume of new loans in the 1st quarter of 2009 (Figure 4).     The four state-owned

commercial banks' total loan balance rose by RMB2.31 trillion in that quarter,

substantially more than the 1.80 trillion increase over the entire year of 2008, and

increased by RMB4.10 trillion over the full year of 2009.   This raised their share of

total loan volume from 36.78% in 2008 to 42.73% in 2009, abruptly reversing their

steady loss of market share to city commercial banks and foreign banks.         China's




                                             24
joint-stock commercial banks likewise increased their loans outstanding by RMB1.18

trillion in the 1st quarter of 2009 and RMB2.23 trillion over in that whole year.



        ===Insert Figure 4 about here===



        The global downturn also hurt non-financial SOEs badly.           State Council

SASAC's statistics for 2008 show non-financial SOEs' profits decreased by 24.5% at

the national level, with 45.5% of the SOEs suffering losses.      Both ROS and profits

were in deep troughs in 2008, and neither improved until 2009 Q3 (see Figure 5).

The performance of C-SOEs, also tracked by the State Council SASAC, shows a similar

pattern.     China's entrepreneur confidence index, based on a National Bureau of

Statistics quarterly nationwide survey of 20,000 enterprise managers, hit a historic

low at the start of 2009 (Figure 6).     Nonetheless, these too stepped forth to do

their bit.

        Non-financial SOEs responded to the government's call for economic stimulus

with a prompt and substantial hike in investment.      Prior to 2008, SOEs' annualized

real growth rate in fixed asset investment typically lagged that of non-SOEs by about

ten percentage points (Figure 6).     But this growth rate increased sharply – from

21.09% in 2008 Q4 to 38.50% in 2009 Q1 and 45.30% in 2009 Q2.            Across all four

quarters of 2009, the SOEs' fixed asset investment growth rate remained

substantially higher than normal.    In contrast, non-SOEs' annualized growth rate in

fixed asset investment remained at its usual level through all the four quarters of

2009.
                                               25
       ===Insert Figure 5 about here===



       ===Insert Figure 6 about here===



       With banker and entrepreneur confidence indexes dragging at or near

historic lows, and with banks and nonfinancial SOEs navigating through increasingly

choppy business environments, these sudden expansions in lending and investment

were unlikely to be driven by enterprise profit maximization.      Rather, the top

executives at SOE banks and nonfinancial SOEs were instructed to pursue these

policies by the government.

       The SASACs made "contributions to the stimulus plan" a new corporate

performance objective, as highlighted in State Council SASAC's 2009 annual report,

to be used in evaluating SOE executives; and most SOE banks' and nonfinancial

enterprises' annual reports, or similar documents, echo this.      Senior Chinese

government officials' speeches exhorted SOEs to "serve the country's interest", and

the Organization Department of the CCP weighed obedience to Party thought heavily

in promoting, renewing, or demoting SOE executives.    Thus, responding quickly and

meaningfully to the government's macroeconomic stimulus became an SOE's "policy

burden" and an explicitly stipulated objective for SOE managers.




                                             26
3.2    Potential Problems with the SOE Channel


The dual objectives assigned managers of SOE banks and nonfinancial SOEs – to

advance the government's political objectives and optimize SOE financial

performance – remained in effect as SOEs fulfilled these policy burdens.      Assessing

borrowers on the basis of the likely financial viability of their investment plans is

time consuming and requires expensive expertise.       Given the government's policy

directive to increase lending immediately and substantially, careful evaluation of

lending decisions was almost certainly simply not possible.        Rational SOE bank

executives would doubtless obey the directive, but perhaps in ways that minimize

damage to the financial performance of their banks, thereby protecting their annual

bonus packages and their promotion prospects at the end of their three-year terms

in their current positions.   SOE Banks, obliged to issue huge volume of loans, would

thus favor borrowers perceived as unlikely to default, at least in the near future.

       For several reasons, bankers saw large C-SOEs as preferred borrowers.          First,

large C-SOEs were widely thought "too big to fail".      If the downturn proved long

and deep, the State was likely to save them from serious trouble.      Second, lending

to large C-SOEs was "politically correct."   Nonperforming loans to other borrowers,

especially private corporations, would leave SOE bankers open to criticism.            But

decisions to let SOEs, especially C-SOEs, renege on debts would be made by high

government and party officials, sheltering SOE bankers from blame.                    Such




                                               27
reasoning appears to have been persuasive, for listed C-SOEs received nearly 60% of

all new loans to all companies listed in mainland exchanges in 2009.18

          The managers of nonfinancial SOEs, having borrowed these funds, had to

invest them quickly to demonstrate adherence to the government's stimulus plan,

but also avoid damaging the financial performance of their SOEs, and thus their

bonus income streams.           Like the top managers of SOE banks, nonfinancial SOEs are

evaluated annually for bonuses and triennially for promotions.                    Investments that

would not show major problems for at least three years were thus needed.

          Large corporate capital investments require careful planning, forecasting, risk

assessment, and other financial analysis; and this too takes time and money.

Formulating profitable capital investments is daunting under normal conditions;

amid a global economic downturn, the task can be petrifying. Nonfinancial SOE

managers were thus hesitant to invest in property, plant, and equipment associated

with their primary lines of business; fearing that such investments would do poorly

in the near-term future.         The National Bureau of Statistics estimates the mean ROA

of 23 of the 38 industrial sectors it covers as below the loan interest rate (5.31%) in

2008.

          Thus, nonfinancial SOE managers needed nontraditional investments whose

returns would likely cover their borrowing costs – at least until positive triennial

evaluations moved them on to higher positions elsewhere in the economy.




18
     Source: Author’ calculation based on annual report data in the Genius Finance Database.
                                                       28
       Real estate seemed to fill this bill for several reasons.       First, real estate

prices in major cities rose steadily over the preceding years, making residential

construction one of the most profitable industries.        The two latest economic

censuses show the ROS of the real estate sector rising faster than in any other sector

– from 8.31% in 2004 to 12.62% in 2008, when it ranked third in profitability, behind

only "mining" and "other services".    In major cities with hot housing markets, the

sector's ROS was even higher in 2008, reaching 14.99% in Beijing and 17.90% in

Shanghai.   Second, real estate is relatively easy to enter, at least compared to other

highly profitable industries.   For example, entering "mining", the most profitable

sector, requires locating and developing ore deposits; and the sector is, in any event,

given over to state-licensed monopolies.      In contrast, any nonfinancial SOE with

ready cash might take to buying land or residential apartment blocks, and even to

building them, with some hope of financial success.

       Accordingly, many C-SOEs, obeying political directives to hike their borrowing

from SOE banks and invest, opted to invest real estate.    While SASAC guidelines list

only 16 C-SOEs with real estate development as core business, these and 78 other

C-SOEs owned or controlled real estate developers by the end of 2009.           Most of

these concentrated on real estate in a few major cities, where their buying pushed

up lot prices substantially.    Indeed, C-SOE land purchases are widely thought

responsible for land and housing price surges these cities experienced during the

recovery.   The next sections assess the validity of this sentiment.




                                              29
4.       Land Transaction Data


All urban land was nationalized at the founding of the People's Republic of China in

1949.    Under the Constitutional Amendment of 1988, the State retains ultimate

ownership of urban land, but allows individuals and enterprises to lease land use

rights for specified periods.        For example, residential lot leases typically last 70

years.    A private housing development project might involve a developer leasing

lots from a local government, building housing units on the lots, and then selling the

developed units.       A State Council madate, issued in 2002 and reiterated in 2004,

requires that leases for urban lots designated for residential development be sold at

auctions.19     In most cases, the developer entering the highest bid gets the lease.

         We collect land parcel auction data in eight major Chinese cities: Beijing,

Chengdu, Hangzhou, Shanghai, Shenzhen, Tianjin, Wuhan, and Xian.                      These are all

large cities, with relatively developed economies and housing markets.                      In 2009,

their combined GDPs constituted 17.3% of China's GDP, and 35% of new home sales

occurred within the nation.20

         Our data, from the Soufun Database and local land resources authorities'

websites, contain 3,542 land transaction records.21               These include all such public

residential land lease sales in these eight cities from 2003 Q1 through 2010 Q1,

except leases for land entirely designated for public housing, which we exclude


19
    Three variants are permitted: one-stage auction, two-stage auction, and an alternative bidding
   process. See Cai, Henderson and Zhang (2009) for details.
20
    Calculation based on Nation Bureau of Statistics data and municipal statistics for each city.
21
    Soufun is a leading Chinese data vendor specialized in land and housing transaction data. The
   company’s website is fdc.soufun.com.
                                                      30
because their prices are determined using other mechanisms.          In April 2010, with

China's economic recovery seemingly drawing to a successful conclusion, with

America's real estate bubble still in the news, and with high and rising urban land

prices attracting attention, the State Council SASAC explicitly discouraged C-SOEs,

especially those for which real estate is not a core business, from further

participation in lease auctions.   Our data thus includes the period in which China's

macroeconomic stimulus was in high gear, and in which C-SOE investment options

were unrestricted.    Table 4 describes the distribution of these transactions across

the eight major cities we study.



       ===Insert Table 4 about here===



       Our data include each land parcel's location and physical attributes as well as

its sale price and date.   For each parcel, we ascertain the buyer's characteristics

from the eight cities' municipal real estate authority databases.    These classify each

buyer as a C-SOE, L-SOE, or non-SOE and, within each classification, assign the buyers

grades, from one (highest) through five (lowest), according to size and experience as

a developer.    This also lets us distinguish listed from unlisted buyers.       Table 5

displays the definitions and descriptive statistics of the variables so constructed.



       ===Insert Table 5 about here===




                                               31
       A cursory inspection of our data supports the thesis that SOEs abruptly

increased their activity in the real estate development business as the

macroeconomic stimulus package was unfolded.           Figure 7 shows SOEs' market

share as low, with non-SOE developers dominating the market, until 2008; after

which SOEs, and especially C-SOEs rapidly become major players.                  C-SOE

developers' share by total value rose from about 15% in 2008 to about 23% in 2009,

and a historic high of about 33% in 2010 Q1.



       ===Insert Figure 7 about here===



       Table 6 reveals substantial variation across cities in C-SOE entry.   In Beijing,

their favorite market, C-SOEs roughly doubled their market share from its historic

level or roughly 24% to 53.54% in 2009 and 2010 Q1, when the stimulus package was

unfolded.    Simultaneous surges in market shares are also clearly evident in

Shanghai, Chengdu, and Tianjin, but less so in the other four cities.



       ===Insert Table 6 about here===




                                               32
5.         Empirical Analysis of Land Auctions in Eight Major Cities


5.1        Hedonic Model of Constant Quality Price Index


Our first objective is to understand whether changes in land parcel prices are related

to the stimulation packages.           To compare the price of heterogeneous land parcels,

we use a pooled hedonic land pricing model.                  The dependent variable is transaction

price for each parcel in the logarithmic form (in constant 2003 RMB) measured as

the price per square meter of the permitted housing floor space.22                     To control for

quality variation, we include the distance to the city center (D_CENTER), the

permitted building density expressed as permitted floor space over land area

(DENSITY), and requirements to provide public housing units on the parcel

(SHARE_PH).         We expect all three to correlate negatively with a parcel's price.              We

also control for site quality at delivery, measured by whether the land is leveled or

not (LANDLEVEL), and expect higher prices for leveled land.                 We also control for the

parcel's size (SIZE), requirement to build public utilities such as school or hospital on

the parcel (PUBLIC), and the form of the transaction (AUCTION for one-stage auction

and BIDDING for a bidding process, with two-stage auctions as the left-out category).

All regressions include city and quarter fixed effects.

           Table 7 reports the results of our basic hedonic model, estimated by OLS

(column 1), sandwich estimator allowing for clustering by city (White 1980; column

2), and random effect regression (column 3), respectively.


22
      Note that in China, land parcels of residential use are always priced in the floor area of housing
     permitted to be built on the parcel, instead of being priced in terms of the land area.
                                                        33
       The coefficients of the controls are broadly consistent with our expectations.

Land parcels nearer city centres and with lower building densities fetch higher prices

per square meter of permitted floor area; though parcels levelled before delivery

fetch insignificantly higher prices and parcels with public housing requirements fetch

insignificantly lower prices.    The method of sale controls associate one-stage

auctions with higher prices, two-stage auctions with intermediate prices, and the

bidding process with lower prices.



       ===Insert Table 7 about here===



       The coefficients on the quarterly time dummies from column 2 of Table 7 are

plotted in Figure 8; and can be interpreted as a real constant quality residential land

price index for these cities.   The figure shows land prices surging in 2009 Q2 and

rising until they peaked at the end of 2009.       Overall, the index almost doubled

(97.4%) from 2009 Q1 to 2009 Q4; corresponding neatly to the surge in lending to

SOEs, and especially C-SOEs that Figure 4 shows beginning in 2009 Q1.



       ===Insert Figure 8 about here===



       A near doubling of land price within one year is extraordinary by any

reasonable standards.     Fundamentals explanations are always possible if one is

flexible enough with assumptions.      For example, wild swings in rational agents'

expectations due to radical shifts in political or economic forecasts, demand,


                                              34
regulation, savings behavior, might do the trick.    However, the abrupt prominence

of C-SOE developers as land prices surged is surely strong circumstantial evidence

consistent with our thesis.




5.2     Estimating the Price Effect of SOE Developers


       We further explore the linkage between SOE participation in the real estate

sector and land parcel prices by including buyer characteristics in our regressions.

These include indicator variables for buyers controlled by C-SOEs and L-SOEs, CSOE

and LSOE, respectively; an indicator variable set to one if the buyer is a listed firm,

LISTED; and a set of indicator variables corresponding to the grade the government

assigns the developer, GRADE1 through GRADE5 in descending order of quality.

Table 8 reports the results.    Again, like in Table 7, all the three estimators are

applied and the results are consistent.    The indicator variables for C-SOE and L-SOE

buyers, especially the former, attract significantly positive coefficients, implying that

they offer inexplicably (in terms of the control variables) high prices for land parcels.

The robust clustered sandwich estimator regressions (column2) show C-SOEs and

L-SOEs paying 16% and 11% more, respectively, than non-SOE buyers for land parcels

that are otherwise identical in terms of the characteristics we observe.



       ===Insert Table 8 about here===




                                               35
       These price premiums at least partially explain the surge we observe in

residential land prices.   Figure 9 provides the constant quality prices of different

buyer groups.    The figure shows the C-SOE group's constant price index surges in

2009 Q1, followed by the other groups’ price indices, and the C-SOEs' index

persistently exceeds those of others after 2009 Q1.       This clearly suggests that the

C-SOEs' participation in land lease markets plays a role in the rise of land prices in

China from 2009 Q1 through the end of our sample. Our estimate is likely

conservative, for in a China without C-SOE bids, other developers bids would surely

be lower than those we observe.



       ===== Insert Figure 9 about here =====



5.3    Robustness


Other factors might contribute to C-SOE real estate developers' high bids.          First,

C-SOEs' connections have surely long provided privileged access to government

funds, loans from SOE banks, etc. (Allen, Qian, and Qian, 2005); which would cut

their costs of capital and justify their higher bids for land parcels.    Second C-SOEs'

connections might likewise provide speedier permit approval, utility access, and so

on; which would make real estate developments more profitable for C-SOEs, again

justifying their paying higher prices for land parcels.

       However, neither alternative fully explains our findings.         C-SOEs' superior

connections have long been a fixture of Chinese business (McGregor 2010).          Figure

9 shows that C-SOEs only began paying prices substantially higher than those paid by
                                                36
other buyers when the stimulus program began.        Before that, C-SOEs' prices were

sometimes slightly above or below those paid by other buyers.         Table 9 confirms

that this effect is statistically significant: the gap between C-SOEs' bids and those by

other buyers became significantly elevated after the first quarter of 2009, when the

macroeconomic stimulus began.        Moreover, locally-controlled SOEs should also

have connections, especially with the local authorities regulating real estate

developments.     Had connections suddenly become a major advantage to SOE real

estate developers in 2009, L-SOEs should have responded too; but Table 9 shows no

such effect.



        ===== Insert Table 9 about here =====



         Conceivably, the value of SOEs' connections might have lain dormant until

2008, when the C-SOEs were suddenly inundated with unprecedented quantities of

cheap loans, and pressured to invest it quickly.   Location is important in real estate,

and SOE executives' connections are likely to be especially useful in the cities that

host their headquarters.    Indeed, access to local networks is thought important in

explaining agglomeration in developed economies (Ellison and Glaeser, 1999).

Table 10 investigates this by including interactions to see if C-SOEs pay more for land

nearer their headquarters.      This is observed, but the stimulus effect remains

significant.   Thus, Table 10 concedes that connections may indeed help C-SOE land

developers, but reaffirms a transmission role for C-SOEs in the macroeconomic

stimulus.
                                              37
           ==== Table 10 about here =====



           Another possibility is that we control imperfectly for land parcel quality, and

C-SOEs might be disproportionately purchasing higher quality land after 2008.         We

therefore consider additional variables in our hedonic regressions.               Beijing,

Shenzhen, Shanghai, Tianjin, and Wuhan have subways, so we introduce the

logarithm of the distance to the nearest subway station as another quality measure

and rerun our regressions using only data from these five cities.           This exercise

generates qualitatively similar results to those shown in the tables, by which we

mean identical patterns of signs and significance levels and roughly comparable

coefficient magnitudes.

           Another approach to capture the effects of missing hedonic factors is to

directly introduce the price of comparable newly-built housing units.       We therefore

match each land transactions in Beijing with the price of newly completed residential

housing no more than five kilometers away and sold no more than twelve months

earlier.     This lets us match each of 296 land transactions to one or more of 907

completed residential housing developments.           For each transaction, we take the

average sale price during the previous month of housing units in the matched

completed developments, weighted by the reciprocal of the distance.             We then

include this "neighborhood price" as an additional right-hand side variable.         This

exercise also yields qualitatively similar results to those shown.




                                                 38
6.        Macroeconomic Impact of C-SOE Land Transactions


For SOEs to constitute a macroeconomic policy channel, their real estate

investments and the associated surge in land prices must have a macroeconomic

impact.     Two direct effects contribute to GDP.

        First, by increasing the overall value of land transactions, C-SOEs directly

elevate aggregate investment and therefore GDP.                To assess the importance of the

real estate related sectors to GDP, we calculate what GDP growth would have been

without the real estate related sectors.23            For example, China's 2009 GDP growth

was 9.3%, but would have been only 8.3% without real estate related sectors.                        In

other words, the real estate related sectors were responsible for roughly 11% of

total GDP growth.        Figure 10 graphs this fraction by year, and shows the real estate

related sectors' contribution to GDP growth peaking in 2009.



        ===Insert Figure 10 about here===



        Second, revenue from land lease sales accrues to Chinese government.                        In

2009 total government spending grew by 23%, from RMB 6.26 trillion in 2008 to

RMB 7.63 trillion in 2009; while total budgetary government revenues rose only 11.7%

to RMB 6.85 trillion.       This left Chinese government with an overall deficit of RMB

0.78 trillion, 6.2 times as much as that in 2008.24          Governments' revenues from land

sales – RMB 1.39 trillion in 2009, and up over 60% from the previous year, was thus

23
   In the calculations, we define "real estate related sectors" as the aggregate of the real estate and
construction industries.
24
   Source: National Bureau of Statistics, China.
                                                      39
an important factor in preventing a major contraction in government spending.25

Clearly, the hike in land auction income played a critical role in financing the fiscal

stimulation policies for Chinese government.26

        However, sustainably high GDP growth in the long run depends on the

efficiency of resource allocation.        Wu, Gyourko and Deng (2010) argue that Chinese

land prices were already above fundamental values in some cities, notably Beijing,

prior to the stimulus package, and that 2009 and early 2010 saw increasingly

effervescent land prices.            While this might increase nominal wealth for

homeowners, and thus encourage them to increase consumption; it burdens others

with larger interest payments, decreasing their quality of life.             Moreover, as recent

American macroeconomic events make clear, the implosion of a real estate price

bubble decreases homeowners' wealth significantly, reduces their consumption,

leaves people burdened with large debts, and leaves the economy with a surfeit of

unprofitable housing developments.            If China's macroeconomic stimulus via its SOE

channel is merely replicating this effect, a truly epic tale of short-term gain for

long-term pain may be unfolding.




25
   Source: Soufun Database.
26
   More precisely, land auction income is especially important for financing local government since in
China all land revenues accrue to local governments. In 2009 the overall deficit at local government
level reached RMB2.8 trillion.
                                                      40
7.     Conclusion


China's macroeconomic stimulus had an extraordinarily large and rapid effect.

This reflects the central government's continued direct controls over much of the

economy.    The central government ordered its SOE banks to lend, and they lent;

but primarily to the central government's nonfinancial SOEs.            The central

government ordered its nonfinancial SOEs to invest, and they invested; but primarily

in real estate.    This increased GDP substantially and rapidly in 2009, effectively

countering the effects of the global financial crisis that affected many other

countries that year.

       However, the success of this stimulus may well disguise a curse. The

economic logic behind a monetary stimulation is to keep credit flowing to

economically viable firms by countering banks' tendency to tighten credit constraints

during a downturn.      The Chinese stimulus, in contrast, strengthened the flow of

credit into already cash-flush C-SOEs, which were almost certainly not credit

constrained at the time.

       Two conclusions follow.      First, China remains fundamentally a command

and control economy, despite its seemingly rapid embrace of markets.      Compared

with most developed economies and most other emerging economies, the Chinese

economy remains subject to remarkably sweeping direct control by the central

government.       While other governments must rely on "jawboning" and interest rate

signals to stimulate lending and investment, China's government can simply decree

that its SOEs affect a macroeconomic stimulus.     The "Chinese model" of economic
                                              41
development, with the Communist Party retaining the economy's commanding

heights, has generated three decades of rapid growth.            To the extent that such

"ordered up" lending and investment artificially accelerated real estate investment

and elevated real estate prices, above fundamentals, a major misallocation of the

economy's resources may have ensued.           This may brake future growth.

           Second, the macroeconomic effectiveness of expansionary fiscal and

monetary policies depend, in the long run, on sustained microeconomic efficiency.

The microeconomic implications of China's "ordered up" macroeconomic stimulus

are unclear, but our first pass over the figures suggests at least the possibility of an

expanding housing bubble in 2009 and 2010.

           A sharp drop in housing prices in China is unlikely to trigger a financial crisis

of the sort America recently experienced.          This is because the C-SOE banks that

abruptly upped their lending and the nonfinancial C-SOEs that recycled those loans

into real estate remain cash flush.         A collapse in land prices would harm their

balance sheets, but is unlikely to damage them severely.          In addition, widespread

mortgage defaults by home buyers are unlikely because required down-payments

ranged from thirty to forty percent.         Homeowners might take capital losses, but

would not profit from abandoning their investments unless the prices collapsed

utterly.     Finally, home ownership in China opens access to social benefits, such as

schools, and contributes to one's social status.       Such considerations make mortgage

defaults costly, even if the mortgage is somewhat "under-water" – that is, even if

property values fall below outstanding mortgage debts.

                                                  42
       Nonetheless, a sharp decline in house price would mean a sharp decline in

the wealth of many Chinese people.     Chinese still have access to only a very limited

range of saving and investment instruments: essentially only bank accounts,

domestic stocks, and real estate.    By storing much of their wealth in real estate,

many Chinese households have become house price dependent.           While an abrupt

collapse in house price would likely not irreparably damage C-SOE banks or

nonfinancial C-SOEs with real estate operations, it would almost surely substantially

decrease household wealth.    This negative wealth effect could become a sustained

drag on aggregate demand, possibly inflicting wore long-run damage on the Chinese

economy that the recent crisis inflicted on the U.S. economy.




                                             43
References

Allen, Franklin, Jun Qian and Meijun Qian. "Law, Finance, and Economic Growth in
    China," Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 77, No. 1 (July 2005): 57-116.
Allen, Franklin, Jun Qian and Meijun Qian. "China's Financial System: Past, Present,
    and Future," in China's Great Economic Transformation, edited by Brandt, Loren
    and Thomas Rawski, Cambridge University Press, 2008.
Bai, Chong-En, David Li, Zhigang Tao and Yijiang Wang. "A Multitask Theory of State
     Enterprise Reform," Journal of Comparative Economics, Vol.28, No.4 (Dec 2000):
     716-738.
Bai, Chong-En and Lixin Colin Xu. "Incentives for CEOs with Multitasks: Evidence from
     Chinese State-owned Enterprises," Journal of Comparative Economics, Vol.33,
     No.3 (Sep 2005): 517-539.
Bai, Chong-En, Jiangyong Lu and Zhigang Tao. "The Multitask Theory of State
    Enterprise Reform: Empirical Evidence from China," American Economic Review,
    Vol.96, No.2 (May 2006): 353-357.
Barro, Robert and Charles Redlick. "Macroeconomic Effect from Government
    Purchases and Taxes," NBER Working Paper No. 15369, September 2009.
Blandchard, Oliver and Roberto Perotti. "An Empirical Characterization of the
    Dynamic Effects of Changes in Government Spending and Taxes on Output,"
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 117, No. 4 (November 2002): 1329-1368.
Brandt, Loren, Thomas Rawski and John Sutton. "China's Industrial Development," in
    China's Great Economic Transformation, edited by Brandt, Loren and Thomas
    Rawski, Cambridge University Press, 2008.
Broadman, Harry. "The Business(es) of the Chinese State," World Economy, Vol. 24,
    No. 7 (2001): 849–875.
Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum and Jonas Fisher. "Fiscal Shocks and their
    Consequences," Journal of Economic Theory, Vol. 115, No. 1 (March 2004):
    89-117.
Cai, Hongbin, Vernon Henderson and Qinghua Zhang. "China's Land Market Auctions:
     Evidence of Corruption," NBER Working Paper 15067, 2009.
Chiu, Becky and Mervyn Lewis. Reforming China's State-Owned Enterprises and
    Banks. Edward Elgar Publishing Ltd. 2006.
Edelberg, Wendy, Martin Eichenbaum and Jonas Fisher. "Understanding the Effects
    of a Shock to Government Purchases," Review of Economic Dynamics, Vol. 2, No.
    1 (January 1999): 166-206.
Ellison, Glenn and Edward Glaser. "The Geographic Concentration of Industry: Does
     Natural Advantage Explain Agglomeration?" American Economic Review, Vol. 89,
     No. 2 (1999): 311-316.
                                             44
Feldstein, Martin. "Rethinking the Role of Fiscal Policy," American Economic Review,
    Vol. 99, No. 2 (2009): 556-559.
Firth, Michael, Peter Fung and Oliver Rui. "Firm Performance, Governance Structure,
     and Top Management Turnover in a Transitional Economy," Journal of
     Management Studies, Vol.43, No.6 (Sep 2006): 1289-1330.
Freedman, Charles, Michael Kumhof, Douglas Laxton, Dirk Muir and Susanna
    Mursula. "Fiscal Stimulus to the Rescue? Short-Run Benefits and Potential
    Long-Run Costs of Fiscal Deficits," IMF Working Paper No. WP/09/255,
    November 2009.
Gali, Jordi, David Lopez-Salido and Javier Valles. "Understanding the Effects of
     Government Spending on Consumption," Journal of European Economic
     Association, Vol. 5, No. 1 (March 2007): 227-270.
Huang, Yasheng. "Central-Local Relations in China During the Reform Era: The
   Economic and Institutional Dimensions," World Development, Vol. 24, No. 4
   (April 1996): 655-672.
IMF, "The Size of the Fiscal Expansions: An Analyses for the Largest Countries," (Feb,
    2009), imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2009/020109.pdf.
Kato, Takao and Cheryl Long. "CEO Turnover, Firm Performance, and Enterprise
    Reform in China: Evidence from Micro Data," Journal of Comparative Economics,
    Vol.34, No.4 (Dec 2006): 796-817.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-De-Silanes and Andrei Shleifer. "Corporate
   Ownership Around the World," Journal of Finance, Vol. 54, No. 2 (April 1999):
   471–517.
Lin, Yifu, Fang Cai and Zhou Li. "Competition, Policy Burdens, and State-Owned
     Enterprise Reform," American Economic Review, Vol. 88, No. 2 (May 1998):
     422-427.
Lin, Yifu and Guofu Tan. "Policy Burdens, Accountability, and the Soft Budget
     Constraint," American Economic Review, Vol. 89, No. 2 (May 1999): 426-431.
Lin, Yifu and Zhiyun Li. "Policy Burden, Privatization and Soft Budget Constraint,"
     Journal of Comparative Economics, Vol. 36, No. 1 (March 2008): 90-102.
Mcgregor, Richard. The Party: The Secret World of China's Communist Rulers.
   HarperCollins, 2010.
Morck, Randall, David Stangeland and Bernard Yeung. "Inherited Wealth, Corporate
   Control, and Economic Growth," in Concentrated Corporate Ownership, edited
   by Morck, Randall, The University of Chicago Press, 2000.
Pistor, Katharina. "Banking Reforms and Bank Bail Outs in the Chinese Mirror," in
     China’s Transition to a Market Economy, edited by Joseph Stiglitz, Oxford
     University Press, 2010.


                                             45
Prasad, Eswar and Isaac Sorkin. "Assessing the G-20 Economic Stimulus Plans: A
    Deeper Look," Reports by Brookings Institute (March, 2009),
    http://www.brookings.edu/articles/2009/03_g20_stimulus_prasad.aspx.
Qian, Yingyi. "The Process of China's Market Transitions: Evolutionary, Historical and
    Comparative Perspective," Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics,
    Vol. 156, No. 1 (2000): 151–171.
Ramey, Valerie. "Identifying Government Spending Shocks: It's All in the Timing,"
   NBER Working Paper No. 15464, October 2009.
Rotemberg, Julio and Michael Woodford. "Oligopolistic Pricing and the Effects of
    Aggregate Demand on Economic Activity," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 100,
    No. 6 (1992): 1153-1297.
Shih, Victor C. Factions and Finance in China: Elite Conflict and Inflation, Cambridge
    University Press, 2008.
Steinfeld, Edward. Forging Reform in China: The Fate of State-Owned Industry,
    Cambridge University Press, 1998.
White, Halbert. "A Heteroskedasticity-consistent Covariance Matrix Estimator and a
   Direct Test for Heteroskedasticity," Econometrica, Vol 48, No. 4 (May 1980):
   817–838.
Wu, Jing, Joseph Gyourko and Yongheng Deng. "Evaluating Conditions in Major
   Chinese Housing Markets," NBER Working Paper No. 16189, July 2010.
Zhao, Zhenyu, Zhishu Yang, Chong-En Bai. "The Empirical Study of the Effect on the
    Top Management Turnover in China's Listed Companies." Journal of Finance
    Research, (Aug 2007): 76-89. (In Chinese)




                                             46
Figure 1: Annualized Real Growth Rate of M2 and Loan Balances

  35%
                                           M2                   Total Loan Balance
  30%


  25%


  20%


  15%


  10%


   5%
         01Q1
                   01Q3
                             02Q1
                                      02Q3
                                                03Q1
                                                        03Q3
                                                               04Q1
                                                                      04Q3
                                                                             05Q1
                                                                                     05Q3
                                                                                              06Q1
                                                                                                        06Q3
                                                                                                                  07Q1
                                                                                                                           07Q3
                                                                                                                                   08Q1
                                                                                                                                           08Q3
                                                                                                                                                  09Q1
                                                                                                                                                         09Q3
                                                                                                                                                                10Q1
Source: People's Bank of China (the central bank of China).




Figure 2: Annualized Real Growth Rate of Investment in Fixed Assets
   40%


   35%


   30%


   25%


   20%


   15%
            06Q1

                          06Q2

                                    06Q3

                                             06Q4

                                                       07Q1

                                                               07Q2

                                                                      07Q3

                                                                              07Q4

                                                                                       08Q1

                                                                                                 08Q2

                                                                                                               08Q3

                                                                                                                         08Q4

                                                                                                                                  09Q1

                                                                                                                                          09Q2

                                                                                                                                                  09Q3

                                                                                                                                                         09Q4

                                                                                                                                                                 10Q1




Source: National Bureau of Statistics, China.




                                                                                       47
Figure 3: Structure of SASAC Institutions
China's roughly 300 SASACs include the SASAC of the State Council, which
supervises SOEs controlled by the national government; about 30 province-level
SASACs, which supervise provincially-controlled SOEs; and numerous municipal
SASACs, which supervise locally-controlled SOEs.


                                      People of China



                                 National Peoples’ Congress



                                       State Council




                                                                 Local
                    Ministries            SASAC
                                                               Government


                                                              Local SASAC



                                        Central SOE            Local SOE


                                       Subsidiaries or        Subsidiaries or
                                        Departments            Departments




                                                  48
Figure 4: Loan Balance Increments and Bankers' Confidence Index
  Trillion Yuan RMB                                                                                                             Bankers' Confidence Index
 5.0                                                                                                                                         80

 4.5                                                                                                                                                              Others
                                                                                                                                                        70
 4.0
                                                                                                                                                        60
 3.5                                                                                                                                                              Joint-Stock
                                                                                                                                                        50        Commercial
 3.0
                                                                                                                                                                  Banks
 2.5                                                                                                                                                    40
                                                                                                                                                                  State-Owned
 2.0                                                                                                                                                              Commercial
                                                                                                                                                        30        Banks
 1.5
                                                                                                                                                        20        Policy Banks
 1.0
                                                                                                                                                        10
 0.5
                                                                                                                                                                  Bankers'
 0.0                                                                                                                                                    0         Confidence
           2007Q1

                      2007Q2

                                  2007Q3

                                            2007Q4

                                                            2008Q1

                                                                      2008Q2

                                                                                 2008Q3

                                                                                             2008Q4

                                                                                                       2009Q1

                                                                                                                       2009Q2

                                                                                                                                 2009Q3

                                                                                                                                            2009Q4
                                                                                                                                                                  Index



Source: People's Bank of China (the central bank in China).


Figure 5: Quarterly Performance of SOEs

 Profit
                                                                                                                                                        ROS
 (trillion yuan RMB)
  500                                                                                                                                                       10%
  450                                                                                                                                                       9%
  400                                                                                                                                                       8%
  350                                                                                                                                                       7%     Profit

  300                                                                                                                                                       6%
  250                                                                                                                                                       5%
  200                                                                                                                                                       4%     ROS
  150                                                                                                                                                       3%
  100                                                                                                                                                       2%
   50                                                                                                                                                       1%
       0                                                                                                                                                    0%
                                                                                                                                 09Q3
           06Q1
                    06Q2
                           06Q3
                                   06Q4
                                           07Q1
                                                     07Q2
                                                               07Q3
                                                                      07Q4
                                                                               08Q1
                                                                                      08Q2
                                                                                              08Q3
                                                                                                      08Q4
                                                                                                                09Q1
                                                                                                                          09Q2


                                                                                                                                          09Q4
                                                                                                                                                 10Q1




Source: Ministry of Finance, China.

                                                                                                       49
Figure 6: Annualized Real Growth Rate of Fixed Asset Investment

              and Entrepreneurs' Confidence

 Annualized Real                                                              Entrepreneurs'
 Growth Rate of                                                              Confidence Index
   Investment
 60%                                                                                    160

                                                                                        140
 50%
                                                                                        120
 40%
                                                                                        100

 30%                                                                                    80

                                                                                        60
 20%
                                                                                        40
 10%
                                                                                        20

  0%                                                                                    0
       05Q1    05Q3    06Q1    06Q3    07Q1     07Q3   08Q1   08Q3    09Q1    09Q3

                SOE            Non-SOE             Entrepreneurs' Confidence Index

Source: National Bureau of Statistics, China.




                                                  50
Figure 7: Market Share of the Three Categories of Buyers
Categories are central government-controlled state-owned enterprise (CSOE),
lower-level government-controlled state-owned enterprises (LSOE), and
enterprises not designated as controlled by a government (NSOE).

(A) Market Share by Total Floor Area
   100%
    90%
    80%
    70%
    60%
                                                                             NSOE
    50%
                                                                             LSOE
    40%
    30%                                                                      CSOE
    20%
    10%
     0%
            2003     2004       2005   2006   2007   2008   2009   2010(1)



(B) Market Share by Total Value

   100%
    90%
    80%
    70%
    60%
                                                                             NSOE
    50%
                                                                             LSOE
    40%
    30%                                                                      CSOE
    20%
    10%
     0%
            2003     2004       2005   2006   2007   2008   2009   2010(1)

Source: Authors' calculation.




                                                51
            100
                  150
                        200
                              250
                                    300
                                          350
                                                400
                                                      450
                                                            500
                                                                  550
     03Q1                                                               600
                                                                              2003 Q1=100


     03Q2
     03Q3
     03Q4
     04Q1
     04Q2
     04Q3
     04Q4
     05Q1
     05Q2
     05Q3
     05Q4
     06Q1
     06Q2
     06Q3




52
     06Q4
     07Q1
     07Q2
     07Q3
     07Q4
     08Q1
     08Q2
     08Q3
     08Q4
     09Q1
     09Q2
                                                                                            Figure 8: Constant Quality Index of Residential Land Price Index




     09Q3
     09Q4
     10Q1
Figure 9: Constant Quality Residential Land Prices Paid, by Buyer Type
A model similar with that in Table 8 is estimated. Dependant variable is log of
land price per square meter of permitted housing floor area. The C-SOE and
L-SOE dummies are introduced as cross terms with time dummies. Other
right-hand-side variables are consistent with those in Table 8. A bundle of typical
land parcel attributes are then adopted to predict the constant quality land price
for each buyer type.

                                     12000


                                                                 C-SOE
                                     10000
Constant Quality Price in RMB / m2




                                                                 L-SOE
                                      8000

                                                                 N-SOE

                                      6000



                                      4000



                                      2000



                                         0
                                                                        2004Q3
                                             2003Q1

                                                      2003Q3

                                                               2004Q1



                                                                                 2005Q1

                                                                                          2005Q3

                                                                                                   2006Q1

                                                                                                              2006Q3

                                                                                                                       2007Q1

                                                                                                                                2007Q3

                                                                                                                                         2008Q1

                                                                                                                                                  2008Q3

                                                                                                                                                           2009Q1

                                                                                                                                                                    2009Q3

                                                                                                                                                                             2010Q1




                                                                                                            53
Figure 10: Contribution of Real Estate Related Sectors to GDP Growth
   12%


   10%


    8%


    6%


    4%


    2%


    0%
          1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009

Source: Authors' calculation based on statistics reported by National Bureau of Statistics.




                                                  54
Table 1: Thousands of Enterprises, by Control Category

                                                2001                2004                2008

Domestic- Funded Enterprises

     State Owned Enterprises                       369                 192                  156

     Collective Enterprises                        858                 456                  260

     Other Joint-Stock Enterprises                 300                 406                  638

     Private Enterprises                          1324                 1982                 3596

     Other Types                                       37                  62               124

Foreign-Funded Enterprise                          139                 152                  186

                   Total                          3027                 3250                 4960
Note: According to the definition of National Bureau of Statistics, China, "state owned
enterprises" refer to enterprises which the State (i.e., certain SASAC or SOE) is the only
owner or majority shareholder (with more than 50% of share); "collective enterprises" refer
to enterprises jointed-owned by a certain group of people (such as village or neighborhood);
"other joint-stock enterprises" refer to joint-stock enterprises without any single SASAC or
SOE as the dominant shareholder; "private enterprises" refer to enterprises owned by
certain person; and "foreign-funded enterprises" refer to enterprises owned or controlled by
persons or companies outside mainland China.
Source: National Bureau of Statistics, China.




Table 2: Asset Shares of Various Enterprises in 2008

                                                         Asset                  Proportion in
                                                 (trillion yuan RMB)            Total Volume
 Domestic- Funded Enterprises

       State Owned Enterprises                               63.5                  30.53%

       Collective Enterprises                                 9.0                   4.33%

       Other Joint-Stock Enterprises                         86.9                  41.78%

       Private Enterprises                                   25.7                  12.36%

       Other Types                                            1.4                   0.67%

 Foreign-Funded Enterprise                                   21.5                  10.34%

                       Total                                208.0                 100.00%

Source: National Bureau of Statistics, China.

                                                  55
Table 3: Banking Financial Institutions at the End of 2009

                                                                               Asset
                                                      Number
                                                                         (trillion RMB)
                                               Amount      Share       Amount      Share

Policy Banks                                          3     0.05%         6.95     8.63%

State-Owned Commercial Banks                          4     0.07%        39.04    48.47%

Joint-Stock Commercial Banks

     State as Largest Share Holder                   11     0.20%        12.59    15.63%

     Others                                           2     0.04%         2.01     2.50%

Others

     City Commercial Banks and Credit Union      158        2.80%         5.71     7.09%
     Rural Commercial Banks and Credit Union    5241       93.02%         8.64    10.73%

     Postal Savings Bank                              1     0.02%         2.70     3.35%

     Foreign Banks                                   32     0.57%         1.35     1.68%

     Non-Bank Institutions                       182        3.23%         1.55     1.92%

                     Total                      5634      100.00%        80.53   100.00%

Note: See the text for the full list of the four groups of banks.
Source: People's Bank of China; China Banking Regulatory Commission.




                                                56
Table 4: Geographic Distribution of Land Transactions

                                        Floor Area               Total Price                Average Price
     City             Deals
                                      (million sq.m.)       (billion yuan RMB)          (2003 yuan per sq.m.)
    Beijing              309               44.31                  186.10                       4200
   Chengdu               710              113.58                  126.22                       1111
  Hangzhou               704               60.89                  214.86                       3529
   Shanghai              401               48.22                  167.99                       3484
   Shenzhen              115               13.89                    35.02                      2521
    Tianjin              449              105.60                  128.00                       1212
    Wuhan                637               84.51                  103.81                       1228
     Xian                217               32.89                    23.86                        725
     Total              3542              503.88                  985.87                       1957




Table 5: Definition and Descriptive Statistics of Variables
 Variable                        Definition                                 Mean                 Std. Dev.
              Land parcel transaction price (constant 2003
   LP         RMB per square meter of floor area of                     2145.21                 2838.51
              housing permitted to build on the parcel).
D_CENTER      Distance to the city center; in kilometers.                   25.61                 23.17
 DENSITY      Ratio of floor area to land area.                                2.54                 1.53
              Share of public housing required in the total
RATIO_PH                                                                       0.0026               0.051
              floor area of the parcel.
              The parcel is leveled when delivered to the
LANDLEVEL                                                                      0.57                 0.50
              buyer or not; 1=yes, 0=o/w.
              Floor area permitted to build on the parcel; in
  SIZE                                                                         0.14                 0.25
              million square meters.
              Part of the parcel is designated for public use
 PUBLIC                                                                        0.045                0.21
              or not; 1=yes, 0=o/w.
              The parcel is transacted by one-stage auction
AUCTION                                                                        0.24                 0.43
              or not; 1=yes, 0=o/w.
              The parcel is transacted by bidding or not;
 BIDDING                                                                       0.097                0.30
              1=yes, 0=o/w.
              The parcel is purchased by a C-SOE developer
  CSOE                                                                         0.080                0.27
              or not; 1=yes, 0=o/w.
              The parcel is purchased by an L-SOE developer
  LSOE                                                                         0.20                 0.40
              or not; 1=yes, 0=o/w.
              The parcel is purchased by a listed company or
 LISTED                                                                        0.24                 0.43
              not; 1=yes, 0=o/w.



                                                            57
Table 6: C-SOE Developers' Share in Land Market (by Total Value)
    City               2003-2008                   2009-2010(1)
   Beijing              24.33%                       53.53%
  Chengdu               16.01%                       26.31%
  Hangzhou               8.24%                        6.68%
  Shanghai              19.85%                       29.97%
  Shenzhen              31.55%                        6.76%
   Tianjin               9.63%                       17.19%
   Wuhan                19.24%                       23.37%
    Xian                 8.91%                       12.98%




                                     58
Table 7: Basic Hedonic Model of Land Parcels' Price
Sample is all land transactions from the first quarter of 2003 to the first quarter of
2010 in eight major cities, as described in Table 4. Dependant variable is the
natural log of land price per square meter of permitted housing floor area.
Right-hand-side variables as defined in Table 5. Numbers in parentheses are
t-ratios (column 1), or robust t-ratios adjusted for city-level clustering (column 2),
or t-ratios allowing for random effects (column 3).

                                     (1)                               (2)                               (3)
                                    OLS                       Clustered by City                  Random Effects
log(D_CENTER)             -0.77         (-51.05)***         -0.77           (-24.70)***      -0.77            (-51.27)***
DENSITY                   -0.12         (-12.55)***         -0.12             (-4.85)***     -0.12            (-12.66)***
SHARE_PH                  -0.11            (-0.44)          -0.11             (-0.82)        -0.10              (-0.43)
LANDLEVEL                  0.072           (1.18)            0.072            (0.63)          0.074             (1.24)
SIZE                      -0.11            (-2.24)**        -0.11             (-2.15)**      -0.11              (-2.27)**
PUBLIC                     0.17            (2.51)**          0.17             (2.80)***       0.17              (2.58)**
AUCTION                    0.29            (6.39)***         0.29             (4.50)***       0.29              (6.38)***
BIDDING                   -0.088           (-1.69)*         -0.088            (-0.88)        -0.087             (-1.68)*
  City Dummies                       YES                               YES                              NO
 Time Dummies                        YES                               YES                              YES
   Adjusted R2                      0.99                               0.99                               -
Notes: (1) Coefficients of city and time fixed effects are not show.    .
       (2) Number of observations is 3478.
       (3) ***: significant at the 1% level; **: significant at the 5% level;*: significant at the 10% level.




                                                                59
Table 8: Effect of Buyers' Type on Land Parcels' Price
Sample is all land transactions from the first quarter of 2003 to the first quarter of
2010 in eight major cities, as described in Table 4. Dependant variable is the
natural log of land price per square meter of permitted housing floor area.
Right-hand-side variables as defined in Table 5. Numbers in parentheses are
t-ratios (column 1), or robust t-ratios adjusted for city-level clustering (column 2),
or t-ratios allowing for random effects (column 3).

                                             (1)                               (2)                           (3)
                                            OLS                        Clustered by City              Random Effects
CSOE                               0.16            (3.16)***        0.16              (2.79)***     0.16           (3.18)***
LSOE                               0.11            (3.56)***        0.11              (2.96)***     0.11           (3.59)***
log(D_CENTER)                     -0.71         (-46.82)***        -0.71         (-22.53)***       -0.71          (-47.05)***
DENSITY                           -0.10         (-10.95)***        -0.10             (-4.33)***    -0.10          (-11.06)***
SHARE_PH                          -0.22            (-0.97)         -0.22             (-2.00)**     -0.22           (-0.96)
LANDLEVEL                          0.070           (1.19)           0.070            (0.68)         0.073          (1.25)
SIZE                              -0.21            (-4.18)***      -0.21             (-3.52)***    -0.21           (-4.23)***
PUBLIC                             0.11            (1.74)*          0.11              (1.82)*       0.12           (1.81)*
AUCTION                            0.28            (6.29)***        0.28              (4.68)***     0.27           (6.29)***
BIDDING                           -0.17            (-3.31)***      -0.17             (-1.81)*      -0.17           (-3.32)***
LISTED                             0.14            (4.33)***        0.14              (2.82)***     0.14           (4.37)***
       City Dummies                          YES                               YES                           NO
    Time Dummies                             YES                               YES                           YES
   Developer Grade
                                             YES                               YES                           YES
         Dummies
       Adjusted R2                          0.99                               0.99                           -
Notes: (1) Coefficients of city and time fixed effects are not show.       .
         (2) Number of observations is 3478.
         (3) ***: significant at the 1% level; **: significant at the 5% level;*: significant at the 10% level.




                                                                  60
Table 9.          Timing of C-SOE Developer Price Effect
Sample is all land transactions from the first quarter of 2003 to the first quarter of
2010 in eight major cities, as described in Table 4. Dependant variable is the
natural log of land price per square meter of permitted housing floor area.
STIMULUS is an indicator variable set to zero before the first quarter of 2009 and to
one in that quarter and thereafter. Other right-hand-side variables as defined in
Table 5. Numbers in parentheses are robust t-ratios adjusted for city-level
clustering.

                                           (1)                                (2)                           (2)
CSOE                              0.0908          (1.34)          0.0506            (0.83)        0.157           (2.79)***
CSOE interacted with:
    STIMULUS                      0.196           (2.46)**        0.190             (2.50)**
LSOE                              0.117           (2.19)**                                        0.122           (2.33)**
LSOE interacted with:
    STIMULUS                    -0.00880         (-0.14)                                         -0.0290          (-0.49)
log(D_CENTER)                    -0.707          (-22.6)***      -0.709             (-22.7)***   -0.708           (-22.5)***
DENSITY                          -0.104          (-4.35)***      -0.105             (-4.37)***   -0.104           (-4.33)***
SHARE_PH                         -0.269          (-2.40)**       -0.266             (-2.51)**    -0.226           (-1.99)*
LANDLEVEL                         0.0698          (0.68)          0.0703            (0.68)        0.0692          (0.68)
SIZE                             -0.211          (-3.57)***      -0.197             (-3.24)***   -0.209           (-3.50)***
PUBLIC                            0.120           (1.92)*         0.128             (2.06)**      0.116           (1.85)*
AUCTION                           0.274           (4.69)***       0.273             (4.63)***     0.275           (4.69)***
BIDDING                          -0.167          (-1.78)*        -0.159             (-1.70)*     -0.170           (-1.81)*
LISTED                            0.141           (2.80)***       0.154             (3.13)***     0.142           (2.83)***
       City Dummies                        YES                                YES                          YES
   Time Dummies                            YES                                YES                          YES
  Developer Grade
                                           YES                                YES                          YES
        Dummies
       Adjusted R2                         0.99                            0.99                            0.99
Notes: (1) Coefficients of city and time fixed effects are not show.      .
         (2) Number of observations is 3478.
         (3) ***: significant at the 1% level; **: significant at the 5% level;*: significant at the 10% level.




                                                                  61
Table 10.           Importance of Connections Proxies to C-SOE Price Premium
Sample is all land transactions from the first quarter of 2003 to the first quarter of
2010 in eight major cities, as described in Table 4. Dependant variable is the
natural log of land price per square meter of permitted housing floor area.
STIMULUS is an indicator variable set to zero before the first quarter of 2009 and to
one in that quarter and thereafter. As proxies for the likely strength of
“connections” between the C-SOE's top executives and the authorities regulating
real estate development, we include LOCAL, an indicator variable set to one if the
land purchased is in the same city as the C-SOE's head office and to zero otherwise,
and log(DISTANCE), the logarithm of the distance in kilometers between the
C-SOE's head office and the city in which the land purchased is located. Other
right-hand-side variables as defined in Table 5. Numbers in parentheses are
robust t-ratios adjusted for city-level clustering.

                                      (1)                     (2)                       (3)                    (4)
CSOE                           0.0358        (0.52)     0.381 (4.12)***            0.0349      (0.52)     0.380 (4.13)***
CSOE interacted with:
    LOCAL                       0.314 (3.38)***                                    0.314 (3.36)***
    log(DISTANCE)                                      -0.0491 (-3.90)***                                -0.0490 (-3.87)***
    STIMULUS                    0.182       (2.38)**    0.162       (2.13)**       0.185      (2.55)**    0.165      (2.26)**
LSOE                            0.121       (2.31)**    0.122       (2.32)**       0.117 (3.15)***        0.117 (3.16)***
LSOE interacted with:
    STIMULUS                   -0.0126      (-0.21)    -0.0130      (-0.22)
log(D_CENTER)                  -0.706 (-22.6)***       -0.706 (-22.6)***           -0.707 (-22.6)***     -0.706 (-22.7)***
DENSITY                        -0.105 (-4.38)***       -0.105 (-4.40)***           -0.105 (-4.37)***     -0.105 (-4.40)***
SHARE_PH                       -0.341 (-3.22)***       -0.344 (-3.25)***           -0.340 (-3.23)***     -0.343 (-3.26)***
LANDLEVEL                      0.0678        (0.66)    0.0672        (0.66)        0.0681      (0.67)    0.0675       (0.66)
SIZE                           -0.208 (-3.56)***       -0.207 (-3.52)***           -0.209 (-3.59)***     -0.207 (-3.55)***
PUBLIC                          0.115       (1.94)*     0.115       (1.93)*        0.114      (1.93)*     0.115      (1.92)*
AUCTION                         0.272 (4.66)***         0.272 (4.65)***            0.272 (4.67)***        0.272 (4.66)***
BIDDING                        -0.171       (-1.85)*   -0.171       (-1.85)*       -0.170     (-1.87)*   -0.170      (-1.86)*
LISTED                          0.146 (2.90)***         0.146 (2.91)***            0.146 (2.90)***        0.146 (2.91)***
       City Dummies                  YES                     YES                        YES                    YES
    Time Dummies                     YES                     YES                        YES                    YES
   Developer Grade
                                     YES                     YES                        YES                    YES
        Dummies
       Adjusted R2                   0.99                    0.99                      0.99                   0.99
Notes: (1) Coefficients of city and time fixed effects are not show.           .
         (2) Number of observations is 3478.
         (3) ***: significant at the 1% level; **: significant at the 5% level;*: significant at the 10% level.




                                                                     62
