NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ADEQUATE (OR ADIPOSE?) YEARLY PROGRESS:
ASSESSING THE EFFECT OF "NO CHILD LEFT BEHIND" ON CHILDREN'S OBESITY
Patricia M. Anderson
Kristin F. Butcher
Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach
Working Paper 16873
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16873

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2011

We thank Jannine Riggs, Denise Airola, and Jim Boardman of the Arkansas Department of Education
for helpful discussions about the Arkansas education data and accountability rules. We received generous
financial support from RWJ grant number #57922, Rockefeller Center at Dartmouth College Reiss
Family Faculty Research Grant, and a Wellesley College Faculty Award. Brian Dunne, A.J. Felkey,
Brenna Jenny and Alan Kwan provided excellent research assistance. We thank Eric Edmonds, Jonathan
Guryan, seminar participants at UC-Davis, Boston College, Louisiana State University, the University
of Toulouse, and conference participants at the American Economic Association 2010 annual meetings,
and the Rockefeller Center Health Policy Workshop for helpful comments. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Patricia M. Anderson, Kristin F. Butcher, and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Adequate (or Adipose?) Yearly Progress: Assessing the Effect of "No Child Left Behind"
on Children's Obesity
Patricia M. Anderson, Kristin F. Butcher, and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach
NBER Working Paper No. 16873
March 2011
JEL No. I18,I21
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates how accountability pressures under No Child Left Behind (NCLB) may affect
children’s rate of overweight. Schools facing increased pressures to produce academic outcomes may
reallocate their efforts in ways that have unintended consequences for children’s health. For example,
schools may cut back on recess and physical education in favor of increasing time on tested subjects.
To examine the impact of school accountability programs, we create a unique panel data set of schools
in Arkansas that allows us to test the impact of NCLB rules on students’ weight outcomes. Our main
approach is to consider schools to be facing increased pressures if they are on the margin of passing
– that is, if any subgroup at the school has a passing rate that is close to the AYP passing threshold,
where we define close as being 5 percentage points above or below the threshold. We find evidence
of small effects of accountability pressures on the percent of students at a school that are overweight.
A follow-up survey of school principals points to reductions in physical activity and worsening of
the food environment as potential mechanisms.

Patricia M. Anderson
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
6106 Rockefeller
Hanover, NH 03755-3514
and NBER
patricia.m.anderson@dartmouth.edu
Kristin F. Butcher
Department of Economics
Wellesley College
106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481
and NBER
kbutcher@wellesley.edu

Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach
School of Education and Social Policy
Northwestern University
Annenberg Hall, Room 205
2120 Campus Drive
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
dws@northwestern.edu

I. Introduction
Childhood obesity has increased dramatically over the past three decades, from about
4 percent during the mid-1970s to 16 percent today. There have been many changes in
children’s lives during the period when children’s obesity has been increasing (see Anderson
and Butcher 2006a). In particular, there have been changes at home and at school that may
contribute to increased obesity. Understanding how the school environment may contribute
to obesity is critical as the school environment may be relatively more within the control of
public policy makers than the family environment. In recent years, especially, pressures on
schools have changed dramatically. No Child Left Behind (NCLB) added explicit
“accountability” incentives for schools to improve test score outcomes without necessarily
providing more resources with which to produce these outcomes.
This paper investigates how accountability pressures under NCLB may affect children’s
obesity. Children’s health is not among the outcomes for which schools are held accountable
– standardized test achievement is the primary area monitored, with secondary emphasis on
attendance and graduation rates. Schools facing increased pressure to produce academic
outcomes may reallocate their efforts in ways that have unintended consequences for
children’s health. The new financial pressures due to accountability rules may, for example,
induce school administrators to try to raise new funds through outside food and beverage
contracts, or time pressures may cause them to cut back on recess and physical education in
favor of increased time teaching tested subjects.1
To examine the impact of school accountability programs, we create a unique data set
that allows us to test the impact of NCLB rules on students’ weight outcomes. This dataset
combines school-level rates of “obesity” and “overweight” for school children in Arkansas

Additionally, schools may use food as rewards to motivate students, and there is the possibility that testing
pressures increase cortisol secretions in children due to the increased stress, which may lead to weight gain.

1

1

with data from the Arkansas Department of Education on standardized test proficiency rates
in English and math for all schools, by grade and subgroup.2 The standardized test pass rates
are those used for determining whether a school is making Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP)
under NCLB. The main methodological difficulty in trying to assess the causal effect of
accountability pressures on children’s health outcomes is that schools that have children who
perform poorly on tests may also have children who have worse health outcomes. Our
empirical strategy, described in detail below, addresses this issue by taking advantage of the
fact that the determination of which schools do and do not make Adequate Yearly Progress is
very complicated, and even schools with generally high performing students (who are likely to
be healthier) face accountability pressures that may induce changes at the school that
adversely affect students’ health status.
The main empirical results examine whether schools facing accountability pressure
have more overweight and obese students. These results, however, cannot examine the
mechanisms through which changes that are made to be NCLB compliant may affect
children’s obesity. In order to directly examine those mechanisms, we designed and fielded a
survey of school principals in Arkansas. An analysis of Arkansas principals’ reports of
changes they have made at their schools in response to No Child Left Behind supports the
notion that these changes could plausibly affect children’s caloric intake or expenditure.
Below, we describe the Arkansas data and accountability program in more detail, and
discuss our approach to modeling the role that accountability pressures may play. We then
present results from empirical models on obesity rates, as well as some results of a survey of
school principals, before concluding.

Obesity is defined as having a body mass index (BMI) greater than the 95th percentile of a distribution of ageand sex-specific BMIs from a baseline population from the 1970s. Overweight is defined analogously, with BMI
greater than the 85th percentile. The official Arkansas documentation follows CDC convention and labels these
thresholds differently as “overweight” and “at risk of overweight,” respectively. We will use the more common
terms “obese” and “overweight” instead.
2

2

II. Policy and Research Background
In 2002, the Federal No Child Left Behind (NCLB) legislation was passed, requiring
states to define and implement stringent accountability standards and prescribing increasing
penalties for schools that fail to meet their state’s standard. Under NCLB in Arkansas, schools
are held accountable for the fraction of children in a school who earn a passing score on the
state standardized tests in math and literacy.3 For an elementary school to be deemed
passing4, approximately 30 percent of students in the school had to pass the test in 2002. The
percent passing goal ratchets up by about 7 percentage points each year until it reaches 100
percent in 2014. The starting points are slightly lower for higher grades, and the annual
increase in the goals are slightly higher in order to reach the Federally mandated goal of 100
percent proficiency by 2014.5 In addition to the overall percentage passing in the school, each
student subgroup – as defined by race, socio-economic status and other educational
categories – must meet the same percent passing rate. A school that fails to meet the passing
percentage in a certain year can still be awarded passing status through the “safe harbor
provision” if the fraction of students failing in the school declines by 10 percent or more
between one year and the next. This is a simplified overview of the program. There are more
details that are important for the data work but add little to the intuition of the program –
such as minimum subgroup size rules and the ability of schools to use a 3-year average
percent passing instead of their current pass rate – that are described in more detail in
Appendix A.
3 The passing threshold on the Arkansas state test is lower than the threshold on the Nation’s Report Card
(NAEP) test. In particular, 62 (61) percent of students passed the 4th grade state test in literacy (math), while 28
(26) percent of 4th graders passed the NAEP test. This 34-35 percentage point difference across tests in pass
rates is in line with the U.S. average of 32-37 points (Education Week, 2006). The information about Arkansas’s
NCLB program is taken from http://arkansased.org/nclb/nclb.html (accessed March 25, 2010).
4
We refer to schools as “failing” schools or “passing” schools. However, the official nomenclature is that schools
that we refer to as “failing” schools are in “School Improvement Status.”
5 Annual AYP percent passing goals by grade and subject are listed in Appendix Table 1.

3

If a school fails to meet the AYP goals for 2 consecutive years, they must implement
corrective actions that increase in severity over time if the school continues to fail from
allowing students to transfer to a different non-failing school in the district in year 1, to being
required to offer supplemental instruction to students in year 2, to more extreme measures
such as school restructuring in year 5. In the first few years of NCLB, approximately 25
percent of Arkansas schools were out of compliance with AYP (Blankenship and Barnett,
2006), while 46 percent were failing in 2009 (Arkansas Department of Education, 2009).
A substantial amount of research has documented that schools respond to
accountability pressures. Overall, test scores improve – sometimes quite substantially – after
accountability is enacted (Carnoy and Loeb 2002, Jacob 2005, Figlio and Rouse 2006, Dee
and Jacob 2009, Wong et al. 2010). These gains are made in part by schools’ strategic
responses that alter whom they teach and test – for example strategically assigning kids to
special education or English Language Learner status (Cullen and Reback 2006), strategically
suspending low performing students (Figlio 2006) or shifting teaching resources toward
students on the cusp of passing (Reback 2008, Neal and Schanzenbach 2009). Bokhari and
Schneider (2009) find that stricter accountability laws result in more children being
prescribed psychostimulates for ADHD (and being diagnosed with the disorder). Schools also
strategically alter what they teach, shifting effort toward literacy and math and away from untested subjects (Jacob 2005, Rouse et al. 2007).
It is intuitive that accountability rules surrounding standardized test performance may
affect test scores. In order for accountability pressures to affect children’s obesity, it must
affect either calories expended or ingested, and there is less prior research that directly
addresses this question. The small number of papers that address these issues, however,
point to changes in the food or physical activity environment that could affect children’s
calorie balance. For example, Figlio and Winicki (2005) find that schools that face
4

accountability sanctions increase the number of calories offered in their school lunches
during the testing period. Anderson and Butcher (2006b) find that schools in states with
accountability measures are more likely to give students access to junk food.6 Additionally,
they find that schools that are more likely to give students access to junk have students with
higher BMI.
As for school changes that affect the calorie expenditure side of the equation, the
Center on Education Policy (2007) finds 20 percent of school districts have decreased recess
time since NCLB was enacted, with an average decrease of 50 minutes per week. Yin (2009)
uses cross-state differences in the implementation of accountability laws (pre-NCLB) to
explore the effects of accountability on obesity and finds that high school students in states
with accountability laws show a significant increase in body mass index and obesity rates.
Her analysis also includes an examination of the potential mechanisms by assessing how
physical education participation varies with the introduction of accountability laws. She finds
evidence that female adolescents’ participation in PE classes declines with the advent of
accountability. It is worth noting, however, that there is not much compelling evidence that
increased PE time decreases obesity rates among high school students. Using state changes in
state PE requirements, Cawley et al. (2007) find that while increased time in PE may increase
the reported level of physical activity among high school students, there is no evidence that it
reduces students’ body weight or likelihood of being overweight or obese.7 Note that our
empirical analysis includes elementary school students as well as high school students, thus
the mechanisms for changes in physical activity also include changes in recess time.
6

This paper uses a two sample two-stage least squares estimation strategy, and whether or not the school is in a state that
has an accountability rule is one of the factors used in the first stage which predicts the fraction of schools in a county that
give students access to junk food.
7
It is surprisingly difficult to find research using credible sources of exogenous variation in physical activity that shows a
large and statistically significant link to obesity. Not only is it difficult to find credible sources of exogenous variation in
reported time in physical activity, it is usually impossible to measure effort or intensity of that physical activity. And, as
anyone who has tried to track their own calories consumed and expended knows, it is distressingly easy to offset calories
burned in physical activity with changes in consumption.

5

Beyond our school-level exploration of the effect of accountability on obesity rates, we
provide more insight into the possible mechanisms with a survey of Arkansas school
principals, described below.

III. Background and Data
In order to measure the impact of NCLB pressure on children’s obesity status, we
construct a unique dataset that merges school-level information on test scores, obesity, and
other demographic characteristics from different sources. Using these different sources, we
construct our final data set which has 2852 observations for Arkansas schools from 2004 to
2007. The data contain information on 1190 different schools in Arkansas; 447 of the schools
include grades 7 and above, the rest include only lower grades.

A. Arkansas Assessment of Childhood and Adolescent Obesity8
In 2003 the state of Arkansas passed a sweeping act intended to help combat
childhood and adolescent obesity. Although obesity has been increasing nationwide, obesity
levels were particularly high in Arkansas. In 2003, about 21 percent of school aged children in
Arkansas were obese or overweight, while this figure was about 18 percent for the nation as a
whole.9 A multifaceted coalition came together to address the challenge of childhood obesity,
and passed Act 1220 of the 2003 Arkansas General Assembly.10 A central component of this
initiative was the reporting of health risk information to parents (ACHI 2004).

8 This section draws heavily from the yearly reports on the Arkansas Assessment of Childhood and Adolescent
Obesity released by the Arkansas Center for Health Improvement. Reports are available online at: www.achi.net
9 Comparison of Table 1 in ACHI (2004) to NHANES 2003-2004 calculations
(http://www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/dnpa/obesity/childhood/prevalence.htm).
10 The coalition included parents, school nurses, teachers, and administrators, private foundations (including
Robert Wood Johnson), physicians, hospitals, universities, Governor Mike Huckabee, the Arkansas
Departments of Education and Health, among many others.

6

The Arkansas Center for Health Improvement (ACHI) spearheaded the effort to collect
height and weight information for each school child in the state of Arkansas. This effort
included ensuring that each school had the equipment and trained personnel necessary to
accurately weigh and measure each child.11 After children were weighed and measured, a
letter then went home to each parent describing the child’s BMI, where this fit in the BMI
distribution (whether the child was obese, overweight, healthy weight, or underweight), and
the type of health risks that might be associated with the child’s BMI. Parents of children with
an unhealthy weight were urged to consult a physician. An implicit assumption of this effort
was that if better information was in the hands of parents, they could make – or help their
children make – better informed, more healthful, choices that would improve their weight
outcomes. Additionally, an annual public report is produced (available on the ACHI website)
with the percent of students who are underweight, normal weight, overweight, and obese at
each public school in Arkansas. Thus, due to the Arkansas Assessment of Childhood and
Adolescent Obesity, we have panel data on school-level rates of overweight and obesity from
2004 to 2007.

B. School Academic Performance Reports
One of the requirements of NCLB is to make available school-level information on the
passing rate, both overall and for student subgroups. School report cards for Arkansas were
provided by the Department of Education. These school report cards provide information on
the percent of students scored as proficient on the literacy test and the percent scored as
proficient on the math test. As described above, a school’s AYP designation is determined by
the average passing rate of its students overall. In addition, the passing rate of all designated

11

Training included taking each measure a number of times to ensure accuracy.

7

sub-groups that have a large enough enrollment in the school must also meet the goal.12
Student sub-groups are defined by race (for whites, African Americans, Hispanics, etc.), and
as low socio-economic status, English language learners, and students with disabilities. If any
one of the student subgroups fails to attain AYP, then the entire school is designated as failing
to meet AYP.13
While these basic rules are straightforward enough, in practice a school can be deemed
to meet or fail to meet AYP for several other reasons. For example, even if a school (or
subgroup) has a lower fraction of students meeting AYP than the passing standard requires, it
still might make AYP through the “Safe Harbor” provision, which allows a school to be
deemed as passing if the percentage of failing students (within subject and subgroup) declines
by ten percent relative to the prior year. On the other hand, a school will be deemed as failing
despite its passing rate if too low a fraction of its students participate in the test, or if
attendance or graduation rates are below the target threshold.14
There are many details involved in determining AYP status and this means it is very
difficult using publicly available data to predict which schools will be deemed as making AYP
and which schools will be placed on “School Improvement Status”.15 Since only aggregate data
on grade level by subject by subgroup are available to us, we cannot perfectly predict AYP
status. However, it seems very likely that if it is difficult for researchers to determine which
schools will make AYP and which will not, it is likely also difficult for school administrators to
make such a determination as the school year progresses. If school administrators change the
way resources are deployed at the school in order to help insure that the school makes AYP
The definition of “large enough” varies by state. In Arkansas, there must be 40 students in the subgroup for it
to count toward accountability, or if there are more than 800 students in the school the subgroup must be at
least 5 percent of the total enrollment.
13 Again, although we refer to these as “failing” schools, the official nomenclature is that these schools are in
“School Improvement Status.”
14 More information on the Arkansas accountability plan is available at
http://arkansased.org/nclb/pdf/accountability_wkbk_021208b.pdf.
15
It is, in fact, impossible to do this with school level data on aggregate student performance. The official determination is
made using micro level data on student performance and detailed information on student characteristics.
12

8

status, these changes are unlikely to be starkly discontinuous around the threshold of making
and not making AYP. Administrators may have a sense of whether they are likely to be far
below or far above the requirements for making AYP, but there is likely to be a substantial
fraction of schools where the administrators believe they are on the margin of making or
failing to make Adequate Yearly Progress. It is these schools where administrators should
have the most incentive to make changes to improve test scores. The data we have access to,
percent proficient by grade-level by subject by subgroup, will allow us to identify schools
where administrators are likely to be worried about marginally making or missing AYP.

C. Other Demographic Characteristics
Subgroup proficiency rates are reported on the school report cards for groups with a
sample size of at least 10, but only subgroups that have sample size of 40 (or 5 percent of total
enrollment, whichever is larger) count toward the official accountability rating. As a result, we
need to obtain measures of subgroup sample sizes. Although perfect data on this are not
publicly available, we are able to estimate population sizes from the Common Core of Data
(CCD) for the years 2002-2006.16 The CCD data report annual school-by-grade enrollment
overall and for several subgroups of interest (whites, African Americans and Hispanics). In
addition, we were able to proxy for the number of low-income students in each grade by
multiplying the school-level fraction of students on free or reduced-priced lunch by the gradespecific enrollment. We used the information on enrollment from the CCD to omit test scores
from accountability calculations if they were based on too small of a population and therefore
did not count toward accountability status under Arkansas rules. We also use the CCD data to

Because the BMI and test score data extend to 2007 but at the time we began our project the CCD data were
not yet available for that year, we assign 2007 CCD data to be the same as the 2006 data.

16

9

create school-level demographics on percent nonwhite and percent poor (i.e. receiving free or
reduced-price lunch).

IV. Methodology
The main challenge in isolating the effect of NCLB on children’s weight outcomes is
that low-income children are more likely to score poorly on standardized tests, and are also
more likely to be overweight. As a result, a simple cross-sectional relationship between NCLB
status and children’s weight will be a biased estimate of the impact of accountability pressure
on obesity. We take two basic approaches to investigating the possibility that accountability
pressures may be contributing to childhood overweight. The first approach assumes that
accountability-induced behavioral changes are likely to be greatest among schools that are
close to meeting their targets. That is, schools easily meeting the current proficiency levels are
unlikely to feel the need to change their behaviors much in the face of accountability, while
schools very far from meeting the standards may feel pressure, but will be less likely to think
that a small change such as a reduction in recess time or using a portion of the time allocated
for gym class to work on mathematics concepts will be useful in addressing their deficiencies.
However, we expect that schools with test scores just above and just below the target in year
t-1 are the most likely to make the types of changes that could result in more overweight and
obese students by year t. By comparing these “marginal” schools to those far away from the
thresholds, we can determine if accountability is having an unintended impact on children’s
health. Our second approach assumes that if a school has seen larger proficiency gains over a
year, then that school probably undertook some types of behavioral changes to achieve those
gains. As a result, we compare schools that make large gains in a given year to schools that
make more modest gains, and measure whether there is a significant difference in obesity
rates or changes in obesity rates between them.
10

With our first empirical approach we address the main methodological challenge by
taking advantage of the fact a school being categorized as “marginal” in our framework is not
straightforwardly related to the socio-economic status of students in that school. Under
NCLB rules, the entire school fails to make AYP if any single subgroup fails to meet the
proficiency goal; as a result the school’s status is defined by its worst-performing subgroup.17
For each school-grade-year, for each test, for each subgroup with a group size large enough to
count toward the official accountability rating, we standardize the proficiency rates around
that year’s AYP threshold. For example, for the 4th grade math test, the initial threshold is 40
percent. If a subgroup had a 45 percent proficiency rate, their standardized rate for 4th grade
math in the initial year is 5. Similarly if a subgroup had a proficiency rate of 30, their
standardized rate for 4th grade math in the initial year is -10. Thus, positive standardized rates
represent meeting AYP, while negative ones represent failure to meet AYP. Since AYP is
determined at the school level, not grade level, we then aggregate the data to the school-year
level. We define school-level proficiency score as the minimum standardized rate across all
grades and subgroups in the school. We also maintain the minimum-across-grades math and
literacy proficiency rates for the overall school population, as they reflect more generally on
the school’s overall academic performance. Additionally, based on the CCD, we calculate the
percentage of the school’s students who are nonwhite, and the percent poor to control for
observable demographics.
Our first approach, then, is to consider schools to be “marginal” if they have a
minimum subgroup passing rate that is close to the AYP threshold, and to hold constant other
factors that are related to student socio-economic status, test scores, and health outcomes.
We define “close to the AYP threshold” as being 5 percentage points above or below the

17

However, as seen below, we investigate the robustness of our results to this choice.

11

threshold.18 While schools may have some idea that they are going to be close to making or
missing the AYP threshold and change behaviors contemporaneously, we will nonetheless
estimate current rates of overweight or obesity based on the previous year’s test results to
ensure that the school has had time to react to being close to the AYP threshold. We estimate
the following model:
4

4

4

4

i 1

i 1

i 1

i 1

(1) Overwgt st    1marginal st 1    i pctnw ist    i pctpoorsti   i mathprof sti   i litprof sti   st
where Overwgt is the percentage of students in school s at time t who are overweight or
obese, mathprof and litprof are the overall current-year proficiency rate in math and literacy,
respectively, pctnw is the fraction of the student enrollment that is non-white, and pctpoor is
the fraction of student enrollment on free or reduced-price lunch. The variable marginal is an
indicator for whether the worst-performing subgroup last year was within 5 points of the
passing threshold, and proxies for whether the school might implement short-term policies
that might harm student obesity rates, such as curtailing recess. A nice feature of this
approach is that we can flexibly control for the overall achievement in a school and identify
schools at risk of missing AYP based on their worst-performing subgroup. For example, two
schools with similar overall achievement rates may be very similar, but one school is at risk
under AYP because of a struggling subgroup, while the other school does not face that risk
because they have too few students to have that subgroup count toward the school’s
accountability status.19 In some specifications we augment the specification with the lagged
dependent variable – that is, the prior year’s rate of overweight. Additionally, we can
compare the “marginal” schools separately to schools that are farther above and below the
threshold. To do this, we add a separate control for whether the minimum subgroup in a
We have also experimented with alternative divisions with qualitatively similar results.
One might be interested in measuring whether there is a particularly strong impact on the rate of overweight
of students in the actual subgroups that were marginal. Unfortunately, we do not have access to sufficiently
disaggregated data to do such an estimate.

18
19

12

school always scores more than 5 points above the cutoff; in these specifications, the
coefficient on “marginal” and the coefficient on “>5 points above” are both relative to the
schools for which the worst performing subgroup is more than 5 points below the threshold.
This allows us to compare schools in the marginal group separately to schools in each “tail” of
performance (for the worst performing subgroup). To further probe these relationships, we
also estimate these equations based on whether any subgroup (and not just the minimum
subgroup) is on the margin of passing in the prior year, and whether any subgroup has ever
been on the margin of passing.
Our second approach focuses on the relationship between overall school performance
and obesity rates, not subgroup performance. The school’s change in math proficiency rate is
added to the school’s change in literacy proficiency rate to define the total proficiency gain
over the prior year. Gains in proficiency scores might occur for for several reasons,
including: 1)mean reversion, if the prior years scores were aberrantly low; 2) changes in the
type of student who took the test; or 3) changes in the way the school allocates its resources
that are intended to improve test scores. The idea with this specification is that if schools
that managed test score gains did it by changing the way it resources are allocated, then those
changes may have the potential to affect children’s weight as well as test performance. As
with the models focusing on the marginal schools, the main threat to validity in this approach
is that factors that are correlated with test performance, like the composition of the student
body, may also be correlated with obesity rates. In these specifications, we also control
flexibly for current demographics and academic performance. Additionally, it is important to
keep in mind that any mechanical change in the student body that would tend to improve test
scores would also be expected to reduce obesity rates, since higher socio-economic status
students, on average, have higher test scores and lower BMI. Thus, any unmeasured socio-

13

economic characteristics in these regressions would be likely to bias the coefficient toward
finding a negative relationship between gains in test performance and obesity rates.

V. Results
A. The Role of NCLB on Students’ Overweight Status
We start by examining some basic descriptive statistics using the final data set.
Looking at the top rows of Table 1, in the first column we see that almost a fifth of school-byyear cells in Arkansas are classified as being “marginal” (i.e. the school’s minimum scoring
grade-test-subgroup cell falls within 5 points of the AYP threshold), with the remaining
school-by-year cells being almost evenly split between being more clearly in failing territory
(scoring more than 5 points below the AYP threshold) and passing territory (scoring more
than 5 points above the AYP threshold). Moving down the column, we see that overall in the
average school-by-year observation 38.3 percent of students are overweight or obese,
53.6 percent receive free or reduced-price lunch and 26.9 percent are nonwhite. Finally, on
average schools met the target English proficiency rate by 13.5 percentage points and the
target math proficiency rate by 12.6 points, but over the previous year the total proficiency
rate actually dropped by almost one percentage point because the target passing rate
increased in line with the schedule presented in Appendix Table 1. The second and third
columns present characteristics for the average school which is marginal in terms of meeting
the AYP goal and the average school which is not. Keeping in mind that “non-marginal”
schools are comprised of schools with minimum scoring groups that are both farther below
and above the threshold for AYP, one sees that there is a very slightly higher rate of
overweight and obesity at the marginal schools, and that this does not appear to be driven
primarily by demographic differences. Marginal schools have a very slightly lower rate of free
and reduced-price lunch recipients and a much lower nonwhite percentage. In terms of

14

overall school performance, both marginal and non-marginal schools are fairly similar, with
the overall test performance of marginal schools actually being a bit better in both English
and Math. Note however, the marginal schools had higher proficiency rate growth over the
past year, up almost 3 percentage points, while non-marginal schools lost almost
2 percentage points.
Table 2 presents the results of the basic model described in equation (1) above, with
schools categorized as “marginal” by their lowest-performing subgroup and percent
overweight (including obese) as the dependent variable. Standard errors are clustered by
school. Starting with column (1), we see that marginal schools in Arkansas have a rate of
overweight that is just under 1 percentage point higher than the non-marginal schools. When
we augment the controls with the lagged value of overweight in column (2), schools that were
marginal in the previous year see an increase in the rate of overweight that is almost
0.5 percentage points larger than those that were non-marginal.20 Columns (3) and (4)
continue to control for the lagged rate over overweight, and compare the marginal group of
schools separately against the top and bottom of the distribution.21 Marginal schools have
0.59 percentage points more overweight students compared to schools where the worst
performing subgroup is more than 5 points above the AYP threshold, and this difference is
statistically signifcant at conventional levels. Note, however, that the point estimate in
column (4) is also positive and indicates that marginal schools have 0.361 percentage points
more overweight students than schools where the worst performing subgroup is more than
5 points below the AYP threshold. While this coefficient is not statistically different from
zero, it also is not statistically different from the coefficient estimated in column (3). If being

20 If we simply replace the flexible function of overall test performance with the lagged value of overweight, the
results are very similar to those presented (e.g. the coefficient (standard error) for column (2) is 0.519 (0.200)),
but since the test score variables are jointly significant, we retain them in the model presented.
21 We recognize that column (4) can be derived from column (3), but estimate both models for ease of
determining statistical significance.

15

a “marginal” school were straightforwardly correlated with socio-economic status, then we
would expect that marginal schools would have children with worse health outcomes than
schools in the “more than 5 points above AYP” group and better health outcomes than schools
in the “more than 5 points below AYP.” Instead, schools in the “marginal” category have
students with worse health outcomes than schools where the worst performing subgroup is
farther away from the threshold, either above or below. This strongly suggests that
“marginal”schools are undertaking actions to try to make adequate yearly progress, and that
these actions may have unintended consequences.
Our alternate approach is based on the gains in proficiency levels across years. Schools
with larger year-to-year gains have likely done something to improve scores, and in doing so
may have adopted policies that result in increased overweight. The specification in columns
(5) and (6) uses the sum of the math and reading proficiency gains experienced by the school
overall (not any particular subgroup). In column (5), we see a significantly positive estimate
indicating that a school making a bigger proficiency gain under NCLB over the past year has a
slightly higher rate of overweight. Because Arkansas set up its schedule for AYP to involve
equal increments each year until reaching 100 percent proficiency, a typical school that just
met its goal in one year would be expected to add about another 7 or 8 percentage points to
each of the literacy and math proficiency rates (for a total gain of about 15) in order to make
AYP again the next year. Based on the results in column (5), a school making this size gain
would be expected to have a rate of overweight that is about 0.43 percentage points higher
than a school not making any gains, which is similar to the effect for marginal schools found
in column (2). However, when we control for last year’s rate of overweight in column (6), the
estimated effect of the total gain becomes very small and insignificant. Note, however, that if
a school is regularly making large gains, changes resulting in weight gain may have been put
in place in the past, with no additional changes in policies or weight occurring in the current

16

year. Controlling for the lagged value of percent overweight will absorb the effects of any past
changes in how the school conducts business. In such a case, we would expect the coefficient
in column (6) to be zero.
Table 3 repeats the specifications in Table 2, with the obesity rate as the dependent
variable and schools classified as marginal by their lowest performing subgroup. The results
are quite similar, but smaller in magnitude. Overall, students in schools where the minimum
scoring subgroup was within 5 points of the proficiency threshold in the prior year are 0.6
percentage points more likely to be obese (see column 1). When the lagged obesity rate is
controlled (column 2), the coefficient falls by about half but remains statistically significant.
When we compare marginal schools to the top and bottom of the distribution separately in
columns (3) and (4), marginal schools are only statistically significantly more likely to have
obese students when compared to the higher performing schools, however, both point
estimates are positive. Again, the point estimates indicates that “marginal” schools have
more obese students than schools that are either farther below or farther above the NCLB
threshold. Turning to our alternate specification, schools with larger annual test score gains
see higher obesity rates, but the results are not robust to controlling for lagged obesity rates
(columns 5 and 6). In the remaining tables and figures, we limit the analysis to the school’s
rate of overweight, though results for obesity are qualitatively similar.22
Table 4 presents some robustness checks. Columns (1) – (3) change the independent
variable of interest to whether any subgroup – not just the minimum-scoring subgroup – falls
within 5 points of the passing threshold.23 The idea here is that even if a school has no real
chance to meet AYP for its worst subgroup, if there is a marginal group at the school, policy
changes may take place to get that group over the AYP threshold. The results are fairly similar
Results for Table 4 and Figure 1 with obesity rate as the dependent variable are available upon request.
This definition results in a much larger number of school-year-cells being defined as marginal – about 47
percent.
22
23

17

to those in Table 2, but slightly smaller in magnitude once the prior rate of overweight is
controlled. Columns (4) – (6) define the independent variable of interest as whether any
subgroup has been marginal in any prior year.24 The intuition behind this final approach is
that schools may have implemented policies to improve performance after a year in which
they were marginal, and have continued to implement those policies in future years when
they were no longer on the margin. When this specification is employed, the results are still
similar but with slightly larger point estimates than those found in Table 2.
Overall, then, Tables 2 through 4 suggest that accountability pressures may have
unintended side effects on children’s health. In particular, the coefficients are robust to
controlling for the prior year’s rate of overweight, indicating that schools that are marginal on
test scores see a discrete increase in overweight. We further build the case that this likely
reflects a causal relationship by next turning to an event study analysis to investigate the time
pattern of increases in the rate of overweight. We then report results of a survey we conducted
that asked Arkansas school principals to about their policies and practices, and how those
have changed after the implementation of NCLB.

B. Event Study
The timing of increases in the rate of overweight can be estimated more directly using
an event study analysis. Specifically, we fit the following equation:
5

4

4

4

4

2

i 1

i 1

i 1

i 1

(2) Overwgt st      i 1( st  i )    i pctnw ist    i pctpoorsti   i mathprof sti   i litprof sti   st
where τst denotes the event-year, defined so that τ=0 in the first year that a school’s minimum
subgroup scores within 5 points of the passing threshold (i.e. the first year a school is
“marginal.”) τ=1 denotes the first year after a school is declared to be marginal, and so on. In
This definition results in just over 72 percent of the school-year-cells being defined as marginal, a large
increase that is not surprising.

24

18

the years in which τ<0, the school was not yet marginal. The coefficients are measured
relative to the omitted coefficient τ≤-3. Schools that never have marginal status are still in the
dataset, but they only help identify the relationship between covariates and overweight since
the vector of τ’s are all zero for such schools. We include all available observations, even
though we do not observe the full range of event-time for all schools.
Figure 1 plots the event-year coefficients from estimating equation (2). Although the
coefficients are imprecisely estimated, the figure shows relatively flat trends in the years prior
to first being marginal under NCLB, then a moderate jump in the following year. There is
some additional upward movement in subsequent years which may reflect the intensifying of
efforts to improve test scores that have negative spillover effects on students’ weight. Overall
this provides further evidence that the timing lines up well with the hypothesis that
accountability pressures under NCLB may be causing the increases in the rate of overweight.

C. The Effect of NCLB on School Policies
At the start of this paper, we presented several theories on why accountability
pressures might have an effect on students’ obesity: there may be changes in the school that
unintentionally affect either students’ expenditures of energy (like a shift away from recess
toward test preparation) or in-take of energy (like sales of junk food to raise extra money for
test preparation) . In order to evaluate the validity of these theories, we fielded a survey to the
principals of the Arkansas schools used in our study. Principals were invited via email to
participate in an online survey, were offered a $10 incentive for participation in the form of a
gift certificate to an online bookstore, and were reminded via email three times after the
original request. Approximately 5 percent of the sample either did not have a valid email or
had previously opted out of receiving survey invitations. Of the remainder, approximately
20 percent responded to the survey, resulting in a dataset of 191 schools; however, not every

19

principal answered every question. We matched the survey responses with our data set on
test scores, demographics, and obesity rates to examine how schools that responded to the
survey compare to other schools in Arkansas. It is clear that the survey data set is not a
random sample of Arkansas schools: respondents are principals at relatively better-off
schools as measured by demographic characteristics, test scores, and the likelihood that they
are passing under NCLB (see Appendix Table 2 for descriptive statistics). Nonetheless, the
responses are informative about the types of changes that schools implemented in response to
NCLB.
Table 5 presents results from the survey. First, we see that 86 percent of schools report
increasing spending since NCLB went into effect. Ten percent report raising funds through
sales of foods or beverages, and 17 percent report increased funding from vending machines
or pouring rights contracts. At the same time, 38 percent report using food as a reward for
students, either in the form of parties in school or coupons that can be redeemed for food
items outside of school. Thus, we see some evidence that school changes in response to NCLB
may be increasing calories consumed.
There is also evidence that changes in response to NCLB may be reducing time spent in
physical activity. Schools report having increased instructional time on tested subjects
(English/language arts and math) by almost an hour and a half per week. To make room for
this additional instruction, 38 percent of schools report that time spent on non-academics has
been reduced. Schools in the sample currently spend an average of almost 190 minutes (or
about 3.2 hours) per week in PE classes and about 127 minutes (or about 2.1 hours) at recess.
Taking both activities combined for all schools, students spend an average of 304 minutes (or
about 5.1 hours) per week in PE and recess. This is substantially higher than the 150 minutes

20

per week of “physical activity” required by the state.25 Since NCLB, only 3 percent report
reducing time spent in PE, while 12 percent report reducing time spent at recess.26 While only
a small fraction of schools report decreasing the amount of time spent in physical activities,
over 80 percent have not had increases since NCLB. In addition, a substantial fraction of
schools report offering before or after school sessions for instruction, or increasing the length
of the school day. To the extent that these sessions may be displacing active play or other
physical activity, this may also contribute to weight gain among students. Finally, the
overwhelming majority of schools report engaging in some explicit test preparation. Many
(over 25 percent) report having test prep sessions after school, and 5 percent report
conducting test preparation during recess, lunch or PE class.
Thus, there is evidence that NCLB may have reduced the opportunities for physical
activity in Arkansas schools, although the changes do not seem overwhelming. That said, for
the 22 schools for which we can calculate the drop in recess time, it averages 51 minutes per
week.27 A simulation of a weekly reduction of that magnitude over the course of a 36 week
school year implies that the rate of overweight of a population would increase by about
1.6 percentage points.28 Interestingly, an increase of about 0.5 percentage points, as is found
in Tables 2 and 3, is simulated to be achieved with less than a 20 minutes reduction in
physical activity per week.
While this snapshot of the state of Arkansas school policies is quite interesting, we
would ideally like to know whether the policies differ by our definitions of a “marginal”

For K-8 students, at least 60 minutes of weekly physical activity must be in PE class. The remainder can
include recess and after- or before-school activities. See http://arkansased.org/programs/csh/physed_faqs.html
for more details.
26 Note that not all schools answered both of these questions. In particular, only elementary schools tend to have
recess, so while 186 schools reported time spent in PE, only 129 reported time spent at recess.
27 The decrease in PE time among those reporting a decrease is 33 minutes per week.
28 The simulation uses children age 6-16 from the NHANES who have an overweight rate of 36.4 percent. Using
age-gender-weight-specific formulas for base metabolic rate (BMR), and assuming the children are in caloric
balance before the change in weekly activity, it is possible to simulate the caloric imbalance and subsequent
weight gain.
25

21

school. To this end, we are hampered by our small sample sizes, as well as differential
response rates across groups and some issues of timing. The remaining columns of Table 5
break out the responses by the school’s most recent (2007) test performance relative to the
passing threshold. Although policy changes that might contribute to obesity have been
implemented in schools across the board, there is some suggestive evidence that the food and
exercise environments have changed more at lower-performing schools.
Perhaps the most reasonable approach would be to regress a policy such as reduction
in PE or recess on the marginal definition based on any group being close to the AYP
threshold at any time in the past (along with the basic demographic and school controls).29
The drawbacks to this approach are twofold. First, for many of the policy variables, the
samples are really quite small, potentially limiting our ability to find significance for
coefficients that correspond to large effects. Second, a given school may have had a group
scoring within 5 points of the AYP goal after 2007, meaning they really should be coded as
being marginal in terms of the 2009 survey data. This measurement error would lead to
attenuation bias in our estimates.
With these caveats in mind, it is worth noting that the coefficient on being marginal
under NCLB on combined minutes of recess and PE is -29, but the estimate is not
significantly different from zero. This point estimate is, however, quite in line with the type of
change that was simulated to produce the estimated change in the rate of overweight.30 No
other models have estimates that are significant at conventional levels.

29 Note that controlling for the lagged rate of overweight does not really make sense in this context, since the
inclusion of the lagged dependent variable in Tables 2 and 3 was meant to control for unobserved determinants
of current overweight.
30 A drop in activity of 30 minutes per week is simulated to increase the rate of overweight by 0.86 percentage
points, which is close to the estimate in column (1) of Table 2. Note though that an activity drop of 76 minutes
per week would imply just over a 2 percentage point increase in overweight, which is in line with column (4) of
Table 3.

22

V. Conclusions and Further Avenues for Research
Through the No Child Left Behind Act, schools face increasing pressure to improve
performance on standardized tests. Past research has clearly documented that school
behaviors are affected by accountability pressures (e.g. Cullen and Reback 2006, Figlio 2006,
Jacob 2005, Neal and Schanzenbach 2009, Rouse et al. 2007). Since schools are graded based
primarily on standardized test scores, but not on other student outcomes such as children’s
health, schools facing accountability pressure may well make decisions designed to increase
test scores that have unintended negative consequences for children’s weight.
This paper adds to the small amount of evidence on the effect of accountability on the
food and physical activity environment (e.g. Figlio and Winicki 2005, Yin 2009, Anderson
and Butcher 2006b). By focusing on schools in Arkansas that are close to meeting AYP
standards, we find schools that were on the margin of passing have about a 0.5 percentage
point higher rate of overweight in the following year. This effect is based on models that also
control for the school’s lagged rate of overweight. Models without the lagged dependent
variable find larger effects. Because it is clear that schools with lower test scores also have
students with worse socioeconomic outcomes it is important that we are not just comparing
poor performing schools to better performing schools. Rather, being a “marginal” school has
a positive point estimate for rates of obesity and overweight whether the marginal schools are
compared to those scoring farther above or farther below the AYP threshold.
These results present prima facie evidence that the NCLB accountability rules may
have unintended adverse consequences for student health. As a result, parents and school
administrators, and policy-makers should keep in mind the potential for impacts on
children’s health as they consider how to reallocate school resources in pursuit of test score
gains.

23

24

References
Anderson, Patricia M. and Kristin F. Butcher, “Trends in and Potential Causes of Childhood
Obesity,” The Future of Children: Child Overweight and Obesity, vol. 16, no. 1, Spring
2006a, Brookings Institution Press.
Anderson, Patricia M. and Kristin F. Butcher, “Reading, Writing, and Refreshments: Do
School Finances Contribute to Childhood Obesity?” Journal of Human Resources, vol.
41, no. 3, Summer 2006b, pp.467-494.
Arkansas Center for Health Improvement (ACHI), “The Arkansas Assessment of Childhood
and Adolescent Obesity,” 2004.
Arkansas Center for Health Improvement, “The 2005 Arkansas Assessment of Childhood and
Adolescent Obesity: Online State Report,” September 2005.
Arkansas Center for Health Improvement, “The Arkansas Assessment of Childhood and
Adolescent Obesity – Tracking Progress: Online State Report, Year 3 (Fall 2005Spring 2006),” 2006.
Arkansas Center for Health Improvement, “Assessment of Childhood and Adolescent Obesity
in Arkansas: Year Four (Fall 2006 – Spring 2007),” 2007.
Arkansas Department of Education (2009). 2008-2009 School Improvement List, Press
Release. http://arkansased.org/communications/pdf/ayp_release_100909.pdf
Blankenship, Virginia H. and Joshua H. Barnet, “AYP in Arkansas: Who’s on Track?”
Arkansas Education Report 3(2), Summer 2006.
Bokhari, Farasat A. S. and Helen Schnedier, “School Accountability Laws and the
Consumption of Psychostimulants,” Journal of Health Economics, forthcoming.
Carnoy, Martin and Susanna Loeb (2002), “Does External Accountability Affect Student
Outcomes? A Cross-State Analysis,” Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis 24(4):
305 – 331.
Center on Education Policy. Choices, Changes, and Challenges: Curriculum and Instruction
in the NCLB Era. Washington DC: 2007.
Cullen, Julie Berry and Randall Reback (2006). “Tinkering Toward Accolades: School
Gaming under Performance Accountability System.” Advances in Applied
Microeconomics 14: 1 – 34.
Dee, Thomas and Brian Jacob (2009) “The Impact of No Child Left Behind on Student
Achievement.” NBER Working Paper No. 15531.
Education Week (2006) Quality Counts 2006 (available online at
http://www.edweek.org/ew/toc/2006/01/05/index.html)

25

Figlio, David (2006) “Testing, Crime and Punishment.” Journal of Public Economics, 90(45): 837 – 851.
Figlio, David and Cecilia Elena Rouse (2006). “Do Accountability and Voucher Threats
Improve Low-Performing Schools?” Journal of Public Economics, 90(1-2): 239 – 255.
Figlio, David and Joshua Winicki, “Food For Thought: The Effects of School Accountability
Plans on School Nutrition,” Journal of Public Economics, Volume 89, Issues 2-3,
February 2005, Pages 381-394.
Going, Scott B., Timothy G. Lohman, and Harold B. Falls, “Body Composition Assessment” in
Fitnessgram/Activitygram Reference Guide (Gregory J. Welk. and Marilu D. Meredith
eds.), Dallas, TX: The Cooper Institute.
Jacob, Brian (2005) “Accountability, Incentives and Behavior: The Impact of High-Stakes
Testing in Chicago Public Schools.” Journal of Public Economics 89(5-6): 761 – 796.
Neal, Derek and Diane Schanzenbach (2009) “Left Behind by Design: Proficiency Counts and
Test-Based Accountability.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 92(2): 263‐283.
Reback, Randall, “Teaching to the Rating: School Accountability and Distribution of Student
Achievement,” Journal of Public Economics, 92 (2008): 1394 – 1415.
Rouse, Cecelia Elena, Jane Hannaway, Dan Godhaber and David Figlio (2007) “Feeling the
Florida Heat? How Low-Performing Schools Respond to Voucher and Accountability
Pressure.” NBER Working Paper No. 13681.
Schanzenbach, Diane Whitmore “Do School Lunches Contribute to Childhood Obesity?,”
Journal of Human Resources, vol. 44, no. 3, Summer 2009, pp.684-709.
Yin, Lu, “Are School Accountability Systems Contributing to Adolescent Obesity?”
mimeograph, 2009.

26

Appendix A: Determining Adequate Yearly Progress in Arkansas
During the time period studied, high-stakes math and literacy tests were given in
grades 4, 6 and 8, and in algebra, geometry and 11th grade literacy. The publicly available
school report card data report the percentage of students with scores on each test in various
ranges (below basic, basic, proficient and advanced), separately for math and literacy. For
each school, this information is reported not only for the “combined population,” but also for
a variety of subgroups defined by race/ethnicity (African-American, Caucasian, Hispanic) and
special classification status (economically disadvantaged, limited English proficiency,
students with disabilities).31
Average proficiency rates are reported in the public-use data for all group-by-test cells
with a sample size of at least 10. However, the cell does not count toward proficiency unless
there are at least 40 students in the cell (for schools with fewer than 800 students) or the cell
represents at least 5 percent of enrollment (for schools with 800 or more students). Since
sample sizes are not included in the report card data, we merge on information from the
Common Core of Data (CCD). The CCD reports for each grade and each year the total number
of students, as well as the number of African-American, Caucasian and Hispanic students in
the grade. We use these data to code whether a subgroup is large enough to count toward
AYP. The CCD only reports the total number of economically disadvantaged students in the
school (as measured by the fraction on free or reduced-price lunch). To estimate the gradespecific population, then, we multiply the school-level fraction that is disadvantaged by the
grade-specific enrollment. No information is available from either source for the number of
students with disabilities or limited English proficiency. After trying several approaches to
proxy for whether the sample sizes in these two groups would have been large enough to

The report cards also list separate proficiency rates by gender, and for migrants, but these subgroups do not
count toward AYP.
31

27

count toward AYP, we dropped both of these subgroups from the analysis. Note that in the
end this improved our predictive power when we modeled the official AYP status as coded by
the state as a function of the program rules and the public-use data.
If fewer than 95 percent of students are tested in math and reading, the school
automatically fails AYP. The report card lists whether the school meets the 95 percent
threshold, and if not it reports the school-wide percentage of students tested. The
denominator of this calculation is all students enrolled in the grade or course at the time of
testing.
If the proficiency rate in the cell is greater than or equal to that year’s passing target
(termed “Annual Measurable Objective” or AMO and displayed in Appendix Table 1), and at
least 95 percent of the eligible students are tested, then that group-by-test meets AYP. The
school as a whole meets AYP if both its combined population and all subgroups that count
toward proficiency meet the AYP requirements. If any subgroup fails to meet that year’s AMO
(and does not meet AYP through the safe harbor provision described below), then the school
has failed to meet AYP. As a result, the binding constraint is the proficiency rate of the worstperforming subgroup that is large enough to count toward the rating. Our empirical approach
reflects this by defining each school by the performance of its subgroup with the lowest
passing rate.
A school can have its AYP status determined based either on the current year’s
performance or the average over the prior 3 years. The metric chosen can vary across years,
but must be consistent across all subgroups within the same year. Our empirical work defines
being marginal under AYP based only on the current year’s results. Robustness checks that
use the maximum of the current year and the 3-year average are substantially the same.
Schools can also be classified as meeting AYP requirements even if the passing rate is
below the year’s AMO under the safe harbor provision, as long as at least 95 percent of

28

students are tested in the year. Under safe harbor, if the fraction of students scoring below
proficient in each subgroup declines by at least 10 percent from the prior year, then the school
meets AYP requirements for that year. In addition, the school meets AYP under safe harbor if
its observed increase in proficiency rates falls within a 95 percent confidence interval of the
safe harbor goal. Over this time period, the minimum increase necessary to meet AYP under
safe harbor was always greater than 5 points, which is the cutoff for being a “marginal” school
in the analysis.
In order to meet AYP, schools must also satisfy the appropriate “secondary indicator.”
For high schools, graduation rate must be at least 70 percent, and for non-high schools
attendance rates must be at least 91.13 percent. Among schools that are passing due to test
rates, relatively few fail due to the secondary indicator. We do not use this information in our
analysis.

29

Figure 1: Estimated Impact of “Marginal” Status under NCLB on Overweight Rate, by Year

30

Table 1: Summary Statistics

Marginal
Below AYP
Above AYP
Overweight Rate
Obesity Rate
Percent Free/ReducedPrice Lunch
Percent Nonwhite
English Proficiency
Rate
Math Proficiency
Rate
Annual Gain
Observations

Full Sample
0.183
(0.387)
0.405
(0.491)
0.412
(0.492)
38.3
(5.8)
21.1
(4.7)
53.6
(18.9)
26.9
(28.3)
13.5
(16.8)
12.6
(18.8)
-0.992
(27.3)
2852

Marginal Schools
(w/in 5 pts of AYP)
1
-0
-0
-39.0
(5.2)
21.6
(4.4)
52.5
(16.4)
20.8
(24.7)
15.0
(15.3)
13.1
(15.2)
3.0
(25.3)
523

Non-marginal
Schools
0
-0.496
(.500)
.504
(.500)
38.1
(6.0)
20.9
(4.8)
53.8
(19.4)
28.2
(28.9)
13.2
(17.1)
12.5
(19.5)
-1.88
(27.6)
2329

Notes: Means (std. deviations) are shown. “Marginal” is defined as the lowest scoring
subgroup in the school being within 5 points of the AYP goal in the prior year, while “Below
AYP” and “Above AYP” are defined as that subgroup being more than 5 points below or above
the AYP goal in the prior year, respectively. Overweight (obesity) rate is based on students
being above the 85th (95th) percentile of the age and gender-specific BMI distribution set by
the Centers for Disease Control. “Annual Gain” is defined as the overall school combined
increase in English and math proficiency rates over the prior year. Observations are at the
school-year level.

31

Table 2:
Effect of Accountability Pressures on the Overweight Status of Students

Marginal minimum
subgroup
Minimum subgroup
>5 points below AYP
Minimum subgroup
>5 points above AYP
Annual Gain

(1)
0.934***
(0.27)

Lag Overweight Rate
Constant

34.68
(150)
Observations
2852
R-squared
0.28
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

(2)
0.485**
(0.21)

(3)
0.591**
(0.23)
0.230
(0.21)

(4)
0.361
(0.23)

(5)

(6)

-0.230
(0.21)
0.029***
(0.0036)
0.708***
(0.017)
-585.2***
(194)
2090
0.65

0.705***
(0.017)
-598.8***
(195)
2090
0.65

0.705***
(0.017)
-598.5***
(195)
2090
0.65

15.87
(151)
2869
0.29

0.00009
(0.0032)
0.709***
(0.017)
-564.5***
(194)
2078
0.65

Notes: Standard errors (in parentheses) are corrected for within school correlation. The
dependent variable is the school-wide rate of overweight, where overweight is defined as
being above the 85th percentile of the age and gender-specific BMI distribution set by the
Centers for Disease Control. All models include a time trend and four powers of the overall
English proficiency rate relative to AYP, four powers of the overall math proficiency rate
relative to AYP, four powers of the percent of students who are nonwhite, and four powers of
the percent of students who are poor. “Marginal” is defined as the lowest scoring subgroup in
the school being within 5 points of the AYP goal in the prior year, while “Below AYP” and
“Above AYP” are defined as that subgroup being more than 5 points below or above the AYP
goal in the prior year, respectively. “Annual Gain” is defined as the overall school combined
increase in English and math proficiency rates over the prior year.

32

Table 3:
Effect of Accountability Pressures on the Obesity Status of Students

Marginal minimum
subgroup

(1)
0.637***
(0.198)

(2)
0.281*
(0.160)

(3)
0.441**
(0.180)

(4)
0.094
(0.180)

Annual Gain

119.2
(119)
Observations
2,849
R-squared
0.325
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

0.026***
(0.003)

0.003
(0.002)

-0.347**
(0.166)

Minimum subgroup >5
points above AYP

Constant

(6)

0.347**
(0.166)

Minimum subgroup >5
points below AYP

Lag Obesity Rate

(5)

0.709*** 0.703*** 0.703***
(0.016)
(0.016)
(0.016)
461.8***
(146)
2,087
0.668

482.6*** 482.3***
(146)
(146)
2,087
2,087
0.669
0.669

0.709***
(0.016)
87.83
(121)
2,866
0.342

472.9***
(145)
2,075
0.671

Notes: Standard errors (in parentheses) are corrected for within school correlation. The
dependent variable is the school-wide rate of obesity, where obesity is defined as being above
the 95th percentile of the age and gender-specific BMI distribution set by the Centers for
Disease Control. All models include a time trend and four powers of the overall English
proficiency rate relative to AYP, four powers of the overall math proficiency rate relative to
AYP, four powers of the percent of students who are nonwhite, and four powers of the percent
of students who are poor. “Marginal” is defined as the lowest scoring subgroup in the school
being within 5 points of the AYP goal in the prior year, while “Below AYP” and “Above AYP”
are defined as that subgroup being more than 5 points below or above the AYP goal in the
prior year, respectively. “Annual Gain” is defined as the overall school combined increase in
English and math proficiency rates over the prior year.

33

Table 4:
Robustness Checks for the
Effect of Accountability Pressures on the Overweight Status of Students
(1)

(2)

(3)

Any subgroup within 5 points
last year
Marginal

1.463***
(0.22)

0.382**
(0.17)

Below AYP
Lag Overweight Rate
Constant

-1.429

(151)
Observations
2852
R-squared
0.29
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

0.705***
(0.02)
594.9***
(195)
2090
0.65

0.428**
(0.20)
0.164
(0.28)
0.704***
(0.02)
599.4***
(195)
2090
0.65

(4)

(5)

(6)

Any subgroup within 5 points in
any previous year
2.605***
(0.32)

0.571***
(0.19)

0.699***
(0.02)

0.703***
(0.20)
0.628
(0.44)
0.697***
(0.02)

459.1***

-460.9**

-445.2**

(156)
2852
0.31

(198)
2090
0.65

(198)
2090
0.65

Notes: Standard errors (in parentheses) are corrected for within school correlation. The
dependent variable is the school-wide rate of overweight, where overweight is defined as
being above the 85th percentile of the age and gender-specific BMI distribution set by the
Centers for Disease Control. All models include a time trend and four powers of the overall
English proficiency rate relative to AYP, four powers of the overall math proficiency rate
relative to AYP, four powers of the percent of students who are nonwhite, and four powers of
the percent of students who are poor. In columns (1) – (3) “Marginal” is defined as any
subgroup in the school being within 5 points of the AYP goal in the prior year, while “Below
AYP” is defined as any subgroup being more than 5 points below the AYP goal (provided no
subgroup was within 5 points) in the prior year. In columns (4) – (6) “Marginal” is defined as
any subgroup in the school being within 5 points of the AYP goal in any of the prior years,
while “Below AYP” is defined as any subgroup being more than 5 points below the AYP goal
(provided no subgroup was within 5 points) in any of the prior years.

34

Table 5:
Results from a Survey of School Principals
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

by NCLB category

% total responses

Overall
1.000

Missed by
more than
5 points
0.217

Spending has increased =1
0.864
0.897
If increased spending, from what source? (Check all that apply)
Food fund raisers
0.105
0.114
Vending machines/pouring rights
0.171
0.343

within 5
points of
cutoff
0.111

Made by
more than
5 points
0.672

0.895

0.847

0.059
0.118

0.110
0.120

Any extrinsic rewards for student
success on test? 1=yes
0.619
0.732
If extrinsic rewards, what types? (Check all that apply)
Food
0.376
0.400

0.667

0.575

0.429

0.356

Weekly minutes spent on subjects:
ELA
Math
Lunch
PE
Recess
PE + Recess

589.4
400.4
191.2
188.9
126.5
303.7

575.4
375.2
192.2
208.6
70.1
265.1

451.2
369.0
197.6
237.9
79.3
317.1

616.9
413.8
189.8
174.4
151.9
314.0

Change in min/week since NCLB:
ELA
Math
Lunch
PE
Recess
PE + Recess

51.7
35.0
-0.9
13.5
-6.5
5.8

62.8
39.5
-0.3
11.9
-5.5
6.3

55.6
52.5
-4.2
11.7
3.0
12.1

47.0
30.1
-0.5
14.4
-8.3
4.6

Where did extra instructional time come from? (Check all that apply)
Before/after school sessions
(optional or required)

0.450

0.585

0.429

0.409

Reduced time on non-academic
activities
Increased length of school day
Increased length of school year

0.381

0.390

0.333

0.386

0.111
0.026

0.171
0.024

0.095
0.048

0.094
0.024

School does some test prep =1

0.887

0.950

0.905

0.864

35

When does test prep occur? (Check all that apply)
After school
0.255
During other non-academic classes
0.121
During recess, lunch or PE
0.055
Before school
0.055

0.474
0.105
0.053
0.079

0.158
0.263
0.053
0.053

0.194
0.102
0.056
0.046

Notes: Not all questions were answered by each of the 191 schools.

36

Appendix Table 1: Proficiency Rate Goals in Arkansas, by Grade Span and Year
Grades K-5
Grades 6-8
Literacy Math
Literacy Math
2002
31.80 28.20
18.10 15.30
2003
37.48 34.18
24.93 22.36
2004
43.16 40.16
31.76 29.42
2005
48.84 46.14
38.59 36.48
2006 amendment changed schedule
2006
42.40 40.00
35.20 29.10
2007
49.60 47.50
43.30 38.06
2008
56.80 55.00
51.40 47.02
2009
64.00 62.50
59.50 55.98
2010
71.20 70.00
67.60 64.55
2011
78.40 77.50
75.70 73.41
2012
85.60 85.00
83.80 82.28
2013
92.80 92.50
91.90 91.14
2014
100
100
100
100

Grades 9-12
Literacy Math
19.50 10.40
26.21 17.87
32.92 25.34
39.53 32.81
35.50
43.56
51.62
59.68
67.75
75.81
83.88
91.94
100

29.20
38.05
46.90
55.75
64.60
73.45
82.30
91.15
100

37

Appendix Table 2: Descriptive Statistics of Survey Sample vs. Overall Sample
Overall

Have
No
survey survey

Demographics
Percent non-white
Percent Free/RP lunch
Majority Non-white=1
Majority poor = 1
School eligible for Title I funds
Receiving Schoolwide title I

0.264
0.558
0.198
0.602
0.749
0.833

0.181
0.504
0.087
0.516
0.721
0.782

0.280
0.570
0.221
0.620
0.755
0.843

Total enrollment

409.0

451.2

400.4

Geography
City=1
Town=1
Suburb=1
Rural=1

0.191
0.192
0.079
0.537

0.206
0.152
0.109
0.533

0.188
0.201
0.073
0.538

% Overweight or At-Risk

0.382

0.368

0.385

Test performance
Overall ELA standard score
Overall Math standard score
Min sub-group ELA score
Min sub-group math score
Min group is close (w/in 5 points)
Fail: Min group more than 5 points away
Pass: Min group more than 5 points away

10.1
14.3
3.6
8.1
0.184
0.391
0.425

14.4
20.8
6.8
13.8
0.142
0.277
0.581

9.1
12.9
2.9
6.9
0.193
0.416
0.391

38

