                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               FINANCE AND GOVERNANCE IN DEVELOPING ECONOMIES

                                             Randall Morck

                                         Working Paper 16870
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16870


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2011




Partial funding from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council is gratefully acknowledged.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Randall Morck. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Finance and Governance in Developing Economies
Randall Morck
NBER Working Paper No. 16870
March 2011
JEL No. G3,O1,O25,P11

                                              ABSTRACT

Classic Big Push industrialization envisions state planners coordinating economic activity to internalize
a range of externalities that otherwise lock in a low-income equilibrium, but runs afoul of well-known
government failure problems. Successful Big Push coordination may occur instead when a large business
group, acting in its controlling shareholder’s self-interest, coordinates the establishment and expansion
of businesses in diverse sectors. Where business groups play this role, many basic axioms of Anglo-American
corporate governance, including the advocacy of shareholder value maximization and contestable
corporate control, must be qualified.


Randall Morck
Faculty of Business
University of Alberta
Edmonton, AB T6G 2R6
CANADA
and NBER
randall.morck@ualberta.ca
1.        The Tragedy of Persistent Poverty
The World Bank estimates that 25% of the population of countries it classifies as “low and middle
income” subsisted on less than US$1.25 per day in 2005.1 That amounts to 1.35 billion people, about
21% of the planet’s population, whose talents are largely squandered by the modern world. The number
of potential death-defying medical researchers, job-creating entrepreneurs, and tuition-paying finance
students we “leave on the sidewalk” is unknown, but obviously huge.

Persistent poverty correlates with deficiencies in education, health, government, etc. (Sachs 2008); but
capital accumulation (Solow 1956) and especially allocation (King and Levine 1994; Rajan and Zingales
1998; Wurgler 2000) appear critical. Good corporate governance – meaning the efficient allocation of
capital and other resources by corporations in the fundamental sense of Arrow and Debreu (1954) – is
thus pertinent.

Shaky metonymies obscure can obscure this. Many equate good governance with strict adherence to
quality control, auditing rules, ideal proportions of independent directors, and other procedural tidiness.
Financial economists measure governance with normalized share values (Shleifer and Vishny 1997), but
this too confounds a thing with a possible attribute. High share prices indicate laudable resource
allocation if elevated by high productivity, but if by political rent-seeking (Krueger 1974) or bubbles
(Shiller 2005).

Each metonymy has merit. Administrative chaos, boards of “yes men” and plummeting share prices
sound credible alarms. Share values appropriately normalized (Morck et al. 1989; Jung and Shiller 2005)
can often gauge governance meaningfully. But attributes of good governance in the US can mislead in
less developed countries (LDCs).

LDCs are not “America, but poorer”. Even the term “corporate governance” prevaricates, for key
governance decisions in LDCs affect business groups, not individual corporations (Khanna & Palepu
1997; La Porta et al. 1999; Morck 2010). Business groups are here defined as listed corporations
controlled by other listed corporations (LaPorta et al. 1999). The largest business groups in many LDCs
can include dozens, even hundreds of distinct listed and unlisted firms and encompass large swaths of
national economies.

Moreover, the US governance focus on professional CEOs’ neglecting shareholders misapprehends the
essential fact that most large corporations in LDCs have controlling shareholders (La Porta et al. 1999;
Morck, Stangeland & Yeung. 2000): often other firms controlled by other firms with wealthy families or
tycoons at the end of the chain. Corporate CEOs are thus servants of a wealthy family or tycoon. The
tension here is self-interested ultimate controlling shareholders versus other shareholders, not
management versus shareholders. Indeed, LDC controlling shareholders, irked by impertinent help, will
echo American calls for more “shareholder power”.

Understanding good governance in LDCs requires understanding business groups. Sections 2 and 3

1                                                                   st
    World Development Indicators database, World Bank, accessed Dec 1 2010.

                                                      1
describe Big Push development (Rosenstein-Rodan 1943; Murphy et al. 1989a) and business groups’
potential role therein (Morck & Nakamura 2007). Sections 4 and 5 consider governance and institutional
implications, respectively.



2.     The Big Push
At the level of individual businesses, the problem of economic underdevelopment is one of coordination
(Rosenstein-Rodan 1943; Myrdal 1957; Murphy et al. 1989a; Rodrik 1996; Rodriguez-Clare 1996; Morck
& Nakamura 2007). Businesses in developed economies rely, usually unknowingly, on multitudinous
other firms, each keeping prices near minimal costs (Matsuyama 1992). Because every firm relies not
only on its own suppliers and customers, but on their suppliers’ suppliers, customers’ customers,
suppliers’ other customers, customers’ other suppliers, and so on; market power anywhere along a
multistranded production chain can raise a firm’s costs (DeFontenay & Gans 2004; DeFontenay 2004).
Because firms may connect to multiple production chains, and because many products and inputs have
complementary goods, each firm depends on the existence of efficient production and pricing in
virtually every other sector in the economy (Matsuyama 1995; DeFontaney 2004). This network of
existential externalities is absent or seriously incomplete in LDCs (Rosenstein-Rodan 1943).

A first mover in initial industrialization thus risks all manner of hold-up problems (Williamson 1975;
Hermalin et al. 2010). This makes poverty a stable equilibrium (Nelson 1956). Trade openness can
substitute for missing sectors or discipline monopolies (Murphy et al. 1989b; Venables 1996; Trindade
2005), but only for cheaply transportable traded goods (Skott & Ros 1997).

Transportation costs are high because most LDCs lack tax bases to pay for infrastructure (Berkowitz & Li
2000). Private ports, roads or railways, fearing hold-up, rationally avoid building first (Murphy et al.
1989a). Unqualified, ill-paid, and predatory officials and inefficient judiciaries preclude contracting
solutions; yet can be entrenched by revered traditional cultures that disparage business and seemingly
endorse corruption (Banfield 1958; Guioso et al. 2004, 2008; Hofstede 1980; La Porta et al. 1997;
Putnam 1973; Schwartz & Bardi 2002).

Further, firms need consumers, but well-paid employees are rare in most LDCs (Clark 1940; Kuznets
1957; Nurkse 1953; Lewis 1954). Each firm thus depends on wages and employment throughout the
economy (Rosenstein-Rodan 1943; Myrdal 1957; Chen 1995; Becsi et al. 1999). Sustainably well paid
employees must be productive, and therefore educated and healthy, but public education and
healthcare remain appalling in many LDCs (Sachs 2008). Specialization also raises productivity, but risk
starvation in LDCs where markets work poorly (Gans 1997).

Market power persists if entrants lack financing (Nurkse 1953; Williamson 1975). In many LDCs, financial
systems are stunted (King and Levine 1993; La Porta et al. 1998); intermediation is costly (Becsi et al.
1999; DeSoto 1989, 2000); and capital is allocated inefficiently (Rajan & Zingales 1998; Wurgler 2000).
Most LDCs financial systems are either state-controlled (La Porta et al. 2002), with attendant
government failure problems (Shleifer and Vishny 1998), or business family-controlled (Di Caprio et al.


                                                   2
2007), with attendant elite capture problems (Morck, Yavuz & Yeung 2010). Foreign investment can
help, but cultural, geographic, and other barriers elevate foreigners’ risk (Caves 1982). Microfinance can
help, (Yunus 2008) but accumulates red tape if state-run (Armendáriz & Morduch 2010) and tends
towards usury if private.2

This Gordian knot was first appreciated by Rosenstein-Rodan (1943), who describes a developed
economy as an extraordinarily intricate network, and observed that many – perhaps most – nodes in
that network are either absent or cartelized in LDCs. This conception of the problem of economic
development has never been effectively challenged, and continues to influence policy prescriptions in
development economics (Murphy et al. 1989ab; Rodrik 1996; Rodriguez-Clare 1996; Sachs 2005, 2008).

Rosenstein-Rodan’s solution is more controversial. To cut this Gordian knot, he called for a Big Push: a
massive state-coordinated investment in the entire network, each industry coming online and growing
as needed by other industries to build a self-sustaining whole – with coordination entrusted to economic
planner, trained by Rosenstein-Rodan at the London School of Economics and investment financed by a
multilateral institution designed by Rosenstein-Rodan that would become the World Bank.

The importance of the Big Push in development economics is hard to overstate (Easterly 2001, 2006;
Sachs 2005, 2008). Its often spectacular failure cost many LDCs added generations of penury, but served
economics by highlighting government failures (Acemoglu & Verdier 2000; Faccio 2006; Fisman 2001;
Krueger 1976, 2002; Shleifer & Visny 1993). Government failure, merely painful in developed economies
(Acemoglu et al. 2010; Amore & Bennedsen 2010; Stigler 1971), can cripple LDCs (Shleifer & Vishny
1998).

A foreign aid-financed Big Push also now seems naïve. Like abundant natural resources, massive aid can
undermine development. Most governments depend on corporate and individual taxpayers for
revenues, and must cater to them to some extent (Tiebout 1956; Buchanan 1965). But aid, like
resources royalties, lets politicians ignore other constituencies if donors, or resources extractors, are
happy. Its elite unconcerned about overall development, the country falls under an aid curse (Rajan &
Subramanian 2007), or natural resources curse (Humphreys et al. 2007).

Rosenstein-Rodan (1943) saw state-control as essential because he saw finance as corporate: “Financial
markets and institutions are inappropriate to the task of industrialization of a whole country. They deal
with too small units, and do not account for externalities. Capital goes to individual firms … There has
never been a scheme of planned industrialisation comprising a simultaneous planning of several
complementary industries.”



3.        The Big Push that Worked
In fact, business groups are precisely “a scheme of planned industrialisation comprising a simultaneous

2
    See “Yunus Blasts Compartamos” Business Week, Dec. 13, 2007, online edition.

                                                        3
planning of several complementary industries.” Thus, Koo Cha-Kyung, Chairman of Korea’s LG business
group, recollects (Milgrom & Roberts 1992, 542): “My father and I started a cosmetic cream factory in
the late 1940s. At the time, no company could supply us with plastic caps of adequate quality for cream
jars, so we had to start a plastics business. Plastic caps alone were not sufficient to run the plastic
molding plant, so we added combs, toothbrushes, and soap boxes. This plastic business also led us to
manufacture electric fan blades and telephone cases, which in turn led us to manufacture electrical and
electronic products and telecommunications equipment. The plastics business also took us into oil
refining, which needed a tanker shipping company. The oil refining company alone was paying an
insurance premium amounting to more than half the total revenue of the largest insurance company in
Korea. Thus, an insurance company was started. This natural step-by-step evolution through related
businesses resulted in the Lucky-Goldstar (LG) group as we see it today.”

Rosenstein-Rodan could not have described the coordination problems a Big Push must overcome more
thoroughly or succinctly. LG remains an important Korean business group, containing 58 corporations,
ten listed. Such business groups feature prominently in virtually every developing economy (Khanna &
Yafeh 2007), and in virtually every major developed economy in some historical era (Morck 2005).3

In developed economies, corporate finance may well be central. But substantial literatures in finance
(Fisman & Khanna 2004; Khanna & Yafeh 2007), and also in strategy and industrial organization (Leff
1978; Chang & Choi 1988; Caves 1989; Granovetter 1994, 1995; Khanna & Palepu 1997), shows business
groups circumventing various of the market failures that, entangled, constitute Rosenstein-Rodan’s
Gordian knot in LDCs.4 The. The role of business groups in a Big Push is thus not an alternative
hypothesis to these lines of inquiry, but a potential unifying theme.5

One such line of inquiry documents the extraordinarily wide diversification of the large business groups
that dominate most LDCs (Khanna & Palepu 1997; Khanna & Rifkin 2001; Khanna & Yafeh 2007). The
largest may have a member corporation in every major industry. But Rosenstein Rodan’s (1943) Big Push
is precisely about centralized direction of firms in “several complementary industries”, and thus
necessarily requires that business group’s directing Big Push industrialization be widely diversified.



                                               [Figure 1 about here]



A second line of inquiry ponders the pyramidal form typical of large business groups (Bebchuk et al.
2000; Almeida and Wolfenzon 2006ab). An apex firm controls a first tier of listed firms, each controlling

3
    Business historians often appreciate that business groups, not corporations, are the meaningful unit of analysis
    for investment, financing, and other business decisions (Amsden 1989; Piramal 1998; Roberts 1973; Steers 1999;
    and others).
4
    Strategy work often defines groups using formal and informal ties between managers (Gerlach 1992; Hamilton
    1997; Orrù et al 1997; Keister 2004; Granovetter 2005; Khana & Yafeh 2007), complicating its applicability here.
5
    This unification is first proposed by Morck and Nakamura (2007) to explain Meiji Japan’s rapid industrialization.

                                                          4
other listed firms in a second tier, each controlling yet other listed firms in a third tier, and so on. Since
each corporation is controlled by its parent, and thus its parent’s parent, and so on; each is actually
controlled by whoever controls the apex corporation: usually a wealthy old-moneyed family or tycoon
(La Porta et al. 1999; Morck, Wolfenzon & Yeung 2005; Khanna & Yafeh 2007). The basic pyramid
structure is often augmented by dual class equity (Barontini and Caprio 2005) or cross shareholdings
(Kang & Shivdasani 1997).6 Regardless, the generally pyramidal structure leaves all firms in the group
centrally controlled, enabling Rosenstein-Rodan’s “simultaneous planning of several complementary
industries.”

Yet other studies highlight the vulnerability of public shareholders’ investments in group firms to
oppressive controlling shareholders (Claessens et al. 2002). This vulnerability arises because the
controlling shareholder invests primarily in the apex firm alone, yet controls all firms in the group. Firms
in each successively lower tier of the pyramid are more completely financed with public shareholders’
money. Indeed, outside shareholders provide most of the capital used by most firms in the group. But a
Big Push industrialization entails the coordinated capitalization of an entire industrial economy: a huge
undertaking that requires truly vast amounts of capital. Rosenstein-Rodan entrusts state planners with
appropriately vast foreign aid inflows. Pyramidal business groups instead entrust huge pools of private
savings to controlling shareholders who may, if their private gain induces Big Push industrialization,
achieve the result he sought.

A fourth set of studies find pyramidal group firms outperforming independent firms in LDCs (Amsden &
Hikino 1994; Khanna & Palepu 1997; Chang & Hong, 2000; Khanna & Rivkin 2001; Mahmood & Mitchell,
2004). This could reflect such firms capturing quasirents from higher productivity (Amsden & Hikino
1999) or more effective rent-seeking (Morck, Stangeland & Yeung 2000). But business groups’ successful
coordination of Big Push industrialization would presumably yield vast quasirents.

A fifth line of inquiry uncovers large pyramidal business in the right geographical places at the right
historical times. The major business groups of Taiwan (Tsui-Auch 2006), Malaysia (Gomes 2006), and
Singapore (Tsui-Auch 2006) expand roughly in tandem with their rapidly developing economies. Large
pyramidal business groups also feature prominently in the “catch up” growth of late industrializers:
Canada (Morck et al. 2005), Germany (Fohlin 2005), Italy (Aganin & Volpin 2005), Hong Kong (Claessens
et al. 2000), Japan (Morck & Nakamura 2007), Singapore (Tsui-Auch & Toru 2010), Sweden (Högfeldt
2005), and Taiwan (Chung & Mahmood 2010). Earlier industrializers – America (Becht & DeLong 2005),
Britain (Franks et al. 2005), and Holland (De Jong & Roell 2005) – developed without them, taking
centuries. Moreover, America’s gilded age trusts resembled pyramids in giving one “robber baron”, such
as J. P. Morgan (De Long 1991), rule over many firms in diverse industries and being financed mainly by
public investors. Also, London-based pyramids organized rapid 19th century industrializations elsewhere
in the world (Jones 2000).

A sixth theme, discernable from the above literatures, reveals pyramidal business groups ubiquitous in

6
    Japan’s postwar keiretsu business groups are the major exception. Relying heavily on cross-holdings, they
    formed as takeover defenses in an already developed economy amid postwar reconstruction (Morck &
    Nakamura 2005).

                                                      5
genuinely developing economies, but not in LDCs termed “developing” only in politeness. The poorest
LDCs lack active stock markets and foreign investment; and without outside equity, pyramiding provides
no leverage. Instead, hawkers and small quasi-illegal businesses (De Soto 1989, 2000) complement
creaky state or elite-owned cartels (La Porta et al. 1997, 1999). Haber (2002) argues that insecure
private property rights force large-scale business and government to integrate vertically: either
politicians control businesses or business families control the state. This too is consistent with pyramidal
business groups permitting Big Push growth.

A seventh line of inquiry explores an exception that proves the rule. Japan’s development is a widely
cited example of a successful state-run Big Push (Ohkawa & Rosovsky 1973). Morck and Nakamura
(2007) show that Japan established state-owned enterprises (SOEs) in every major industry in the 1870s
to jumpstart a modern economy. Soon, virtually all hemorrhaged money, and the ensuing budget crisis
devastated the currency and Japanese government credit abroad. A liberal government organized the
world’s first mass privatization in the 1880s, auctioning off almost all the SOEs. Once burned, Japan
practiced classical liberal economics until the military takeover in the 1930s. The privatizations
ultimately handed most ex-SOEs over to pyramidal business groups organized by leading merchant
families. An emerging middle class bought the public floats of scores of new pyramidal group firms
needed by existing firms to provide inputs, buy outputs, produce complementary goods, and so on. By
the 1920s, Japan was an industrialized economy. Japan’s development thus entailed a failed state-led
Big Push of the sort Rosenstein-Rodan (1943) advocated and a second successful Big Push featuring
pyramidal business groups.7

Finally, several interconnected lines of inquiry show pyramidal business groups overcoming various
market failures that constipate commerce in many LDCs (Leff 1978; Chang & Choi 1988; Caves 1989;
Khanna & Palepu 1997, Khanna & Rifkin 2001; Fisman & Khanna 2004; Granovetter 2005; Khanna &
Yafeh 2007). A successful Big Push must transcend all of these problems, each of which is now
considered in turn.

Business groups are thought to circumvent product market failures. A solution to costly goods markets it
their internalization: two firms that would otherwise do business via a market merge into one, making
their dealings internal transfers, not market transactions. This logic motivates diversification. US
conglomerates carried valuation premiums in the 1960s (Matsusaka 1993; Hubbard & Palia 1999), as did
Morgan trust firms in the 1920s (DeLong 1991). But became discounts in recent decades (Lang and Stulz
1994), and are linked to aggravated agency problems (Rajan et al. 2000; Scharfstein and Stein 2000).8
Diversification premiums likewise fell as Chile (Khanna and Palepu 2000b) and Korea (Frerris et al. 2003)
industrialized. Perhaps diversification constitutes good governance until markets become highly
developed, whereafter agency problems predominate.

7
    Japan’s postwar reconstruction, sometimes portrayed as successful state-orchestrated Big Push, was neither.
    Rebuilding a devastated industrial economy differs from initial industrialization, and econometric evidence
    refutes a positive role for state planners (Beason & Weinstein 1996; Beason & James 1999; Beason & Patterson
    2004; though see Pekkanen 2003).
8
    Morck et al. (199) confirm causality, though reverse causation is possible too: underperforming firms might
    diversify or court diversifying bidders (Campa & Kedia 2002; Chevalier 2004;Villalonga 2004ab; Whited 2001).

                                                          6
Importantly, diversification in LDCs generally means diversified business groups containing focused
corporations in many sectors, not unitary conglomerates. The reasons for this are unclear. Perhaps
business groups of freestanding firms better mitigate the agency problems that encumber large unitary
conglomerates (Khanna & Palepu 1997, Claessons et al. 2003; Fauver et al. 2003), but this is wholly
speculative. Regardless, member firms of LDCs’ diversified business groups typically command either no
average valuation discount or a premium

Some evidence supports business groups fulfilling this role. Chang and Choi (1998) and Chang and Hong
(2000) link Korean groups’ superior performance to lower product market transactions costs, and
Chilean and Indian surveys echo this (Khanna & Palepu 2000ab). But overcoming product market
transactions costs implies a specific form of diversification: vertical integration. This is observed in the
Philippines (Khanna and Yafeh 2007) and Korea (Almeida et al. 2010) business groups. However, broader
diversification is evident elsewhere. Perhaps interwoven production chains, complementarities, etc.
require more nuanced diversification measures. Also, diversification premiums are uncorrelated with
institutional development (Khanna & Rivkin 2001; Khanna & Yafeh 2007). However, if diversification
provides no premium during a successful Big Push, but neither beforehand nor afterwards, a
nonlinearity ensues. Alternatively, diversified business groups might foster growth only in some LDCs.

Another problem business groups might circumvent is capital market failure. Pyramids require outside
capital, and Big Push coordination requires capital transfers between group corporations. Pyramidal
business groups thus arise where capital markets exist, but work poorly due to opacity (Maitreesh & Kali
2001; Kali 2003), risk (Kim 2004), etc. DaRin and Hellmann (2002) model banks coordinating Big Push
growth amid weak capital markets. Our thesis expands this to posit such a role for business groups’
controlling shareholders. As banks are prominent member firms in many LDC business groups, the two
theses doubtless overlap. However, equity financing was important to late industrializers in the West,
Meiji Japan, and recently industrialized Asian economies. Equity is more risk-tolerant than debt, and
business groups’ controlling shareholders can lower group firms’ equity cost because their personal
reputations substitute for transparency (Gomes 2000; Jones 2000; Khanna & Palepu 2005) or because
group firms’ mutual coinsurance mitigates risk (Hoshi et al. 1990). Either would also allow higher
leverage (Chang 2003), facilitating an expanded role for banks.

Business groups clearly reallocate capital internally (Masulis et al. 2010), and often do so through a
member bank (DaRin & Hellman 2002), as in Turkey (Yurtoglu 2000; Colpan 2010). But other groups
instead use a “cash cow”, often a regulated utility or natural resources firm, as in Korea (Baek et al.
2006; Almeida et al. 2010).9 A Big Push requires group firms pooling earnings to fund the group’s best
opportunities (Almeida & Wolfenzon 2006b). Consequently, group firm capex is insensitive to firm
earnings (Hoshi et al. 1990; Shin & Stulz 1998), but sensitive to group earnings in Korea (Shin & Park
1999) and Russia (Perrotti & Gelfer 2001). Khanna and Palepu (2000ab) attribute performance
premiums of Chilean and Indian group firms to financing advantages.

  9
   Japan’s prewar government initially sought to use mining SOE to finance a Big Push, as advocated by Sachs and
  Warner (1999). After this failed, the Sumitomo pyramidal business group became a prime mover in a privately
  directed Big Push using its mining operations as a cash cow (Morck & Nakamura 2007).

                                                       7
Big Push coordination has groups capitalizing new firms in sectors existing firms need. Almeida and
Wolfenzon (2006a) model groups’ advantage from using retained earnings to capitalize new firms, but
do not consider Big Push coordination. Khanna and Palepu (2005) liken India’s Tata group to a venture
capital fund.

A successful Big Push obviates internal capital markets by creating a financial sector, and some historical
evidence accords. Related lending aided early growth in New England (Lamoreaux 1994) and British
dominions and colonies (Jones 2000), but then figures prominently their financial scandals (Kindleberger
1976). Related lending aided Mexico’s early 20th century growth (Maurer 1999; Maurer & Haber 2007),
but hindered it late 20th century (La Porta et al. 2003) as the NAFTA member prepared for OECD
accession. Related lending characterized Thailand’s 1980s “tiger economy”, but destabilized its banks in
the 1990s (Chutatong & Wiwattanakantang 2006). If these cases generalize, developed economies need
corporate finance, not business group finance (Chang 2003a; Cull et al. 2006). Schumpeter (1911)
envisions developed economies growing as creative entrepreneurs found new business empires, and
much evidence supports this (King & Levine 1993; Fogel et al. 2008). Perhaps intragroup capital
reallocation suffices for catch-up growth, but not for bankrolling innovative upstarts (Almeida and
Wolfenzon 2006b)

Ghemawat and Khanna (1998) highlight labor market failure as another major problem business groups
circumvent. A Big Push must mobilize and efficiently allocate the economy’s whole labor force (Chen
1995). But LDC labor market transactions costs can be elevated by cultural traditions stressing duties to
kin and discouraging dealings with strangers (Banfield 1958; Putnam 1973; Guiso et al. 2004, 2008).
Business groups operate internal labor markets in India (Khanna & Palepu 1997), Korea (Chang 2003),
and other LDCs (Khanna & Yafeh 2007) that let employees carry reputational capital between member
firms. Chilean and Indian survey data reveal internal group labor markets more important than their
product or capital analogs (Khanna & Palepu 2000ab).

Public goods present a whole spectrum of market failures, which business groups might also mitigate.
Educated workers are more productive, but education is a public good. Many LDCs lack tax bases to
provide meaningfully universal public education (Berkowitz & Li 2000; Banerjee & Duflo 2008), limiting
the pool of qualified teacher and locking poverty (Easterly 2001). No firm dares finance its workers’
schooling, for they might move to another– leaving the first with all the costs but none of the benefits of
their schooling. The largest business groups constitute substantial fractions of national economies, so
the worker’s next employer might well be another group firm, partially internalizing externalities
associated with education. With intragroup labor markets helping these odds further, paying for basic
education and training apparently becomes cost-effective for business groups in India (Khanna & Palepu
1997), Korea (Chang 2003), and Turkey, where the two leading business groups, Koç and Sabanci, each
built a university. Investment by business groups in other public goods – transportation and
communications infrastructure, ports facilities, and the like – merits further study.

Their role in privately providing public goods might also explain why most large business groups in most
countries are more-or-less pyramidal (LaPorta et al. 1999; Khanna & Yafeh 2007). Law is an important
public goodk but many LDCs’ legal systems work poorly. Pyramidal business groups’ controlling


                                                    8
shareholders resolve disputes between group corporation (Grief & Kandel 1995; Kali 1999). The credible
enforcement of such judgments requires a central authority in incontestable control. Consistent with
groups’ controlling shareholder occupying this position, La Porta et al. (1999) find arm’s-length
contracting costs correlating positively with business group importance. A controlling shareholder’s
reputational capital might also reduce contracting costs with outsiders (Maurer & Sharma 2001), as in
Victorian British overseas groups (Jones 2000) and India (Khanna & Palepu 2005). This too requires the
controlling shareholder’s credible control of the firms over which he leverages his reputational capital.
Business groups’ controlling shareholders, by privately providing the public good of dispute resolution,
may well reduce product, capital, and labor market transactions costs. Thus, the pyramidal form, which
grants a controlling shareholder uncontestable control over all member firms in the business group, may
serve an economic purpose that mere networks of equal firms could not achieve.

The above evidence is consistent with pyramidal business groups causing private-sector Big Push
development in some former LDCs. But large pyramidal business groups clearly do not achieve this
everywhere they predominate (Morck, Wolfenzon & Yeung 2005). The hypothesis that business groups
cause Big Push development is thus not only circumstantial; but also incomplete. If business groups
orchestrate successful Big Push development only “sometimes”, variation in their governance and
interactions with ambient institutions become important issues in development economics.



4.      Business Group Governance
Studies of business group governance generally examine the financial performance of individual group
member firms (Fan et al. 2011; Boyd & Hoskisson 2010; Bebchuk & Weisbach 2010). But Rosenstein-
Rodan’s (1943) point that “financial markets and institutions … deal with too small units, and do not
account for externalities” requires expanding the focus beyond individual firms. In an economy
undergoing Big Push industrialization, the quality of governance – that is, the efficiency of decision-
making regarding resource allocation – must be assessed at the group level.

Nonetheless, many issues in business group governance are familiar. Where business groups advance
Big Push industrialization, these issues fade against the benefits of rapid growth. But elsewhere,
business groups can greatly magnify familiar governance problems. This section refocuses insights from
the corporate governance literature onto business group governance.



Shareholder Value

In freestanding firms, “other people’s money” agency problems arise because a separation of ownership
from control leaves self-interested managers in charge of other outside shareholders’ money (Jensen &
Meckling 1976). The controlling family of a pyramidal business group typically has a large equity stake
only in the apex firm, and severely attenuated financial interests in lower tier firms (Bebchuk et al. 2000;
Morck, Stangeland & Yeung 2000). Thus, in Figure 1, a decision that cuts firm D1’s total shareholder


                                                     9
value by $1,000,000 cuts that of C1 by slightly over $500,000, which cuts that of B1 by slightly over
$250,000, which cuts that of A1 by slightly over $125,000, which cuts the controlling family’s wealth by
just over $62,500. Thus, the controlling family’s real financial interest (cash flow rights) in firm D1 is only
6.25%. Referring to pyramidal groups, Berle and Means (1932, 71) conclude: “control can be effectively
divorced from legal ownership and factual power can be exercised over great aggregates of wealth with
almost no interest therein.” Pyramidal business groups’ lower tier firms are thus exposed to “other
people’s money” agency problems as assuredly as are widely held firms whose managers own little
stock (Bebchuk et al. 2000). For example, the controlling family in Figure 1 would rationally spend a
$1,000,000 of D1’s money on a private jet the family valued anywhere above $62,501; as would a
professional manager owning 6.25% of an otherwise diffusely owned firm (Jensen & Meckling 1976).
Inserting more tiers halves the family’s actual financial interest once for each tier; and actual pyramidal
groups can contain upwards of a dozen tiers (Morck, Stangeland & Yeung 2000).

Rational public shareholders presumably anticipate this, and ceteris paribus pay less for shares in lower
tier firms. This need not constitute an expropriation of public shareholders’ wealth unless the insiders
somehow deceived public shareholders about the magnitudes of likely diversions. Nonetheless,
depressed valuations can compromise social welfare by decreasing entrepreneurs’ payoffs from going
public, thereby lowering the returns to entrepreneurship.

Large shareholders can mitigate “other people’s money” agency problems because they bear more of
the cost of any poor investment (Shleifer & Vishny 1986), but this logic obviously does not apply to the
member firms of a pyramidal group, each of which seemingly has a majority shareholder: the firm above
it in the pyramid. Actually, all the member firms have only one controlling shareholder, the family, and
its actual financial stake in lower tier firms can be small. Nonetheless, it controls a majority of votes
every member firm’s board elections, and thus can directly appoint the entire board of every member
firm, and thereby indirectly appoint their CEOs and other top officers. Firms whose top decision-makers
have uncontestable control are vulnerable to “entrenchment” problems: a second class of agency
problems (Morck, Shleifer and Vishny 1988; Stulz 1988). All the member firms in a pyramidal business
group are thus susceptible to entrenchment problems. For example, if a senile or talentless family
patriarch appointed inept cronies as CEOs throughout the pyramid, the other shareholders could do
nothing about it.

In addition, pyramiding creates an agency problem largely unknown in economies of freestanding firms:
tunnelling (Johnson et al. 2000), wherein profits percolate upwards to the apex firm. For example, firm
D1 in Figure 1 might transfer $1,000,000 to A1 by purchasing its goods or services at artificially high
prices, or borrowing from it at artificially high interest rates.10 This transfer augments the family’s wealth
by $500,000 (A1 is worth a million dollars more) less $62,500 (D1 is worth a million dollars less), or
$437,500. Much empirical evidence detects tunneling (Claessens et al. 2000, 2002; Joh, 2003; Bertrand
et al. 2002, Cheung et al. 2006; Bae et al. 2002; Baek et al. 2004, 2006; Masulis et al. 2010; and others),
especially where public shareholders’ legal rights against controlling shareholders are weak (La Porta et


10
     Multinationals use similar transactions move taxable income to low-tax countries (Caves 1982).

                                                          10
al. 2006).11

In developed economies with business groups, corporate governance laws aim to check such practices
(La Porta et al. 2006). But if pyramidal business groups are to orchestrate Big Push growth in LDCs, they
must be able to sacrifice value in one firm when necessary. Hold-up, monopoly pricing, and other such
strategies might maximize the shareholder valuation of the firms undertaking them, but derail a Big
Push. Not maximizing the shareholder valuations of such firms would constitute good governance amid
a Big Push. Pyramids with entrenched controlling shareholder can subordinate one firm’s shareholder
value for the good of the group, tunnel capital from profitable firms to start or expand firms needed to
complete missing pieces of the economic jigsaw, and so on.

This disconnection of firm-level shareholder value maximization from efficient resource allocation raises
a host of unanswered questions. Might good governance then be recast as maximizing the value of the
whole business group? The controlling shareholder in Figure 1 gains if all the firms in the group act to
enhance their collective value; and this might internalize externalities that would block a Big Push in an
economy of freestanding firms. Good governance might then imply a Pareto improvement criterion:
decisions that harm one group firm might be justified by benefits to other group firms. Operationalizing
this is problematic though, for unlisted firms dot most business groups, and shareholders and courts
would have to value these. Estimating the values of whole business groups, let alone their fluctuations in
response to various business decisions, is almost wholly virgin territory for researchers.

Maximizing the value of a group’s apex firm could allocate resources efficiently. Yoshisuke Aikawa
(1934), the founder of prewar Japan’s Nissan pyramidal group (zaibatsu), describes pyramiding as an
elegant solution to the coordination problems associated with rapid industrialization. Nissan was
unusual, in that its apex firm was widely held, not controlled by the Aikawa family, and Aikawa argues
that this promoted efficient resource allocation throughout the pyramid, as any decision that harmed
one subsidiary would have to benefit others to a greater extent to maximize the shareholder value of
the apex firm. This follows if the apex firm’s cash flow interests in each group firm replicate the weights
a selfless central planner would assign. Whether actual business groups are so structured or not is
unknown, as are the effects of varying member firm weights or positions on group performance or
groups’ contributions to economic development.12



Business Group Finance

The placement of a group’s bank is of special interest because banks channel capital to other group
firms. Some prewar Japanese pyramidal groups emulated the Mitsui pyramid, putting their banks at or

11
     As with conglomerates, reverse causation is also possible: expected underperformers might be started in lower
     tiers (Almeida et al. 2010).
12
     Work relevant to these issues is only beginning, but shows great promise (Maman 1999; Acemoglu et al 2003,
     2007; Almeida & Wolfenzon 2006ab; Almeida et al. 2010; Khanna & Yafeh 2007; Masulis et al. 2010). The
     strategy literature debates related issues, but stressing board interlocks, social networks, etc. (Granovetter
     1994; Khanna and Yafeh 2007).

                                                           11
near their apexes. Others emulated the Suzuki pyramid and minimized their controlling shareholders’
cash flow rights in their banks. When a 1923 earthquake caused a financial meltdown, Suzuki’s bank
failed, in part because funds were tunneled out of it, leavings all other Suzuki firms insolvent. This and
subsequent panics destroyed every pyramidal group structured like Suzuki; but all those structured like
Mitsui survived (Morck and Nakamura 2005). How this generalizes is unknown, though Chang (2003)
and Chutatong and Wiwattanakantang (2006) document elevated fragility of related lending during
financial crises.

Jensen (1986) argues that higher leverage constrains governance problems; and pyramidal business
group member firms are more leveraged than independents in Korea (Choi & Cowing 1999; Lee & Lee
2002; Shin & Park 1999), Canada (Daniels et al. 1996), and Italy (Biancoa & Nicodano 2006). However,
Khanna and Yafeh (2007) caution that debts to group financial institutions (or cash cows) are unlikely to
exert the same discipline as arm’s-length debt. Neither Canada nor Korea lets business groups contain
banks, though both allow other financial institutions, so higher group leverage might indeed merely
reflect extensive related lending. Moreover, in business groups, debt lets group firms expand without
diluting control blocks (Dalquist et al. 2003), potentially fostering pyramids of rickety related-party loans
Because the largest few pyramidal groups constitute substantial fractions of many LDCs’ economies,
such groups’ failures would constitute systemic risk.

As mentioned above, business groups’ circumvention of weak capital markets entails transferring capital
between group firms, reduces their costs of capital, and perhaps justifies higher overall leverage (Hoshi
et al. 1990; Khanna & Yafeh 2007; Gopalan et al. 2007; Masulis et al. 2010). Ascertaining whether
business group firms’ high leverage reflects well-functioning internal capital markets or profligate
related lending requires further research. LDCs’ largest business groups successfully weather major
financial crises (Fogel et al. 2008), consistent with efficient risk pooling. But systemic risk raises
expectations of bailouts, which also allow higher leverage and promote survival. Family controlled
banking systems correlate with inefficient capital allocation (Morck et al.2010), but that this turns on
related lending is unclear; and Ferris et al. (2003) argue that large Korean business groups are
inefficiently risk averse.

Corporate finance linkages between dividend policy and good governance may also not carry over to
business groups (Morck & Yeung 2005). A corporation’s optimal dividend policy entails dispersing
earnings unneeded for value-enhancing investment opportunities or efficient financial slack (Myers &
Majluf 1986). Excessive retained earnings invested in value-destroying projects are thought a common
corporate governance problem (Jensen 1986), so high dividends are associated with good corporatize
governance (Jensen 1986; Dennis 1990; DeAngelo & DeAngelo 2000). But in LDCs experiencing Big Push
industrialization, optimal dividend policy entails firms paying out earnings above the costs of their
business group’s value-enhancing investment opportunities plus an efficient cash cushion.

These considerations suggest that group firms’ dividends ought to be low during a Big Push, and rise
after it ends. Consistent with this, Faccio et al. (2001) report business group member firms’ dividends
lower than independents’ in Asia, but higher in Europe. They explain European group firms’ higher
dividends as necessary because shareholders perceive greater scope for misallocating retained earnings


                                                     12
in groups. More generally, La Porta et al. (2000) link higher dividends with stronger shareholder rights,
and argue that such rights empower shareholders to demand high dividends. Dividends might thus rise
as a Big Push draws concludes and governments strengthen shareholder rights in response to middle
class investors’ increased political clout.



Labor as a Big Push Stakeholder

Roe (2003), examining developed economies, finds more powerful labor movements where corporate
ownership is more concentrated. Roe argues that large shareholders protect small shareholders from
powerful workers, but this need not follow if the large shareholders are control blocks in pyramidal
groups. An alternative interpretation explains this correlation as an artifact of a relatively recent Big
Push. As argued above, a Big Push led by business groups leaves most firms with controlling
shareholders. If economically innocuous, this condition might persist – perhaps for decades.

As noted above, a middle class of consumers and savers is an externality that a Big Push industrialization
must internalize (Murphy et al. 1989a; Chen 1995). Henry Ford famously quipped that he paid his
workers enough to buy Fords (Raff & Summers 1987). But Ford workers are unlikely to spend raises only
on Fords. Creating a large car-buying middle class requires wage increases by all, or at least most,
employers.

Very large pyramidal business groups, especially those comprising significant portions of national
economies, might manage this because their workers actually might actually spend appreciable fractions
of any raises on goods made by their employer’s business group. Consistent with this, Khanna and Yafeh
(2007) report higher wages at group firms; and Musacchio (2004) links the rise of business groups to
labor power in Brazil. But empowering a labor movement is a more thorough solution because it
credibly commits all employers to sharing the cost of creating and sustaining a large middle class of
consumers and savers. Thus, as the Big Push fills in more missing pieces of the economy, making
freestanding firms viable, business group controlling shareholders might lobby for more powerful labor
laws to force independents to shoulder their part of the burden. Again, institutions empowering labor
might persist long after this purpose is forgotten.



Systemic Risk-Return Tradeoff

If business groups are to orchestrate a Big Push, they must be large enough to internalize the various
externalities Rosenstein-Rodan (1943) documents retarding development. This is observed: many LDCs’
largest business groups constitute macroeconomically significant fractions of national economies. India’s
two largest pyramidal groups, those of the Tata and Birla families, included about half of the country’s
listed firms’ assets throughout most of its modern history (Khanna & Palepu 2005; Sarkar 2010). Mere
handfuls of large family-controlled business groups constitute the greater parts of the big business
sectors of most Latin American and Asian countries (Morck, Wolfenzon & Yeung 2005; Fogel 2007;


                                                   13
Khanna & Yafeh 2007). This has seldom-considered risk implications.

Finance theory distinguishes systematic from firm-specific risk. Systematic risk – due to unexpected
shifts in government policy, sentiment, and the like – affects all or most firms simultaneously. Firm-
specific risk – due, for example, to unexpected decisions by a firm’s top managers – affects only one
firm, or a most a firm and its immediate customers and suppliers. Systematic risk elevates costs of
capital because it cannot be diversified away; whereas firm-specific risk does not because it cancels out
if investors hold the stocks of many different firms.

In many LDCs, investors cannot diversify across industries without including the stocks of numerous
corporations controlled by each major business family. If the economic purpose of large business groups
is Big Push coordination, all the firms in a business group are apt to make the same mistake at the same
time – turning risk that would be firm-specific in an economy of freestanding firms into systematic risk.
Thus, business groups may render systematic a greater proportion of the risk investors must bear. This
could elevate costs of capital, slow growth, and – if large business groups become “too big to fail –
create systemic risk.

Stocks trading in LDCs do expose investors to more systematic risk and less firm-specific risk than do
stocks in developed economies (Morck, Yeung and Yu 2000). This stylized fact is related to less
transparency (Durnev et al. 2003; Jin and Myers 2006; Chen et al. 2007), less creative destruction (Chun
et al. 2008), less complete arbitrage (Bris et al. 2007, securities law lacunae (Daouk et al. 2006), and
other institutional infirmities.

More concentrated ownership correlates with greater firm-specific risk in the stocks of a developed
economy (Brockman and Yan. 2009). But Khanna and Thomas (2009) find the stocks of Chilean business
group member firms rising and falling more synchronously than those of independents. Research on
very large business groups and systematic, or systemic, risk in across LDCs and over time as economies
develop is needed.



Appropriate Governance

A private-sector-led Big Push may require large business groups, but large business groups do not lead a
successful Big Push. Indeed, they usually do not. Virtually every major Latin American and Asian
economy has experienced brief eras of rapid growth, but most fizzled, and only a handful of Asian
economies managed genuine economic takeoffs (Rostow 1960). Yet business groups predominate
throughout these regions (La Porta et al. 1999; Claessens, Djankov & Lang 2000). More spectacularly,
Argentina fell from developed to developing status by some reckonings, with business groups
commanding the heights of its economy all the while (Fracchia, Mesquita & Quiroga 2010).

Clearly, some countries large business groups are either unable or unwilling to organize Big Push
development. One possible reason for this is governance problems in business groups. Perhaps those
entrusted with the governance of large business groups lack the incentives or talent needed to pull off a


                                                   14
successful Big Push.

Many Anglo-American corporate governance reforms turn on improving incentives. For example,
America’s 202 Sarbanes Oxley Act mandates more salient CEO responsibility for internal control failures.
This approach is criticized as costly (Zhang 2010), and voluntarily enhanced internal controls, which arise
from time to time as management fads, appear inefficacious (Micklethwait & Wooldridge 1996).
Moreover, amid a Big Push, the “internal” control mechanisms needed would presumably be at the
business group level, rendering US firm-level experience an inappropriate template for LDCs.

Another means of aligning align top corporate decision-makers incentives with good corporate
governance is strengthened shareholder rights, meaning greater officer and director liability to
shareholder lawsuits (La Porta et al. 1997). This too may not carry over to LDCs, where controlling
families make major decision and firms’ directors and officers, including CEOs, merely obey orders. Suing
such a CEO is like suing a US conglomerate’s division manager, or wealthy family’s butler. Indeed,
business families in LDCs sometimes support stronger shareholder rights to better discipline the help.
Recent work stressing public shareholder’s legal rights against ultimate controlling shareholders, rather
than shareholders’ legal rights against managers, is more apropos (LaPorta et al. 2006). But the
conditions under which such lawsuits ought to succeed in LDCs are unclear because, as discussed above,
firm-level shareholder value maximization is not obviously socially optimal amid a Big Push.

Incentive-based CEO pay is also though important (Bebcuk & Fried 2004). But again, controlling
shareholders, not CEOs, make key decisions in LDC business groups. Controlling shareholders’ firm-level
pay-performance sensitivity is approximately their cash flow rights (La Porta et al. 1999), which correlate
positively with firm-level shareholder valuation (Morck, Wolfenzon & Yeung 2005; Masulis et al. 2010).
The extent to which the controlling shareholder’s overall wealth maximization might induce decisions
that advance Big Push growth is unknown at present.

Incentives can be augmented by measures that attract talent and improve the quality of decisions.
Independent directors, chairs, and board committees are thought to do both. They are thought better at
challenging misguided CEOs (Weisbach 1988; Adams et al. 2010) and countering groupthink (Morck
2008). Unfortunately, Anglo-American rules, which define “independent” as lacking business ties to the
corporation, go amiss in LDCs. For example, the CEO of one group firm may have no financial ties to
another group firm, but is hardly an independent voice on its board. Were independence redefined as
lacking ties to the business group or its controlling shareholder, impartiality might be more credible. But
in many LDCs, big business is a handful of large pyramidal groups and the pool of qualified genuinely
independent directors is shallow – especially if managers with ties to rival business groups are excluded,
as they obviously must be. Finally, even fully qualified and genuinely independent directors may shrink
from challenging a family commanding unassailable voting control.

Studies of Anglo-American governance highlight the importance of takeovers in removing untalented or
venal managers (Jensen & Ruback 1983; Franks et al. 2005). But if pyramidal business groups coordinate
Big Push growth, their member firms must be immune to takeovers. Otherwise, raiders could identify
firms with hold-up power over other firms, and rival raiders would bid up their share prices to the point


                                                    15
where the winner would have to aggressively hold up other firms. The mere possibility this would suffice
to prevent Big Push coordination.

Strong institutional investors remove underperforming firms’ CEOs in America and Britain (Weisbach
1988; Franks et al. 2005; Cheffins 2009), but this may be undesirable in LDCs. Amid a Big Push, some
firms must perform poorly to provide, for example, complementary goods or essential inputs to other
firms.

If an entire business group underperforms, its controlling shareholder, not its CEOs, arguably needs
replacement. Firing a business dynasty that controls a huge swathe of a country’s economy is likely
beyond the power of most institutional investors. Moreover, the major institutional investors in many
countries are themselves pyramid group member firms. For example, most major Brazilian (Perkins et al.
2008) and Israeli (Hamdani & Yafeh. 2010) institutional investors belong to large pyramidal business
groups, and are thus controlled by those they would discipline.

Very large independent institutional investors, holding highly diversified portfolios spanning many firms
in several business groups might be able to challenge a powerful business dynasty; and might even
comprehend externalities and, for example, accept tunneling and firm-level value forfeitures
appropriate to advancing a Big Push. But assessing such decisions is difficult, and again asks much of
institutional investors.

Dynastic Governance

Indeed, assessing such decisions may ask too much of many business groups’ controlling shareholders.
In most countries, most large business groups are controlled by wealthy families (La Porta et al. 1999).
Echoing Big Push logic, Marcus and Hall (1992, p. 131) explains that “the residual strength of dynastic
families … is that they integrate functions and activities that specialized institutional orders differentiate
and fragment.”

However, a predominance of family controlled business in developing economies need not
unconditionally commend family governance. A Big Push requires a central authority in charge of
coordination (Rosenstein-Rodan 1943; Murphy et al. 1989a), and Hobbes (1651) rightly notes that any
authority is better than none. In preindustrial economies, kinship is often a primary determinant of trust
(Banfield 1958; Putnam 1973; La Porta et al. 1997), perhaps making family lines of authority the only
feasible starting point in nascent business groups.

Indeed, family firms are not without governance problems (Bertrand & Schoar 2006). Schumpeter
(1911), Knight (1921, c. 9); Hayek (1941, 334) and others stress the importance of entrusting business
assets to the most talented hands. But highly talented founders can spawn untalented heirs (Villalonga
& Amit 2006) because business acumen, like other aspects of intelligence, is at most, unreliably
inherited (Devlin 1997). Moreover, restricting top positions to family discourages effort in both kin and
non-kin (Holtz-Eakin et al. 1993). And aging family patriarchs, once cognoscente of their limitations, can
grow bold with senility (Morck et al. 1988). Families can taint business decisions with emotionally
charged loyalties and resentments; and placating disgruntled relatives or upholding customary status


                                                     16
patterns can overwhelm efficient resource allocation (Khanna & Yafeh 2007). Family feuds can tear
businesses asunder (Bertrand et al. 2004) and shifting cultural norms can undermine family governance
(Mehrotra et al 2010). Firm-level studies in developed economies show inherited family control causing
poor firm performance (Smith and Amoako-Adu 2005; Perez-Gonzales 2006; Bennedsen et al. 2007), but
that this is also true of inherited corporate or group governance in LDCs, though plausible, remains
unverified.

All this suggests a tradeoff: Entrusting a business family with incontestable governance over all the firms
in a large business group may be the only practicable way to coordinate a private-sector Big Push in a
preindustrial economy, but risks all the above governance problems. Conditions that shift this tradeoff
are therefore potentially important in explaining the different development trajectories of different
countries. This is consistent with the empirical importance of country-level institutional variables
relative to firm-level measures of corporate governance (Durnev & Kim 2005; Doidge et al. (2007),.



Market Forces and the Big Push

Chandler (1977) argues that developed economies must manage a transition from family business to
professional management to escape these governance deficits, and documents this transition in
America, Britain, Germany, and Japan. This is consistent with family business groups aiding a Big Push,
but becoming an encumbrance thereafter. Yet family controlled pyramidal business groups still account
for large swathes of the big business sectors of many high-income western European economies (Barca
& Becht 2001); and their importance waxes and wanes in Canada (Morck, Stangeland & Yeung 2000).
Family governance clearly can persist long after successful industrialization.

Nonetheless, cross-sectional country-level regressions controlling for education, capital accumulation,
and initial income per capita link greater family control over big business with worse economic and
social development (Morck & Yeung 2004; Fogel 2007). This finding invites alternative interpretations:
the dominance of large family business groups might indicate either a Big Push in progress, and thus an
earlier stage of economic development, or a low-level equilibrium (Nurkse 1953; Leibenstein 1957) in
which family business groups have an ongoing advantage (Khanna & Yafeh 2007).

Either is possible. The institutional infirmities family business groups circumvent in low-income
economies (Leff 1978; Chang & Choi 1988; Caves 1989; Khanna & Palepu 1997, 2005) are more-or-less
the same infirmities a Big Push must transcend (Rosenstein-Rodan 1943; Murphy et al. 1989a). The Big
Push interpretation may be rarer, for family business groups’ importance correlates empirically with
slower growth (Fogel 2007). But it is nonetheless of great potential importance because many rich
economies grew rich with large family controlled business groups in charge (Morck 2005; Morck &
Nakamura 2007). If both interpretations are at work, and this seems likely, understanding why each
holds where it does becomes important. At present, we have little idea, and can only nominate factors
that might plausibly affect the tradeoff.




                                                    17
One obvious consideration is the strength of market forces, known to correlate with better corporate
governance across developed (Roe 2001; Koke & Renneboog 2005) and transition (Estrin 2002)
economies; and across US industries (Giroud and Mueller 2010, 2011). Causation can even be assessed,
for Rennie (2006) shows US utilities deregulation causing corporate governance improvements. That this
also applies to business group governance is unknown, but plausible.

However, the purpose of a Big Push is to suspend firm-level market forces that would interfere with the
coordination needed to establish an industrial economy. Product market competition could,
nonetheless, be brisk if rival pyramidal groups compete. 13 Intense competition is documented between
large pyramidal business groups’ member firms in each sector of prewar Japan and postwar Korea
(Weinstein & Yafeh 1995). In contrast, US pyramidal business groups in the 1920s, which often
contained numerous public utilities, were condemned for concealing cartels (Morck 2005). Competition
between business groups in Latin America is also generally thought weak (Edwards 2010). Turnover
among business group, presumably correlated with the intensity of intergroup completion, is lower in
slower growing countries (Fogel et al. 2008). Turnover among large business groups in India and Taiwan
is low, but higher for lesser business groups (Khanna & Palepu 2005). Because the usual list of corporate
governance prescriptions for developed economies may serve LDCs poorly, enhancing competition
might be considered. Further research on intergroup competition and development is needed.

Openness to global market forces might substitute for domestic competitive pressure in LDCs
undergoing a Big Push. Imports or multinational subsidiaries could fill in missing sectors or undermine
monopolies (Murphy et al. 1989b; Rodrik 1995; Venables 1996); exports could help domestic firms gain
economies of scale (Trindade 2005); and foreign investors could lower capital costs (Rajan & Zingales
1998; Chua et al. 2007). Foreign investors are apparently largely misrepresented as “hot money” (Choe
et al. 1999); but in any case shun family-controlled group firms’ stocks (Khanna & Palepu 2000a; Leuz et
al. 2009). Multinationals undertake joint ventures with family group member firms (Khanna & Yafeh
2007, n. 36); but can misapprehend their partners’ objectives. For example, Perkins et al. (2008)
describe multinationals’ surprised when a Brazilian family deliberately damages a joint venture to help
another of its group firms.

On the other side of the scales, rent-seeking – lobbying officials for regulatory forbearance, tax
loopholes, subsidies, state-enforced monopolies, trade barriers, etc. – retards development, but might
augment shareholder value if insiders share the gains (Krueger 1976). Thus, the elevated shareholder
valuations Khana and Yafeh (2007) report for LDC business group member firms need not indicate a
positive contribution to economy growth if they reflect rent-seeking prowess. Perhaps business groups
lead Big Push growth where their rent-seeking returns are low, but stabilize low-level equilibriums
where rent-seeking is more profitable. If so, their return to rent-seeking may affect how business groups
are governed. Greater regulation and state intervention magnify the returns to influencing officials, so
the residues of past state-led Big Push failures might lock in high-rent-seeking-low-productivity
equilibriums (Easterly 2001).


13
     See DeFontenay and Cans (2004) on competition between rival networks reducing network inefficiencies.

                                                        18
Where rent-seeking is firms’ highest return investment, all manner of distortions stymie growth (Shleifer
& Vishny 1998). Intensified competition can foster bidding wars for political influence; and an active
market for corporate control can pool corporations under the most efficient rent-seeker (Morck &
Yeung 2004). Rent-seeking may be especially destructive in LDCs because it diverts talent from
productivity-enhancing activities (Murphy et al. 1991) and grows more profitable with experience
(Murphy et al. 1993).

Morck and Yeung (2004) argue that large family controlled pyramidal business groups are likely to be
highly effective political rent-seekers for several reasons: First, the leading politicians of many
developing economies belong to their leading business families (Faccio 2006), streamlining business-
government cooperation. Talent may not be inherited, but old moneyed business families are likely to
be very well connected. Second, old moneyed business families are can play repeated games with
politicians. Third, a few family patriarchs can organize more readily than could the CEOs of numerous
independent firms (Olson 1965). Fourth, corrupt officials rationally view wealthy business families as
more credible favor-trading partners than merely “potentially wealthy” entrepreneurs. Fifth, corruption
is hidden if one business group firm receives a political favor and another pays for it. Sixth, powerful
business families can better wreak revenge on defecting politicians. Lastly, business group member
corporations have multiple points of contact with governments, facilitating cooperation (Bernheim &
Whinston 1990).

Historically, subsidies and regulations favored business groups in Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica, the Czech
Republic, India, Indonesia, Israel, Italy, Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Russia, South
Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, and Turkey (Booth et al. 2001; Khanna & Yafeh 2007). Major Malaysian
business groups actually formed around political parties (Gomez & Jomo 1999), so its business and
political elites overlap substantially (Gomez 2006; Johnson & Mitton 2003). Bunkanwanicha &
Wiwattankantang (2005) describe Thai tycoons entering politics specifically to skew government policies
to advantage their groups. Groups controlled by Indonesian President Suharto’s relatives and associates
benefited hugely from official favoritism (Fisman 2001; Mabarak & Purbasari 2005). India’s License Raj
favored its largest business groups (Tripathi 2004). Business families control most LDCs’ private-sector
media (Djankov et al. 2003; Karademir & Danisman 2007), perhaps to lower their costs of influencing
politicians.

Globalization, liberalization, and perhaps laws keeping media firms out of family business groups might
thus focus LDC business groups on Big Push coordination by lowering their returns to rent-seeking.
Historically successful Big Push episodes seem correlated with greater openness and more limited
government. Japan’s successful prewar Big Push occurred under a succession of hands-off governments
(Morck & Nakamura 2007); and Korea’s successful postwar Big Push occurred under General Park
Chung-hee, whose soldier’s disdain for commerce limited government intervention to export goals in
sectors important to the military (Park 1971). Pyramidal business groups led both successes; and both
followed state-led Big Push fiascos (Amsden 1989; Clifford 1994; Kim 1997; Chang 2003). Pinochet’s
policies were also overtly neoliberal as Chile’s economy overtook its neighbors’ (Khanna & Palepu 2007).
Western late industrializers, such as Canada (Brown & Cook 1983) and Sweden (Lindbeck 1974), also
first became rich under classical liberal governments.

                                                   19
Consistent with a latent tradeoff, business families seem ambivalent about liberalizations. Korea’s
business groups lobbied for free trade and deregulation (Kim 1997), as did India’s Tata family (Khanna &
Palepu 2005). But Korean chaebol resolutely resisted political reform, shareholder rights, and
competition laws (Chang 2003); and the Bombay Club of Indian business family patriarchs lobbied
aggressively for barriers to entry (Tripathi 2004).



5.      The Future Isn’t What It Used to Be
This ambiguity may reflect a time inconsistency in business group governance important to economic
development (Morck, Wolfenzon & Yeung 2005). Entrusting an economy’s business assets to the
patriarchs of a few such groups may be the only proven path to a successful Big Push. But once the Big
Push succeeds, the economy contains a complete roster of competitive industries, functioning product,
capital and labor markets, an educated workforce, and a responsible government with a solid middle
class of taxpayers (Berkowitz & Li 2000) who demand shareholder rights of the sort La Porta et al. (1997,
2006) describe. Large pyramidal business groups, and the wealthy tycoons and business families that
control them, lose their economic purpose.

One strategy business groups’ controlling shareholders might use to protect themselves from time
inconsistency is time dilation. If the economy’s process of development can be slowed, pyramidal
business groups retain their economic advantage longer; and slowing development to a crawl partway
into a Big Push might prolong these advantages for generations (Olson 1963; Morck, Wolfenzon & Yeung
2005). Business groups might effectively lock in perpetual quasirents from their ability to circumvent
weak institutions without ever leading a Big Push to fruition. Consistent with this, Rajan and ZIngales
(2003, 2004) observe marked atrophy in many countries financial development after initial bursts of
industrialization.

Some developed economies abolish business groups outright. America used tax and public utilities
ownership regulations to banish pyramiding after its 1920s boom collapsed (Morck 2005). Japan, under
American military occupation, de facto confiscated the control blocks that held its prewar pyramidal
groups together (Morck & Nakamura 2005). Britain’s 1968 Mandatory Takeover Rule eroded its
pyramids away because an active market for corporate control rapidly forced the delisting of ill-
governed corporations with large shareholders (Franks et al. 2005; Cheffins 2009). With groups gone,
the unit of business decision becomes the corporation and the mainstream literature on corporate
finance and corporate governance becomes relevant (Shleifer & Vishny 1997; Hermalin & Weisbach
2003; Hermalin2005; Adams et al. 2010).

Other developed economies seemingly recast their family business dynasties as economic constitutional
monarchs. Sweden’s Wallenberg dynasty still commands a third or so of the economy’s total market
capitalization (Hogfeldt 2005), but econometric studies show no evidence of significant intragroup
income transfers (Agnblad et al. 2001). Similar findings describe other Western European countries
where pyramidal groups persist (Faccio & Lang 2002). Canada, Hong Kong, Israel, Singapore, and other


                                                   20
high-income Common Law countries likewise retain large pyramidal business groups (Claessens et al
2000; Morck, Stangeland & Yeung 2000; Kosenko & Yafeh 2010). These countries generally provide
investors strong legal rights and proscribe tunneling (La Porta et al. 2006). Their economies seem to be
economies of corporations, and their organization into groups – though still evident – serves no obvious
economic purpose.

The fraction of Canada’s big business sector falls steadily from the gilded age until the 1970s, then rises
abruptly to gilded age levels, and then falls back again in recent years (Morck, Percy, Tian & Yeung
2005). Pyramiding also rose and fell over the decades in Italy (Aganin & Volpin 2005). On average, the
pecuniary benefits their controlling shareholders extract cost public shareholders little in most of these
countries (Dyck & Zingales 2004: Nenova 2003), so the reasons for these changes are unclear. Perhaps
their controlling shareholders gained varying intangible private benefits of control, such as status or
power; or perhaps their returns from rent-seeking changed with political fashions.

Even where great business groups’ controlling shareholders are not obviously rapacious, the political
influence attendant to their control over huge swaths of an economy raises concerns (Barca & Becht
2001). For example, Sweden’s startling paucity of new big businesses is linked to the political influence
of its existing business families (Högfeldt 2005). Pyramiding in Canada increases during episodes
interventionist government, and abates during more liberal eras (Morck, Percy, Tian & Yeung 2005;
Mueller & Philippon 2011), and so may reflect varying returns to political rent-seeking. Cross country
evidence supports such a link (Mueller & Philippon 2011). Chang (2003) finds Korean business group
firms collecting monopoly rents from vertical integration, though Kim (2010) suggests that government
favors matter more. Khanna & Yafeh (2007) quote Indonesian and Thai business family patriarchs
describing vertical integration profits as a prime advantage of their business groups. Evidence
contrasting Korea and Taiwan suggests larger vertically integrated monopoly in the former (Feenstra et
al. 2002; Feenstra & Hamilton 2006), and concerns about monopolistic business groups arose in
interwar Belgium (Van Hentenryk 2003), 1930s America (Morck 2005), and postwar occupied Japan
(Hadley 1970; Yafeh 1995).

Business groups’ rent-seeking power may wane with globalization (Stulz 2005), competition (Giroud, &
Mueller 2010, 2011), public shareholder rights against insiders (La Porta et al. 2006), transparency
(Bushman et al. 2004), fully articulated bodies of business group law (Dine 2000), intrusive tax auditing
(Desai et al. 2007), labor laws (Roe 2003), social pressure (Agnblad et al. 2010), or legal systems that
empower smaller players (La Porta et al. 2008). Where group controlling shareholders’ power is severely
constrained, corporate governance, rather than business group governance might predominate, despite
pyramidal business groups persisting. Business group law might exist mainly to render business groups
economically unimportant.

These issues are becoming politically salient in rapidly developing and newly developed economies of
East Asia, and other nouveaux riches economies, such as Israel. All still feature huge pyramidal business
groups with few signs of disappearing. Indeed, Chung and Mahmood (2006) find Taiwanese business
groups continuing to diversify. Gomez (2006) finds Malaysian groups weakening after their political
patrons’ retire; but Polsiri and Wiwattankantang (2006) describe an enduring strength in Thai business


                                                    21
groups. Hanani (2006) sees similar longevity in Indonesian business groups.

The atrophy of a country’s financial system prevents the capitalization of large new firms, and this can
lead to a freezing of caste. For example, the sons, grandsons, and great-grandsons of their founders
control a third each of Argentina’s major business groups (Fracchia et al. 2010). Barriers to entry and a
freezing of caste not only raise consumer prices and entrust governance to heirs of uncertain talent in
perpetuity, but quite likely also blocks creative destruction (Acemoglu et al. 2007; Fogel et al. 2008).
Acemoglu et al. (2003, 2007) argue that corporate governance and the institutions that shape it must
change as the technological frontier nears. Catch-up growth needs the wide diversification of business
groups to overcome Big Push coordination problems; but growth that pushes the technological frontier
outwards needs upstart firms run by initially impecunious creative entrepreneurs (Banerjee & Duflo
2008) and financed by risk-tolerant public equity (Schumpeter 1911). Institutions that perpetuate
business groups likely bias capital allocation against the entrants on which creative destruction depends
(Almeida & Wolfenson 2006). Institutions that let entrepreneurs commit credibly to equity value-
maximizing corporate governance thus become economically important as economies catch up, and are
the core of Jensen and Meckling’s (1976) linking good corporate governance with shareholder value.

How different institutions engage business groups in Big Push development, sustain Big Push
development, and disengage business groups as a Big Push ends are thus unclear, but fundamental,
questions in economic development. The tragic waste of human potential in economies locked into
poverty is, however, clear. That the tools of corporate finance and corporate governance research seem
capable of clarifying important aspect of this tragedy is fortunate.




                                                   22
References
Acemoglu D, Aghion P, Lelarge C, VanReenen C, Zilibotti, F. 2007. Technology, Information & the Decentralization
         of the Firm. Quarterly Journal of Economics 122:1759-99.
Acemoglu D, Aghion P, Zilibotti, F. 2003. Vertical Integration & Distance to Frontier. Journal of the European
         Economic Association 1:630-38.
Acemoglu D, Johnson S, Kermani A, Kwak J. 2010. The Value of Political Connections in the US. MIT Economics
         working paper.
Acemoglu D, Verdier T. 2000. The Choice between Market Failures & Corruption. American Economic Review
         90:194-211.
Adams RB, Hermalin BE, Weisbach MS. 2010. The Role of Boards of Directors in Corporate Governance: A
         Conceptual Framework and Survey. Journal of Economic Literature 2010, 48:1, 58–107.
Aganin A, Volpin P. 2005. The History of Corporate Ownership in Italy. In: RK Morck, ed. A History of Corporate
         Governance around the World. University of Chicago Press, 325-61.
Agnblad J, Berglöf E, Högfeldt P, Svancar H. 2001. Ownership & Control in Sweden: Strong Owners, Weak
         Minorities & Social Control. In: Barca F & Becht M, eds. The Control of Corporate Europe. Oxford
         University Press, Oxford, 228-258.
Almeida H, Wolfenzon D. 2006a. A Theory of Pyramidal Ownership & Family Business Groups. Journal of Finance
         61:2637-80.
Almeida H, Wolfenzon D. 2006b. Should Business Groups Be Dismantled? The Equilibrium Costs of Efficient Internal
         Capital Markets. Journal of Financial Economics 79:99-144.
Almeida, H, Park SY, Subrahmanyam M, Wolfenzon D. 2010. The structure & formation of business groups:
         Evidence from Korean Chaebols. Forthcoming.
Amore MD, Bennedsen M. 2010. Political Reforms & the Causal Impact of Blood-Related Politicians on Corporate
         Performance in the World’s Least Corrupt Society. INSEAD wp.
Amsden A, Hikino T. 1994. Project execution capability, organizational know-how, and conglomerate corporate
         growth in late industrialization. MIT Press.
Amsden A. 1989. Asia's Next Giant: South Korea and Late Industrialization. Oxford University Press.
Armendáriz B, Morduch J. 2010. Economics of Microfinance. MIT Press.
Arrow K, Debreu G. 1954. Existence of an equilibrium for a competitive economy. Econometrica 22:265-290.
Bae K, Kang, JK, Kim JM. 2002. Tunneling or value added? Evidence from mergers by Korean business groups.
         Journal of Finance 57:2695-2740
Baek JS, Kang JK, Park KS. 2004. Corporate Governance & Firm Value: Evidence from the Korean Financial Crisis.
         Journal of Financial Economics 71:65-313.
Baek JS, Kang JK, Lee I. 2006. Business Groups and Tunneling: Evidence from Private Securities Offerings by Korean
         Chaebols. Journal of Finance 61:2415-2449.
Banerjee A, Duflo E. 2008. What is Middle Class about the Middle Classes around the World? Journal of Economic
         Perspectives27:3–28.
Banfield E. 1958. The moral basis of a backward society. Free Press.
Barca F, Becht M, 2001. The control of corporate Europe. Oxford University Press.
Barontini R, Caprio L. 2006. Report on a modern regulatory framework for company law in Europe. European
         Financial Management 12:689-723.
Beason D, Jame J. 1999. The political economy of Japanese financial markets: myths versus reality. St. Martin's
         Press, NY.
Beason D, Patterson DP. 2004. The Japan that never was: explaining the rise & decline of a misunderstood country.
         SUNY Press, Albany.
Beason D, Weinstein D. 1996. Growth, economies of scale & targeting in Japan. Review of Economics & Statistics
         78:286.
Bebchuk L, Fried J. 2004. Pay without performance. Harvard University Press.
Bebchuk L, Kraakman R, Triantis G. 2000. Stock Pyramids, Cross-Ownership & Dual Class Equity. In R Morck, ed.
         Concentrated corporate ownership. University of Chicago Press, 295-315.
Bebchuk L, Weisbach M. 2010. The State of Corporate Governance Research. Review of Financial Studies 23:939-
         961.


                                                       23
Becht M, DeLong JB. 2005. Why Has There Been So Little Block Holding in America? In: RK Morck, ed. A History of
         Corporate Governance around the World. University of Chicago Press, 613-660.
Becsi Z, Wang P, Wynne M. 1999. Costly intermediation, the big push & the big crash. Journal of Development
         Economics 59:275-293.
Bennedsen M, Nielsen K, Pérez-González F, Wolfenzon D, 2007. Inside the Family Firm: the Role of Families in
         Succession Decisions & Performance.. Quarterly Journal of Economics 122:647.
Berkowitz D, Li W. 2000. Tax rights in transition economies: A tragedy of the commons? Journal of Public
         Economics 76:369-397.
Berle A, Means G. 1932. The Modern Corporation & Private Property. Harcourt, Brace & World.
Bernheim D, Whinston M. 1990. Multimarket Contact & Collusive Behavior. Rand Journal of Economics 21:1-26.
Bertrand M, Johnson S, Samphantharak K, Schoar A. 2008. Mixing family with business: A study of Thai business
         groups and the families behind them. Journal of Financial Economics 88:466-83.
Bertrand M, Schoar A. 2006. The role of family in family firms. Journal of Economic Perspectives 20:73-96.
Biancoa M, Nicodano G. 2006. Pyramidal groups and debt. European Economic Review 50:937–961.
Booth L, Aivazian V, Demirguc-Kunt A, Maksimovic V. 2001. Capital Structures in Developing Countries
Boyd BK, Hoskisson RE. 2010. Corporate Governance of Business Groups. In Colpan A, Hikino T & Lincoln JR, eds.
         (Oxford Handbook of Business Groups. Oxford University Press.
Bris A, Goetzmann W, Zhu N. 2007. Efficiency & the Bear. Journal of Finance 62:1029-79
Brockman P, Ya, XM. 2009. Block ownership & firm-specific information. Journal of Banking & Finance 33:308-316.
Brown C, Cook r. 1983. Canada: 1896-1921 – A Nation Transformed. Toronto: McClelland.
Buchanan J.1965. An Economic Theory of Clubs. Economica 32:1-14
Bunkanwanicha P, Wiwattanakantang Y. 2009. Big Business Owners in Politics. Review of Financial Studies
         22:2133-68.
Bushman R, Chen Q, Engel E, Smith A. 2004. Financial accounting information, organizational complexity &
         corporate governance systems. Journal of Accounting & Economics 37:167-201
Caprio G, Laeven L, Levine R. 2007. Governance & Bank Valuation. Journal of Financial Intermediation 16:584-617.
Caves R. 1982. Multinational enterprise & economic analysis. Cambridge University Press.
Caves R. 1989. International Differences in Industrial Organization. In Schmalensee R, Willig R, eds., Handbook of
         Industrial Organization II. North Holland: Amsterdam.
Chandler AD. 1977. The Visible Hand. Harvard University Press.
Chang S, Choi U. 1988. Strategy, Structure and Performance of Korean Business Groups: A Transactions Cost
         Approach. Journal of Industrial Economics 37:141-58.
Chang SJ, Choi U. 1988. Strategy, Structure and Performance of Korean Business Groups: A Transactions Cost
         Approach. Journal of Industrial Economics 37:141-158.
Chang SJ, Hong J. 2000. Economic Performance of Group-Affiliated Companies in Korea: Intragroup Resource
         Sharing and Internal Business Transactions.” Academy of Management Journal 43:429–448.
Chang SJ. 2003. Financial Crisis and Transformation of Korean Business Groups: The Rise and Fall of Chaebols.
         Cambridge University Press.
Cheffins B. 2009. Corporate Ownership & Control: British Business Transformed. Oxford University Press.
Chen BL. 1995. Self-fulfilling expectations, history & big push: A search equilibrium model of unemployment.
         Journal of Economics 61:245-54.
Cheung YL, Rau PR, Stouraitis A. 2006. Tunneling, Propping, and Expropriation: Evidence from Connected Party
         Transactions in Hong Kong. Journal of Financial Economics 82:343-386.
Choe H, Kho BC, Stulz RM. 1999. Do Foreign Investors Destabilize Stock Markets? The Korean Experience in 1997.
         Journal of Financial Economics 54:227-64
Choi J, Cowing T. 1999. Firm Behavior and Group Affiliation: The Strategic Role of Corporate Grouping for Korean
         Firms. Journal of Asian Economics 10:195-209.
Chua CT, Eun CS, Lai S. 2007. Corporate valuation around the world: The effects of governance, growth &
         openness. Journal of Banking & Finance 31:35.
Chun H, Kim JW, Morck R, Yeung B. 2008. Creative destruction & firm-specific performance heterogeneity. Journal
         of Financial Economics 89:109-135
Chung C, Mahmood, IP. 2006. Taiwanese Business Groups: Steady Growth in Institutional Transition, In S. Chang,
         ed. Business Groups in East Asia, Oxford University Press.

                                                       24
Chung CN & Mahmood I. 2010. Taiwanese Business Groups in the Past Three Decades. In: Colpan A & Hikino T
          (eds.) Oxford Handbook of Business Groups. Oxford University Press.
Chutatong C, Raja K, & Wiwattanakantang Y., 2006. Connected Lending: Thailand before the Financial Crisis.
          Journal of Business 79:181.
Claessens S, Djankov S, Fan J, Lang L. 2002. Disentangling the incentive & entrenchment effects of large
          shareholdings. Journal of Finance 57:2741-2771
Claessens S, Djankov S, Lang L. 2000. The Separation of Ownership & Control in East Asian Corporations. Journal of
          Financial Economics 58:81-112
Clark C. 1940. Conditions of Economic Progress. London: Macmillan.
Clifford M. 1994. Troubled Tiger: Businessmen, Bureaucrats, and Generals in South Korea. NY: Sharpe.
Colpan AM. 2010. Business Groups in Turkey. In: Colpan A & Hikino T (eds.) Oxford Handbook of Business Groups.
          Oxford University Press.
Colpan, Asli M., Hikino, Takashi, Lincoln, James R., 2010. Oxford handbook of business groups. Oxford University
          Press, Oxford ; New York.
Cull R, Haber S, Imai M. 2006. All Bad, All of the Time? Related Lending and Financial Development. Stanford
          Center for International Development wp 273.
Dahlquist M, Pinkowitz L, Stulz RM, Williamson R. 2003. Corporate governance & the home bias. Journal of
          Financial & Quantitative Analysis 38:87
Daniels R, Morck R, Stangeland D. 1995. In High Gear: A Case Study of the Hees-Edper Corporate Group. In R
          Morck, ed. Corporate decision-making in Canada. University of Calgary Press, 223-40.
Daouk H., Lee CMC, Ng D. 2006. Capital market governance: How do security laws affect market performance?
          Journal of Corporate Finance 12:560-593.
DaRin M, Hellmann T. 2002. Banks as Catalysts for Industrialization. Journal of Financial Intermediation 11:366–
          397.
De Fontenay C, Gans J. 2004. Vertical Integration and Competition between Networks. Review of Network
          Economics 4:4-19.
DeAngelo H, DeAngelo L. 2000. Controlling Stockholders & the Disciplinary Role of Corporate Payout Policy: A
          Study of the Times Mirror Company. Journal of Financial Economics 56:153-207
DeFontenay C. 2004. The dual role of market power in the Big Push: from evidence to theory. Journal of
          Development Economics 75(1)221-238.
DeJong A, Roell A. 2005. Financing & Control in the Netherlands: A Historical Perspective. In Randall Morck, ed. A
          History of Corporate Governance around the World. University of Chicago Press, 467-506.
DeLong JB, 1991. Did J. P. Morgan's Men Add Value? In P Temin, ed. Inside the Business Enterprise. University of
          Chicago Press, 205-36.
Denis DJ. 1990. Defensive Changes in Corporate Payout Policy: Share Repurchases & Special Dividends. Journal of
          Finance 45:433-56
Desai M, Dyck A, Zingales L. 2007. Theft & Taxes. Journal of Financial Economics 84:591-623
DeSoto H. 1989. The other path: The economic answer to terrorism. NY: Basic Books.
DeSoto H. 2000. The mystery of capital. NY: Basic Books.
Devlin, Bernie, 1997. Intelligence, genes & success: scientists respond to the bell curve. Springer, NY.
Dine J. 2000. The Governance of Corporate Groups. Cambridge University Press.
Djankov S, McLiesh C, Nenova T, Shleifer A. 2003. Who Owns the Media? Journal of Law & Economics 46:341-82.
Doidge C, Karolyi GA,,Stulz RM. 2007. Why do countries matter so much for corporate governance? Journal of
          Financial Economics 86:1–39.
Durnev A, Kim EH. 2005. To Steal or Not to Steal: Firm Attributes, Legal Environment & Valuation. Journal of
          Finance 6:1461-93
Durnev A, Morck R, Yeung B, Zarowin P. 2003. Does greater firm-specific return variation mean more or less
          informed stock pricing? Journal of Accounting Research 41:797-836.
Dyck A, Zingales L. 2004. Private Benefits of Control: An International Comparison. Journal of Finance 59:537-600.
Easterly W. 2001. The elusive quest for growth. MIT Press.
Easterly W. 2006. The white man's burden. Penguin, NY.
Edwards S. 2010. Left behind: Latin America & the false promise of populism. University of Chicago Press.
Estrin S, 2002. Competition & corporate governance in transition. Journal of Economic Perspectives 16:101.

                                                       25
Faccio M, Lang L, Young L. 2001. Dividends & Expropriation. American Economic Review 91:54-78.
Faccio M, Lang L. 2002. The Ultimate Ownership of Western European Corporations. Journal of Financial
          Economics 65:365-95.
Faccio M. 2006. Politically Connected Firms. American Economic Review 96:369-86.
Fan J, Wei K, Xu X. 2011. Corporate Finance & Governance in Emerging Markets: A Selective Review & an Agenda
          for Future Research. Journal of Corporate Finance, forthcoming.
Fauver L, Houston J, Naranjo A. 2003. Capital Market Development, International Integration, Legal Systems, and
          the Value of Corporate Diversification: A Cross-Country Analysis. Journal of Financial and Quantitative
          Analysis 38:135-57.
Feenstra R, Hamilton G. 2006. Emergent Economies, Divergent Paths: Economic Organization & International Trade
          in South Korea and Taiwan. Cambridge University Press.
Feenstra R, Huang DS, Hamilton G. 2002. A Market-Power Based Model of Business Groups. Journal of Economic
          Behavior and Organization 51:459-485.
Ferris SP, Kim KA, Kitsabunnarat P. 2003. The costs (and benefits?) of diversified business groups: The case of
          Korean chaebols. Journal of Banking & Finance 27 251-273
Fisman R, Khanna T. 2004. Facilitating Development: The Role of Business Groups. World Development 32:609-28
Fisman R. 2001. Estimating the value of political connections. American Economic Review 91:1095
Fogel K, Morck R, Yeung B. 2008. Big Business Stability and Economic Growth: Is What's Good for General Motors
          Good for America? Journal of Financial Economics 89:83-108.
Fohlin C. 2005. The History of Corporate Ownership & Control in Germany. . In RK Morck, ed. A History of
          Corporate Governance around the World. University of Chicago Press, 223-277.
Fracchia E, Mesquita L, Quiroga, J. 2010. Business groups in Argentina. In: Colpan A & Hikino T, eds. Oxford
          Handbook of Business Groups. Oxford University Press
Franks J, Mayer C, Rossi S. 2005. Spending Less Time with the Family: The Decline of Family Ownership in the
          United Kingdom. In: Morck RK (ed.) A History of Corporate Governance around the World. University of
          Chicago Press, 581-607.
Gans JS. 1997. Timing and indicative planning in a dynamic model of industrialisation. Journal of the Japanese and
          International Economies.
Ghemawat P, Khanna T. 1998. The Nature of Diversified Business Groups. Journal of Industrial Economies 46:35-61.
Giroud X, Mueller H. 2010. Does corporate governance matter in competitive industries? Journal of Financial
          Economics 95:312
Giroud X, Mueller H. 2011. Corporate Governance, Product Market Competition & Equity Prices. Journal of
          Finance, forthcoming.
                                                                                                    nd
Gomez ET, Jomo KS. 1999. Malaysia's Political Economy: Politics, Patronage and Profits, 2 ed. Cambridge
          University Press.
Gomez ET. 2006. Malaysian Business Groups: The State and Capital Development in the Post-currency Crisis
          Period." In Chang S, ed. Business Groups in East Asia. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 119-46.
Gopalan, Radhakrishnan, Vikram Nanda, and Amit Seru. 2007. Affiliated Firms and Financial Support: Evidence
          from Indian Business Groups. Journal of Financial Economics 86:759-795.
Granovetter M. 1994. Business groups. In Smelser JN, Swedberg R, eds. Handbook of Economic Sociology.
          Princeton University Press.
                                                                                                              nd
Granovetter M. 2005. Business Groups. In Smelser JN, Swedberg R, eds. Handbook of Economic Sociology, 2 Ed.
          Russell Sage Foundation, NY.
Granovetter Mark. 1995. Coase Revisited: Business Groups in the Modern Economy. Industrial & Corporate Change
          4:93–130.
Guiso L, Sapienza P, Zingales L. 2004. The Role of Social Capital in Financial Development. American Economic
          Review 94:526.
Guiso L, Sapienza P, Zingales L. 2008. Trusting the Stock Market. Journal of Finance 63, 2557.
Haber S. 2002. Crony Capitalism & Economic Growth in Latin America.Hoover Institution Press.
Hadley E. 1970. Antitrust in Japan. Princeton University Press.
Hamdani A, Yafeh Y. 2010. Institutional Investors & Minority Shareholder Activism: Do They Matter When
          Ownership Is Concentrated? Hebrew University of Jerusalem working paper.


                                                       26
Hanani A. 2006. Indonesian Business Groups: The crisis in progress. In Chang S, ed. Business Groups in East Asia
          after the Crisis. University of Oxford Press, 179-204.
Hayek F. 1941. Pure Theory of Capital. NY: Macmillan.
Hermalin BE, Katz ML. 2006. Information and the Hold-Up Problem. Haas School of Business working paper.
          University of California at Berkeley.
Hermalin BE, Weisbach MS, 2003. Boards of directors as an endogenously determined institution: A survey of the
          economic literature. Economic Policy Review - Federal Reserve Bank of NY 9:7.
Hermalin BE. 2005. Trends in Corporate Governance. Journal of Finance 60: 2351-84.
Hobbes T. 1651. Leviathan. Thomas Crooke, London.
Hofstede GH. 1980. Culture's consequences. Sage Publications, Beverly Hills.
Högfeldt P 2005. The History & Politics of Corporate Ownership in Sweden. In: Morck R (ed.) A History of Corporate
          Governance around the World. University of Chicago Press, 62.
Holtz-Eakin D, Joulfaian D, Rosen H. 1993. The Carnegie conjecture: Some empirical evidence. Quarterly Journal of
          Economics 108:413
Hoshi T, Kashyap A, Scharfstein D.1990. The Role of Banks in Reducing the Costs of Financial Distress in Japan.
          Journal of Financial Economics 27:67-88.
Hubbard RG, Palia D. 1999. A Reexamination of the Conglomerate Merger Wave in the 1960s: An Internal Capital
          Markets View. Journal of Finance 54:1131-52.
Humphreys M, Sachs J, Stiglitz J. 2007. Escaping the resource curse. Columbia University Press, NY
Jensen M, Meckling W. 1976. Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency Costs & Ownership Structure.
          Journal of Financial Economics 3:305-60.
Jensen M, Ruback R.1983. The Market for Corporate Control: The Scientific Evidence. Journal of Financial
          Economics 11:5-50.
Jensen M. 1986. Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance, and Takeovers. American Economic Review
          76:323-29.
Jin L, Myers SC. 2006. R2 around the World: New Theory & New Tests. Journal of Financial Economics 79:257-92.
Joh SW. 2003. Corporate Governance and Firm Profitability: Evidence from Korea before the Economic Crisis.
          Journal of Financial Economics 68:287-322.
Johnson S, Lopez-de-Silanes F, Shleifer A. 2000. Tunneling. American Economic Review 90:22-27
Johnson S, Mitton T. 2003. Cronyism and Capital Controls: Evidence from Malaysia. Journal of Financial Economics
          67:351-82.
                                                                                       th      th
Jones G. 2000. Merchants to Multinationals: British Trading Companies in the 19 & 20 Centuries. Oxford
          University Press.
Kali R. 2003. Business Groups, the Financial Market and Modernization. Economics of Transition 11:871-96.
Kang JK, Shivdasani A. 1997. Corporate Restructuring during Performance Declines in Japan. Journal of Financial
          Economics 46:29-65.
Karademir B, Danisman A. 2007. Business Groups & Media in Emerging Economies: A Co-evolutionary Approach to
          Their Interrelationship in Turkey, 1960-2005. Problems & Perspectives in Management 5:44-57.
Khanna T, Palepu K. 1997. Why Focused Strategies May Be Wrong for Emerging Markets. Harvard Business Review
          75:41-51.
Khanna T, Palepu K. 2000a. Is Group Affiliation Profitable in Emerging Markets? An Analysis of Diversified Indian
          Business Groups. Journal of Finance 55:867-91
Khanna T, Palepu K. 2000b. The future of business groups in emerging markets: Long-run evidence from Chile.
          Academy of Management Journal 43:268
Khanna T, Palepu K. 2005. The Evolution of Concentrated Ownership in India: Broad Patterns & a History of the
          Indian Software Industry. In: Morck RK (ed.) A History of Corporate Governance around the World.
          University of Chicago Press, 283-320.
Khanna T, Rivkin JW. 2001. Estimating the performance effects of business groups in emerging markets. Strategic
          Management Journal 22:45
Khanna T, Thomas C. 2009. Synchronicity & Firm Interlocks in an Emerging Market. Journal of Financial Economics
          92:2
Khanna T, Yafeh Y. 2007. Business Groups in Emerging Markets: Paragons or Parasites? Journal of Economic
          Literature 45:331-72.

                                                       27
Kim EM. 1997. Big Business, Strong State: Collusion and Conflict in South Korean Development, 1960-1990. Albany:
         SUNY Press.
Kim H. 2010. Business groups in South Korea. In Colpan A, Hikino T, Lincoln J. Oxford Handbook of Business Groups.
         Oxford University Press.
Kim SJ. 2004. Bailout and Conglomeration. Journal of Financial Economics 71:315-47.
Kindleberger C. 1978. Manias, panics, and crashes : a history of financial crises. NY:Basic.
King R, Levine R. 1993. Finance & Growth: Schumpeter Might Be Right. Quarterly Journal of Economics 108:717-37.
King R, Levine R. 1994. Capital Fundamentalism, Economic Development, and Economic Growth. Carnegie-
         Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 40:259-292.
Knight F. 1921. Risk, Uncertainty & Profit. NY: Harper.
Koke J, Renneboog L. 2005. Do Corporate Control & Product Market Competition Lead to Stronger Productivity
         Growth? Journal of Law & Economics 48:475
Kosenko K, Yafeh Y. 2010. Business Groups in Israel. In: Colpan A & Hikino T (eds.) Oxford Handbook of Business
         Groups. Oxford University Press.
Krueger A. 1974. The Political Economy of the Rent-Seeking Society. American Economic Review 64:13-27.
Krueger A. 2002. Why Crony Capitalism is Bad for Economic Growth. In: Haber SH (ed.) Crony capitalism &
         economic growth in Latin America: theory & evidence. Hoover Institution Press, 1-23.
Kuznets S. 1953. Economic Change. Norton.
La Porta R, Lopez-De-Silanes F, Zamarripa G. 2003. Related lending. Quarterly Journal of Economics 118:231-268.
Lamoreaux N. 1994. Insider Lending: Banks, Personal Connections, and Economic Development in Industrial New
         England. Cambridge University Press.
Lang L, Stulz R. 1994. Tobin's q, Corporate Diversification & Firm Performance. Journal of Political Economy
         102:1248-80.
LaPorta R, Lopez-de-Silanes F, Shleifer A, Vishny R. 1997. Trust in large organizations. American Economic Review
         87:333.
LaPorta R, Lopez-de-Silanes F, Shleifer A, Vishny R. 1998. Law & finance. Journal of Political Economy 106:1113.
LaPorta R, Lopez-de-Silanes F, Shleifer A. 2002. Government ownership of banks. Journal of Finance 57:265.
LaPorta R, Lopez-de-Silanes F, Shleifer A. 2006. What Works in Securities Laws? Journal of Finance 61:1-32
LaPorta R, Lopez-de-Silanes F, Shleifer A. 2008. The Economic Consequences of Legal Origins. Journal of Economic
         Literature 46:285-332
LaPorta R, Lopez-de-Silanes F, Shleifer A. 1999. Corporate Ownership around the World. Journal of Finance 54:471-
         517.
Lee D, Lee K. 2002. The Dark Side of Internal Capital Allocation: The Case of Korean Chaebols. Seoul Journal of
         Economics 15:321-68.
Leff N. 1978. Industrial Organization and Entrepreneurship in the Developing Countries: The Economic Groups.
         Economic Development and Cultural Change 26:661–675.
Leibenstein H. 1957. Economic Backwardness and Economic Growth. Wiley.
Leuz C., Lins K, Warnock F. 2009. Do Foreigners Invest Less in Poorly Governed Firms? Review of Financial Studies
         22:3245-3285.
Lewis WA. 1954. Economic Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labour. Manchester School of Economic &
         Social Studies 22: 139–191.
Lindbeck A. 1974. Swedish Economic Policy. University of California Press.
Mahmood IP, Mitchell P. 2004. Two Faces: Effects of Business Groups on Innovation in Emerging Economies.
         Management Science, 50(10): 1348-1365.
Maitreesh G, Kali R. 2001. Financially Interlinked Business Groups. Journal of Economics and Management Strategy
         10:591-619.
Maman D. 1999. Interlocking Ties within Business Groups in Israel — A Longitudinal Analysis, 1974-
         1987.Orgaanization Studies 19:324-39.
                                                                                       th
Marcus GE, Hall PD. 1992. Lives in trust: The Fortunes of Dynastic Families in Late 20 Century America. Boulder,
         Westview
Masulis, R., P. Pham and J. Zein, January 2010. Family Business Groups Around the World: Costs and Benefits of
         Pyramids. Vanderbilt University working paper.


                                                       28
Matsusaka J. 1993. Takeover Motives during the Conglomerate Merger Wave. RAND Journal of Economics 24:357-
        79.
Matsuyama K. 1992. The market size, entrepreneurship & the big push. Journal of the Japanese & International
        Economies 6:347-364.
Matsuyama K. 1995. Complementarities & cumulative processes in models of monopolistic competition. Journal of
        Economic Literature 33:701-729.
Maurer N 1999. Banks and Entrepreneurs in Porfirian Mexico: Inside Exploitation or Sound Business Strategy?
        Journal of Latin American Studies 31:331-61.
Maurer N, Haber S. 2007. Related Lending and Economic Performance: Evidence from Mexico, 1888-1913. Journal
        of Economic History 67:551-581.
Maurer N, Sharma T. 2001. Enforcing Property Rights through Reputation: Mexico's Early Industrialization, 1878-
        1913. Journal of Economic History 61:950-73.
Mehrotra V, Morck R, Shim J, Wiwattanakantang Y. 2010. Must Love Kill the Family Firm? NBER working paper
        16340
Micklethwait J, Wooldridge A.1996. The witch doctors. Times Books, NY.
Milgrom P, Roberts J. 1992. Economics, Organization & Management. Prentice Hall.
Mobarak A, Purbasari D. 2006. Corrupt Protection for Sale to Firms: Evidence from Indonesia. Yale working paper.
Morck R, ed.. 2005. A History of Corporate Governance around the World. University of Chicago Press.
Morck R, Nakamura M. 2005. A Frog in a Well Knows Nothing of the Ocean. In: A History of Corporate Governance
        around the World. University of Chicago Press, 367-459.
Morck R, Nakamura M. 2007. Business Groups and the Big Push: Meiji Japan's Mass Privatization and Subsequent
        Growth. Enterprise and Society 8:543-601.
Morck R, Percy M, Tian G, Yeung B. 2005. The Rise & Fall of the Widely Held Firm: A History of Corporate
        Ownership in Canada. In: A History of Corporate Governance around the World. University of Chicago
        Press, 65-140.
Morck R, Shleifer A, Vishny R. 1989. Alternative mechanisms for corporate control. American Economic Review
        79:842.
Morck R, ShleiferA, Vishny R. 1988. Management Ownership and Market Valuation: An Empirical Analysis. Journal
        of Financial Economics 20:293-315.
Morck R, Stangeland D, Yeung B. 2000. Inherited Wealth, Corporate Control, and Economic Growth: The Canadian
        Disease? In R Morck, ed. Concentrated corporate ownership. University of Chicago Press, 319-69.
Morck R, Wolfenzon D, Yeung B. 2005. Corporate Governance, Economic Entrenchment & Growth. Journal of
        Economic Literature 43:655-720.
Morck R, Yavuz MD, Yeung B. 2010. Banking System Control, Capital Allocation & Economy Performance. Journal of
        Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Morck R, Yeung B, Yu W. 2000. The Information Content of Stock Markets: Why Do Emerging Markets Have
        Synchronous Stock Price Movements? Journal of Financial Economics 58:215-60.
Morck R, Yeung B. 2004. Family control and the rent-seeking society. Entrepreneurship: Theory and Practice 28:18-
        37.
Morck R, Yeung B. 2005. Dividend Taxation & Corporate Governance. Journal of Economic Perspectives 19:163-80.
Morck R. 2010. The Riddle of the Great Pyramids. In Asli M. Colpan & Takashi Hikino, eds. Oxford Handbook of
        Business Groups. Oxford University Press.
Morck, R. 2005. How to Eliminate Pyramidal Business Groups: The Double Taxation of Intercorporate Dividends
        and Other Incisive Uses of Tax Policy. In Poterba J, ed. Tax Policy and the Economy 19. MIT Press,135-79.
Morck, R., 2008. Behavioral finance in corporate governance: economics and ethics of the devil's advocate. Journal
        of Management & Governance 12:179-200.
Mueller H, Phillippon T. 2011. Family Firms & Labor Relations. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
        forthcoming.
Murphy K, Shleifer K, Vishny R. 1989a. Industrialization & the Big Push. Journal of Political Economy 97:1003-26.
Murphy K, Shleifer K, Vishny R. 1989b. Income Distribution, Market Size & Industrialization. Quarterly Journal of
        Economics 537-64.
Murphy K, Shleifer K, Vishny R. 1991. The Allocation of Talent: Implications for Growth. Quarterly Journal of
        Economics 106:503-30

                                                       29
Murphy, K, Shleifer A, Vishny R. 1993. Why Is Rent-Seeking So Costly to Growth? American Economic Review 83:
          409-14
Myrdal G. 1957. Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions. London: Duckworth.
Nelson R. 1956. A Theory of the Low-Level Equilibrium Trap in Underdeveloped Economies. American Economic
          Review 46:894-908.
Nenova T. 2003. The Value of Corporate Voting Rights & Control: A Cross-Country Analysis. Journal of Financial
          Economics 68:325-51.
Nurkse R. 1953. Problems of Capital Formation in Underdeveloped Countries. Oxford University Press.
Okawa K, RosovskyH. 1973. Japanese economic growth. Stanford University Press.
Olson M. 1963. Rapid Growth as a Destabilizing Force, Journal of Economic History, 23(4), 529-552.
Olson M. 1965. The Logic of Collective Action. Harvard University Press.
Park CH. 1971. To Build a Nation. Acropolis NY.
Perez-Gonzalez F. 2006. Inherited Control & Firm Performance. American Economic Review 96:29.
Perkins S, Morck R, Yeung B. 2008. Innocents abroad the hazards of international joint ventures with pyramidal
          group firms. NBER wp13914.
Perotti E, Geifer S. 2001. Red Barons or Robber Barons? Governance and Investment in Russian Financial-Industrial
          Groups. European Economic Review 45:1601-17.
Polsiri P, Wiwattanakantang Y. 2006. Thai Business Groups: Crisis and Restructuring. In Chang S, ed. Business
          Groups in East Asia after the Crisis. University of Oxford Press, 147-178.
Putnam R. 1973. The beliefs of politicians: ideology, conflict & democracy in Britain & Italy. Yale University Press.
Raff D, Summers L. 1987. Did Henry Ford Pay Efficiency Wages? Journal of Labor Economics 5:57-86
Rajan R, Servaes H, Zingales L. 2000. The Cost of Diversity: The Diversification Discount and Inefficient Investment.
          Journal of Finance 55:35-80.
Rajan R, Subramanian A. 2007. Does Aid Affect Governance? American Economic Review 97:322-27
Rajan R, Zingales L. 1998. Financial Dependence & Growth. American Economic Review 88:559-86.
                                                                                                 th
Rajan R, Zingales L. 2003. The Great Reversals: The Politics of Financial Development in the 20 Century. Journal of
          Financial Economics 69:5-50
Rajan R, Zingales L. 2004. Saving capitalism from the capitalists. Princeton University Press.
Rennie C. 2006. Governance Structure Changes & Product Market Competition: Evidence from U.S. Electric Utility
          Deregulation. Journal of Business 79:1989
Rodriguez-Clare A. 1996. The division of labor & economic development. Journal of Development Economics 49:3 –
          32.
Rodrik D. 1995. Getting interventions right: how South Korea & Taiwan grew rich. Economic Policy 20:55– 107.
Rodrik D. 1996. Coordination failures & government policy: a model with applications to East Asia & Eastern
          Europe. Journal of International Economics 40:1– 22.
Roe M, 2001. Rents & their corporate consequences. Stanford Law Review 53, 1463
Roe M., 2003. Political determinants of corporate governance: Political context, corporate impact. Oxford
          University Press.
Rosenstein-Rodan P. 1943. Problems of Industrialization of Eastern and Southeastern Europe. Economic Journal
          53:202-21.
Rostow WW. 1960. The stages of economic growth, a non-Communist manifesto. University Press, Cambridge.
Sachs J. 2005. The End of Poverty: Economic Possibilities for Our Time. Penguin, NY.
Sachs J. 2008. Common Wealth: economics for a crowded planet. Penguin, NY.
Scharfstein D, Stein J. 2000. The Dark Side of Internal Capital Markets: Divisional Rent-Seeking & Inefficient
          Investment. Journal of Finance 55:2537-64.
Schumpeter J. 1911. Theorie der wirtschaftlichen Entwicklung. Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot.
Schwartz S, Bardi A. 2002. Moral dialogue across cultures: An empirical perspective. In E. W. Lehman, ed.
          Autonomy & Order: A communitarian anthology. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Shiller R. 2005. Irrational Exuberance. Princeton University Press.
Shin HH, Park YS. 1999. Financing Constraints and Internal Capital Markets: Evidence from Korean Chaebols.
          Journal of Corporate Finance 5:169-91.
Shleifer A, Vishny R. 1986. Large Shareholders & Corporate Control. Journal of Political Economy 94:461-88
Shleifer A, Vishny R. 1993. Corruption. Quarterly Journal of Economics 108:599-617

                                                         30
Shleifer A, Vishny R. 1997. A Survey of Corporate Governance. Journal of Finance 52:737-83.
Shleifer A, Vishny R. 1998. The grabbing hand: Government pathologies & their cures. Harvard University Press.
Skott P, Ros J. 1997. The "big push" in an open economy with nontradable inputs. Journal of Post Keynesian
          Economics 20:149-162.
Smith B, Amoako-Adu B. 2005. Management Succession & Financial Performance in Family Controlled Firms. In:
          Governance & Ownership. Elgar, Cheltenham, p. 27.
Solow R. 1956. A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth. Quarterly Journal of Economics 70:65-94.
Stigler G. 1971. The Theory of Economic Regulation. Bell Journal of Economics 2:3-21.
Stulz R. 1988. Managerial Control of Voting Rights: Financing Policies and the Market for Corporate Control.
          Journal of Financial Economics 20:25-54.
Stulz RM. 2005. The Limits of Financial Globalization. Journal of Finance 6:1595-1638.
Tiebout C. 1956. A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures. Journal of Political Economy 64:416-424
Trindade V. 2005. The big push, industrialization & international trade: The role of exports. Journal of Development
          Economics 78:22-48.
Tripathi D. 2004. Oxford History of Indian Business. Oxford University Press.
Tsui-Auch LS, Toru Y, 2010. Business Groups in Singapore. In: Colpan A & Hikino T (eds.) Oxford Handbook of
          Business Groups. Oxford University Press.
Tsui-Auch LS. 2006. Singaporean Business Groups: The Role of the State and Capital in Singapore Inc. In S Chang,
          ed. Business Groups in East Asia. Oxford University Press, 94-115.
Van Hentenryk G. 2003. Bankers and politics in Belgium in the twentieth century. In Gourvish T, ed. Business
          and Politics in Europe, 1900-1970: Essays in Honour of Alice Teichova. Cambridge University Press, 89-
          105.
Venables A. 1996. Trade policy, cumulative causation & industrial development. Journal of Development
          Economics 49:179.
Villalonga B, Amit R. 2006. How do family ownership, management and control affect firm value? Journal of
          Financial Economics 80:385–417.
Weinstein D, Yafeh Y. 1995. Japan Corporate Groups - Collusive or Competitive - An Empirical-Investigation of
          Keiretsu Behavior. Journal of Industrial Economics 43:359-376.
Weisbach M. 1988. Outside Directors and CEO Turnover. Journal of Financial Economics 20:431-60.
Williamson O. 1975. Markets & Hierarchies. Free Press, NY.
Wurgler J. 2000. Financial Markets and the Allocation of Capital. Journal of Financial Economics 58:187-214.
Yunus M. 2008. Creating a World without Poverty: Social Business & the Future of Capitalism. Public Affairs, NY.
Yurtoglu B. 2000. Ownership, Control and Performance of Turkish Listed Firms. Empirica 27:193-222.
Zhang IX. 2010. Economic Consequences of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. Simon School of Business wp.




                                                        31
Figure 1. An Archetypical Pyramidal Business Group.
An ultimate controlling shareholder, in practice usually either a business family or tycoon, controls a single apex corporation, denoted Family
Firm. This holds controlling equity blocks in each member of a first tier of listed corporations, in this example A1 and A2, with public
shareholders holding their remaining shares. Each of these holds controlling equity blocks in more corporations in a second tier, in this case
B1 through B4; and these control member corporations in a third tier, and so on. In each tier, public investors hold shares not included in the
control blocks. The largest such structures can contain over a dozen tiers and magnify control over one corporation into control over huge
business groups containing assets worth vastly more. The largest such groups can comprise substantial portions of a national economy.


                                                                                                                    Family Firm
                                                         >50%                                                                                                                             >50%

                                                           A1                                                                                                                               A2

                       >50%                                                                >50%                                                         >50%                                                                >50%

                         B1                                                                  B2                                                           B3                                                                  B4

      >50%                              >50%                              >50%                              >50%                       >50%                              >50%                              >50%                              >50%

        C1                                C2                                C3                                C4                         C5                                C6                                C7                                C8

              >50%             >50%             >50%             >50%             >50%             >50%             >50%      >50%             >50%             >50%             >50%             >50%             >50%             >50%             >50%

   D1            D2               D3               D4               D5               D6               D7               D8        D9              D10              D11              D12              D13              D14              D15              D16

             <50% in          <50% in          <50% in          <50% in          <50% in          <50% in          <50% in   <50% in          <50% in          <50% in          <50% in          <50% in          <50% in          <50% in          <50% in
             each             each             each             each             each             each             each      each             each             each             each             each             each             each             each


                                                                                                          Public Shareholders
