                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     BUSINESS FAILURES BY INDUSTRY IN THE UNITED STATES, 1895 TO 1939:
                         A STATISTICAL HISTORY.

                                          Gary Richardson
                                           Michael Gou

                                        Working Paper 16872
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16872


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2011




We thank Sorottha Han and Jeannie Quo for research assistance. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Gary Richardson and Michael Gou. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Business Failures by Industry in the United States, 1895 to 1939: A Statistical History.
Gary Richardson and Michael Gou
NBER Working Paper No. 16872
March 2011
JEL No. N1,N11,N6,N61,N8,N81

                                               ABSTRACT

Dun’s Review began publishing monthly data on bankruptcies by branch of business during the 1890s.
This essay reconstructs that series, links it to its successors, and discusses how it can be used for economic
analysis.


Gary Richardson
Department of Economics
University of California, Irvine
3155 Social Sciences Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697-5100
and NBER
garyr@uci.edu

Michael Gou
3151 Social Science Plaza
University of California
Irvine, CA 92697-5100
mgou@uci.edu
Introduction

         Business failures have long been recognized as indicators of economic trends.1 Failures

rise during recessions. Failures fall during expansions. Knowledge of these trends enables

businessmen to make better decisions. So, business-information agencies began publishing data

on the issue in the middle of the nineteenth century. The United States Commerce Department

began publishing a series soon thereafter.2 The principal source for information about business

failures during the late 19th and early 20th centuries was R. G. Dun and Company, which

gathered the information from court filings nationwide. From the 1850s to the 1890s, Dun

published information about bankruptcies in various venues and forms. In 1896, Dun began

publishing monthly data on business failures cross tabulated by branch of business, which the

company asserted, was obviously “of the highest interest and importance to the business world”

because the data showed in what directions misfortune had occurred in and which direction

“misfortune was to be expected.”3 Dun was the first firm to do so. Dun continued publishing this

series until the 1930s. The series has, however, lain dormant since Dun discontinued it in 1936.

         This article resurrects that series, entitled “Business Failures by Branch of Business.” The

authors reconstruct it by examining every issue of Dun’s Review (plus related and successor

publications) published between 1895 and 1940. The reconstruction requires the authors to fill

gaps in the series and link the series to its successor, “Business Failures by Division of Industry.”

         Scholars have worked with this data before, but none of the extant series provides the

same length, breadth, and depth of information provided in this paper. The Historical Statistics of



1
    The National Bureau of Economic Research recognized total liabilities of failed firms as a leading indicator of
    economic activity soon after the Bureau began dating business cycles (Simpson and Anderson 1957, p. 193).
2
    The Statistical Abstract of the United States for 1891 included data on commercial failures by state for the years
    1889, 1890, and 1891 and for the U.S. as a whole back to 1879. The Statistical Abstract for 1899 extended the
    U.S. series back to 1876. The information that it published came from R.G. Dun and Company.
3
    Dun’s Review, 5 June 1897, p. 2.


                                                           1
the United States, for example, contains series on bankruptcies derived from Dun’s data (Sutch

2006). “Table Ch408-41: Business incorporations and failures–number and liabilities: 1857–

1998” indicates annual figures for the liabilities of failed firms, number of failed firms, number

of failures per 10,000 active firms, number of active firms, and number of new incorporations.

Beginning with the 1924 edition, the Statistical Abstract of the United States contains similar

information. The table “Commercial Failures: Number and Liabilities” indicates the number and

liabilities of failed firms each year beginning in 1857 and monthly beginning in 1918. Beginning

with the Biennial Supplement in 1936, the Survey of Current Business contains more detailed

data. The table “Finance: Commercial Failures” indicates the number and liability of failures by

month for most economic sectors (manufacturing, trading, etc.) and for many divisions of

manufacturing (definitions appear in the next section), but does not indicate how this data relates

to data available for earlier periods and fails to indicate the changing definitions of divisions of

industry before 1936. This essay presents data on business failures at the lowest level of

aggregation, topically and chronologically, from the origins of the series around 1895 until the

end of the depression in 1939.

          During the 1890s, when the series began, a business failure was defined as a concern

which was involved in a court proceeding or voluntary action which was likely to end in loss to

creditors. Personal bankruptcies of individuals such as doctors, dentists, and lawyers were

excluded. Liabilities of failed businesses were defined “as all liabilities except long-term

publicly-held obligations, chiefly bonds.” The exclusions were comparatively small, averaging

about one percent of current liabilities for businesses that went bankrupt.4

          These definitions arose from the nature of bankruptcy during the nineteenth century. The

United States’ constitution (Article 1, Section 8, Clause 4) provided Congress with the power to
4
    Definitions from Simpson and Anderson 1957 p. 193.


                                                         2
create “uniform Laws on the subject of Bankruptcies throughout the United States.” Congress

exercised this authority several times since the foundation of the nation. In 1800, Congress

passed the first Bankruptcy Act, which it repealed in 1803. In 1841, Congress passed the second

Bankruptcy Act, which it repealed in 1843. In 1867, Congress passed the third Bankruptcy Act,

which it amended in 1874 and repealed in 1878.

       The Bankruptcy Act of 1898 formed the foundation for the modern law of bankruptcy.

The act covered all corporations, except railroads; municipalities; other public entities; and

insurance, banking, and building-and-loan corporations, all of which remained under state

jurisdiction. The act allowed three creditors with claims totaling $1,000 to file in federal court a

petition alleging that a firm had not met its obligations or could not in the future meet its

obligations as they matured. The court appointed a receiver who determined whether the

corporation was insolvent, and if it was insolvent, seized its assets, sold them at auction, and

repaid creditors with the funds recovered.

       This straightforward process worked well in many cases, but the procedure was

imperfect. The seizure and sale of assets disrupted the operations of corporations, and often

proved destructive to the interests of debtors and creditors alike. The procedure inhibited the

reorganization of corporations with the potential to be profitable, because creditors had to

unanimously consent to a reorganization plan. A sole creditor could prevent reorganization. Any

three creditors could compel liquidation.

       In 1934, Congress amended the Bankruptcy Act of 1898. The amendments established

new procedures for restructuring corporate debts. The act covered all corporations already under

the jurisdiction of federal bankruptcy courts and added railroads engaged in interstate commerce.

Section 77 of the Act pertained to railroads. Section 77B pertained to all other organizations




                                                  3
currently under the jurisdiction of federal bankruptcy law. Section 77B was born of a demand for

a method of reorganization more open, fair, and efficient than equity receivership yet still under

the supervision of a bankruptcy court. The Solicitor General of the United States stated that

Section 77B was

        “designed to replace the cumbersome, expensive, and dilatory equity
        receivership proceedings under which corporations were compelled to reorganize
        prior to the enactment of this law, and to permit corporations on their own
        initiative or that of creditors and stockholders to effect a reduction of fixed
        charges and to scale down and excessive debt structure so that the corporation
        may continue its operations on a profitable basis.”5

The new law allowed a corporation to file a petition declaring that it was unable to meet its debts

and desired to reorganize. A federal district judge received the petition. If he determined that it

was filed in good faith and accepted the petition, the court acquired jurisdiction over the debtor

and all of its property wherever located, even if the company was currently under court

supervision, in the hands of a receiver, and undergoing liquidation. The court could appoint

trustees or leave corporate management in place and give them authority to continue operating

the firm. The court divided creditors into classes, depending on the nature of their claims against

the corporation, such as bond holders, stockholders, and unsecured creditors. Two-thirds of each

class (by value) had to approve a plan for reorganization. The corporation proposed a

reorganization plan. Creditors could submit competing plans. A plan was implemented if the

court found it fair and equitable and if two thirds of each class of creditor (e.g. bondholders,

stockholders, and unsecured creditors) agreed to it in writing. Satisfactory plans frequently

involved “the formation of a new corporation and the exchange of new stock and securities for




5
  Dorothy S. Davis, “How Has 77-B Actually Worked? An original research project based on the records of cased
filed under this section of the bankruptcy act.” Dun’s Review, August 1937, pp. 18-21, 46-50.


                                                       4
old. In such transfers, bondholders often consent[ed] to become unsecured by the exchange of

their bonds for debentures or stock. Stockholders may have lo[st] their equity entirely.”6

          Section 77B altered the nature of bankruptcy, and obviously, statistics on bankrupt

businesses. This essay captures that important change by continuing the series on failures

through the 1930s, using the old definition of failure, which indicates the number of firms facing

court proceedings under the rules established in 1898. This essay also establishes a new series,

entitled business reorganizations under Section 77B, which indicates the number of firms

reorganizing under the rules established in 1934.

          The remainder of this essay completes that task. Section 2 describes the sources of data.

Section 3 describes the methods that we use to complete and splice the series. Section 4

describes patterns apparent in the data. Section 5 discusses the implications of our analysis and

potential uses of this new series.


2. Data Sources and Definitions

          R. G. Dun and Company (and its predecessor) published information about business

failures beginning about the time of the Civil War. In 1896, Dun began publishing monthly

figures for failures cross-tabulated by branch of business. Dun’s agents gathered this information

by collecting records of judicial filings from courthouses in municipalities throughout the United

States. Each month, agents forwarded the data to Dun’s national office. Dun’s tabulated the

statistics and published it the following month.

          Dun’s Review was published weekly from August 5, 1893 (volume 1, number 1) until

February 25, 1933 (volume 41, no. 2057). In March 1933, R. G. Dun and Company merged with

its principal competitor, the Bradstreet Company. The new company, Dun and Bradstreet’s,


6
    Davis, “How Has 77-B Actually Worked?” Dun’s Review, August 1937, p. 19.


                                                       5
merged their competing publications, Dun’s Review and Bradstreet's Weekly, to form Dun and

Bradstreet Weekly Review. Three issues of Dun and Bradstreet’s Weekly Review appeared

(numbers 2058 to 2060 on March 4, 11, and 18). Then, the company reduced the frequency of

publication and changed the title to Dun and Bradstreet's Monthly Review. In February 1937, the

title changed again, to Dun’s Review, and stayed that way for 17 years.7

         Appendix 1 indicates volumes of Dun’s Review (and its predecessors and successors)

containing data about bankruptcies disaggregated by branch of business. The data initially

appeared in February 1896. The initial issue contained data from January 1895 and 1896. Issues

from the remainder of the year reviewed events from March 1894 through November 1896. The

January 1897 issue contained data on the previous December as well as the entire years 1894

though 1896. The issued attributed the availability of this data to unspecified evidentiary

advances. “This year,” the Review stated, “we have for the first time such records as to located

trade failures not merely by quarters but by months.” The January issue established the pattern of

publication. Data for one month appeared during the next. Quarterly tabulations appeared four

times each year. Annual tabulations appeared in the January of the following year.8

         Information tabulated by branches of industry appeared consistently for nearly forty

years. From February 1895 to September 1906, Dun’s Review reported the number and liabilities

of failures in 26 branches of business. From October 1906 to March 1936, Dun’s Review

reported the number and liabilities of failures in 28 branches of business. The increase occurred

when Dun split the category “Manufacturing: Chemicals, Drugs, and Paints,” into


7
  For details, see the Dun and Bradstreet information sheet at the Library of Congress, which can be found on-line at
http://www.loc.gov/rr/business/duns/duns15m.html. Note that from 1937 to 1940, Dun’s Statistical Review provides
extensive coverage of data on business failures, including summaries and revisions of all data back to 1934.
8
  Dun’s Review reported information about bankruptcies in several tables. One typically examined the pattern of
bankruptcies at the aggregate level over recent years. Another examined bankruptcies of large and small firms.
Others disaggregated the data by region, state, and Federal Reserve district. In later papers, we construct consistent
time-series based on these tables.


                                                          6
“Manufacturing: Chemicals and Drugs” and “Manufacturing: Paints and Oils” and split the

category “Retail Trade: Drugs and Paints,” into “Retail Trade: Chemicals and Drugs” and “Retail

Trade: Paints and Oils.”

       Dun’s Review defined the branches of business in each edition. The general definition of

a branch was a group of firms producing or trading merchandise which was “more and less

kindred or mutually dependent.” The specific definitions consisted of a sector name, a branch

title, and information regarding related industries included in the classification. Branches were

grouped into three sectors. Manufacturers made goods. Traders sold goods that they did not

manufacture. Companies appeared in the category “brokers and traders” also known as “other” if

they neither manufactured merchandise nor sold merchandise made by others, but instead bought

and sold the rights to merchandise (brokers) or transported goods from point to point

(transporters). Dun excluded banks and railroads from this its scheme (and the resulting data).

Dun also excluded personal bankruptcies of individuals such as doctors, dentists, and lawyers.

       Table 1 lists the branches of business. Each row refers to a branch, indicates long and

short titles with which Dun’s Review referred to this branch, and provides additional information

from Dun’s that characterized the branch. The first row is an example. It indicates a sector,

“manufacturing;” a branch, “chemicals, drugs, and paints;” and additional information,

“medicines, fertilizers, and oils.” This example defines a branch of business including all firms

that manufactured chemicals, drugs, and paints including firms that manufactured fertilizers,

medicines, and oils. A later row in the table indicates a sector, “trading;” a branch, “liquors and

tobacco;” and additional information, “sellers of beer, wine, tobacco, and cigars.” This example

defines a branch of business including all firms that sold liquor (i.e. alcohol produced by

distillation, such as whiskey); other alcoholic beverages, such as beer and wine; and tobacco




                                                 7
products, such as cigarettes and cigars. Exclusions from this category include stores that

occasionally sold alcohol and tobacco but that primarily pursued other lines of trade, such as

general stores, pharmacies, and hotels.

           The exact definitions of branches of business may matter to scholars analyzing this data.

So, we present Dun’s original descriptions in an extended excerpt below.

           In the classification here give under iron are included furnaces, foundries, rolling
           mills and nail works; under machinery, the manufacture of agricultural
           implements; under woolens, the felt, wool hat, yarn, and shoddy works; under
           cottons, the cotton hosiery and lace concerns; under lumber, the saw mills,
           planning, sash and door works; under clothing millinery and tailors; under hats,
           the manufacture of gloves and furs; under chemicals, medicines, fertilizers and
           oils; under milling, all grinding of grain; under leather, the tanners and saddlery
           and harness makers; under liquors, the manufactures of wine tobacco, cigars and
           brewers; with glass and earthenware, pottery, lime and cement works. So with
           traders, under liquors are included sellers of beer, wine, and cigars; with clothing,
           umbrellas; with dry goods, dealers in curtains and gloves; with shoes, all rubber
           goods and harness; with furniture, glassware; with hardware, cutlery and tinware;
           with drugs, oils; with jewelry, watches; with books, picture dealers. Transporters
           do not include railroad companies, but brokers, insurance and real estate.9

Dun’s streamlined this note in later issues, and usually published only in tables containing

quarterly tabulations. In 1900, the note indicated

           Iron, Woolens and Cottons include all branches of those manufactures; Machinery
           includes implements and tools; Lumber includes saw, planing, sash and door
           mills, carpenters and coopers; Clothing includes millinery and furnishings; Hats
           includes fur and gloves; Chemicals include drugs, fertilizers, paints and oils;
           Printing and Books include engraving and maps; Milling includes baking; Leather
           and Shoes includes makers of harness, saddlery, trunks, and rubber goods;
           Liquors includes tobacco, wine, brewers and beer; Glass includes earthenware,
           pottery, brick, lime and cement; Groceries include meats and fish; Hotels include
           restaurants; Dry goods include carpets and curtains; Furniture includes crockery;
           Hardware includes stoves and tools; and Jewelry includes clocks and watches.
           Brokers include all real estate, note, insurance, or produce dealers whose main
           business is not the handling of actual products, and Transporters includes all
           except incorporated railway companies.




9
    Dun’s Review, volume 3, issue 132, 8 February 1896, p. 2


                                                          8
Dun’s summed total manufacturing failures, total trading failures, and failures of brokers and

transporters to arrive at the figure for total commercial failures. In the typical month, Dun’s

categorization embraced over three-quarters of the manufacturing and over seven-eighths of the

trading failures, both in importance and in number. Failures of the remaining firms appeared in

the categories “all other manufacturers” and “all other traders.” The exceptions were railroads

and banks, whose failures did not appear in the data.

           In March 1932, Dun’s Review began to publish an additional table breaking down

business failures by economic functions. The Review titled the table “Failures by Divisions of

Industry.” Appendix 2 indicates all volumes of Dun’s Review (and its successors) containing data

disaggregated in this manner. The Review added the new table because its editors recognized

           the 15 divisions of manufacturing activity listed by the Department of Commerce in the
           Census of Manufactures are widely used for statistical purposes. For this reason it will
           publish once each month from this time on a tabulation of failures in these groups
           subdivided into Manufacturing, Trading and Other Commercial.10

Dun’s divisions of industry mirrored those used by the Census of Manufactures with a few

modifications. Under lines of trade, the classification “books and periodicals” replaced “printing

and publishing,” which described a line of manufacturing. Classifications were added for

“hotels” and “general stores”, since those could be readily distinguished from other lines of

trade. The “other commercial” classification was retained for firms which operated neither as

manufacturers or retailers, such as commission merchants, manufacturers’ agents, brokers, and

others similarly engaged.

           At the aggregate level, ‘branches of business’ and ‘divisions of industry’ appeared

identical. Both schemes divided firms into the sectors ‘manufacturing,’ ‘trading,’ and ‘brokers.’

For these sectors, the number of firms and failures was identical. Differences existed, however,


10
     Dun’s Review, 19 March 1932, p. 3.


                                                   9
in the details. The scheme ‘branches of business’ arose about 1890 and characterized the nature

of commerce and industry at that time. Rules for categorizing firms remained constant, which

ensured a consistent categorization of firms and the comparability of data over time. The scheme

‘division of industry’ arose during the twentieth century, from the Census Bureau’s efforts to

improve data on America’s evolving economy. The Census Bureau standardized all data

according to this classification scheme, and periodically updated its rules regarding

classification, to reflect the changing nature of manufacturing and trade.

           The scheme for classifying firms by division of industry evolved gradually after its

introduction. In August 1932, Dun’s Review split several categories, which increased the number

of divisions in manufacturing and trading. In addition, Dun’s divided traders into wholesalers

and retailers. In September 1932, the Review further disaggregated the divisions of industry. In

October 1932, the Review provided “a more comprehensive tabulation … of the failures known

as ‘Other Commercial,’ those which cannot be properly classed with wither manufacturing or

trading divisions.”11 In April 1933 and February 1934, the Review again updated its classification

schemes. In February 1936, the table’s format changed another time, and the Review described

the changes in this manner.

           In the attempt to make the failure records more useful, certain changes in the
           tabulations appear for the first time this month. The records in the past have
           included failures of insurance and real estate agents and brokers. Some are
           undoubtedly instances where the failure was in fact that of an apartment house or
           office building owner or operator. The real estate involved in such cases led to
           extremely large liabilities. Furthermore, it has not been possible to maintain as
           complete and consistent coverage or to gather as complete information for these
           occupations as for the lines of industry and trade ordinarily surveyed by the Dun
           & Bradstreet organization. The revision has therefore limited the tabulation more
           strictly to commercial failures, covering manufacturing, wholesale trade, retail
           trade, construction and commercial service such as laundries, dry cleaning, and
           hotels. The records in the past do not include so-called personal bankruptcies or
           bankruptcies of persons such as doctors, dentists, and lawyers. It is hoped to
11
     Dun’s Review, 22 October 1932, p. 15


                                                   10
         include a revision of monthly data back at least to 1920 in the March issue of the
         Dun & Bradstreet Review.
                 A new subdivision has been added covering the construction industry.
         This does not imply any change in the total coverage, for these failures were
         previously included in other groups. Because of the fact that failures in the
         construction industry often include individuals whose activity in construction was
         inextricably entangled with real estate financing and speculative building, they
         frequently report unusually large liabilities. It is believed that their segregation
         into a separate group will make the tabulation more useful and significant than in
         the past.12

The firms now classified under construction consisted of enterprises previously included in other

groups, mainly manufacturing.13 Tables 2, 3, and 4 depict ‘divisions of industry’ after these

revisions and as they existed in the year 1936.14

         Along with data disaggregated by division of industry, Dun’s Review continued to

publish data on failures by branches of business. The editorial staff believed that businessmen

wished to see this series continue, so that they could compare contemporary to past events, and

so that they could discern changes in patterns without worrying whether these occurred because

of changes in the construction of the data. Dun’s Review continued to publish data by branches

of business after merging with its rival, Bradstreet, in 1933. Dun and Bradstreet published both

series for four years.15 In March 1936, however, the company discontinued ‘branches by

business,’ stating that ‘divisions of industry’ better reflected the structure of the economy at that

time and coincided with the way in which the Bureau of the Census and Department of

Commerce categorized information about production and trade, making it the more useful series.

         In 1935, Dun and Bradstreet began to publish data on a new method of corporate

reorganization akin to bankruptcy: petitions under Section 77B of the Bankruptcy Act of 1934.
12
   Dun’s Review, February 1936, pp. 20-1. Note: The “hoped for” revision never appeared.
13
   Dun’s Review, March 1936, p. 19
14
   Dun & Bradstreet Monthly Review, March 1936, Pg. 24-25
15
   In the months following the merger with Bradstreet and the restructuring of the Review, Dun’s occasionally
labeled the table “Divisions of Industry” as “Branches of Business” or “Branches of Industry” and vice versa. Dun’s
also occasionally published one, rather than both, of these tables, although Dun’s filled the resulting gap in the series
by printing additional data when it resumed publishing the tables in future issues.


                                                           11
Section 77B provided for the reorganization of corporations. Dun and Bradstreet began

collecting data on petitions under Section 77B soon after the legislation became law. Dun and

Bradstreet began publishing the data one year later. Appendix 3 indicates all issues of Dun’s

Review (and related publications) containing data about reorganizations under Section 77B.

           The quality of Dun’s data on bankruptcies was widely recognized. Dun’s data appeared

in the Survey of Current Business, The Statistical Abstract of the United States, and the monthly

reviews and annual reports of the Federal Reserve banks and board. Dun’s data formed the basis

of articles published in newspapers such as the New York Times, Wall Street Journal, and

Commercial and Financial Chronicle. Dun’s Review noted the popularity of its data when the

editors wrote that “not only trade and manufacturing organizations recognize the importance of

the records regarding their especial lines, but annual books of reference, almanacs, and even the

monthly report of the Bureau of Statistics publishes the figures under the direction of the

Treasury Department at Washington.”16 The fact that both businessmen and bureaucrats used

Dun’s data indicates that they found it valuable. Dun’s data on business failures was certainly

watched by everyone interested in economic trends from the 1890s through the 1930s.



3. Methods for Reconstructing Dun’s Data Series

           Dun’s data on business failures does not come in an easily accessible format. Dun

published the data in a table that appeared each month. The table typically contained data for

failures during the preceding month, the month before that, and the same month in the preceding

year. The table that appeared in March 1910, for example, contained data for February 1910,

January 1910, and February 1909. Every three months, Dun published a table summarizing the

results for the previous quarter, and typically provided data for each quarter in the preceding year
16
     Dun’s Review, 13 July 1901, p. 6.


                                                  12
and from the same quarter in the preceding five years. These quarterly tables typically appeared

in April, July, and September. In January, instead of publishing a quarterly table, Dun published

a table summarizing the previous year and providing comparisons to the past several years. This

schedule remained consistent for roughly forty years.

        To print the tables, R. G. Dun used a linotype system that ensured the information in

subsequent volumes matched the information in earlier issues. The Linotype machine operator

entered text on a 90-character keyboard. The Linotype typesetting machine dropped metal molds

for the corresponding letters and numbers into a matrix, which was then cast to form an entire

line of text, or in our case, a line of a table, as a single metal slug. A template held the slugs for

the table together. Each month, a printer cast a new line for the table, fit the new slug into the

template, shifted all of the current slugs forward by one line, and removed the oldest slug from

the table. Later tables, in other words, literally replicated portions of older tables. This method

ensured that Dun’s published consistent data, although consistency posed one potential problem.

Typos or transpositions that appeared in a table often reappeared in subsequent tables cast with

the same slugs.

        The structure of Dun’s tables shaped the way in which we reconstructed the data series.

The reconstruction required an algorithm that accomplished several tasks. The first was

gathering data scattered throughout hundreds of issues. The second was filling in observations

missing for a variety of reasons. The third was checking for typos and transpositions generated

by the typesetting process and correcting those errors. The fourth was distinguishing information

released initially from data in its final revised form.

        Step (1) involved gathering the data. We did this by requesting all volumes of Dun’s

Review and its successor publications for the years 1890 to 1941 from the libraries of the




                                                  13
University of California. Each bound volume contained all of the weekly issues published in a

particular year. If volumes were missing, damaged, or incomplete, we requested replacements

through interlibrary loan. We combed through these volumes to find tables containing data on

business failures. We copied all of those tables and created a web site containing all of the

documentary evidence. Several lacunae existed in the evidence. Sporadically, Dun’s Review did

not contain the regular table on failures by branch of business. On a few occasions, the

universities from which we gathered Dun’s Review appear to have misplaced a relevant issue,

and interlibrary loan was unable to find a circulating copy.

        Step (2) involved filling in missing observations. We document all of these lapses and the

way in which we corrected them in Table 5. Most of these problems could be corrected by

looking up the information in the appropriate table in subsequent volumes. This procedure

worked for all observations except those for September, October, and December 1933. For these

months, Dun’s Review never published data on failures by branches of business (although Dun’s

did publish those values for the entire U.S., for the sum of all manufacturing branches, and for

the sum of all trading branches). For September, we extracted the missing information from

quarterly figures, by subtracting data for July and August 1933 from data for the third quarter of

1933.

        For October and December, we extracted the sum (October 1933 plus December 1933)

by subtracting the total for the other ten months from the annual total. We split the sum

(Oct+Dec) into monthly components for each branch of business using the following formulas.

        (1.a) Mi,Oct = Mi, Oct+Dec * MOct/(MOct + MDec)

        (1.b) Mi, Dec = Mi, Oct+Dec * MDec/( MOct + MDec)

        (1.c) Tj, Oct = Tj, Oct+Dec * TOct/( TOct + TDec)




                                                   14
          (1.d) Tj, Dec = Tj, Oct+Dec * TDec/( TOct + TDec)

The variables on the left-hand side of these equations are unobserved. Mi,Oct indicates the

October value for the ith manufacturing branch. Mi,Dec indicates the December value for the ith

manufacturing branch. Ti,Oct indicates the October value for the jth trading branch. Ti,Dec

indicates the October value for the jth trading branch. The variables on the right-hand sides of

these equations are observed. Mi, Oct+Dec indicates the sum of October and December for the ith

manufacturing branch. MOct indicates the October value for the sum of all manufacturing

branches. MDec indicates the December value for the sum of all manufacturing branches. Ti,

Oct+Dec   indicates the sum of October and December for the ith trading branch. TOct indicates the

October value for the sum of all trading branches. TDec indicates the December value for the sum

of all trading branches.

          We round the results of equations (1) to (4) to the nearest whole number. To this

rounding rule, we make a few exceptions, which ensure that the results yield the appropriate sum

for each month and each branch of business. We round up some remainders under 0.5, if that

action yields the correct total. In such cases, we round up the highest remainder under 0.5 that

yields the correct total. We round down some remainders over 0.5, if that action yields the

correct total. In such cases, we always round down the lowest remainder over 0.5 that yields the

correct total.

          Step (3) involved checking the data for typos and transpositions generated by the

typesetting process. We did this by summing disaggregated data and seeing if our sum equaled

the totals reported in the original sources. In the few cases where the books did not balance, we

examined all later instances in which Dun’s published that data, to see if they caught and

corrected the discrepancy. If they did not, we checked to see if the discrepancy arose from




                                                    15
common errors such as mistaking a 3 for an 8 or dropping a zero from the end of a number. We

corrected all errors whose cause seemed clear. We left other minor discrepancies in the data. We

indicate all of our actions in the notes to the tables and the appendices to this essay.

         Step (4) involves comparing the initially released data to the data in its final revised form.

The initial series represents the information available to agents at the time they make decisions.

We refer to this series as “initial data” or “initial reports.” The final series indicates the actual

state of the economy. We refer to this series the “final data,” “final reports,” or “final data

series.” The former and the latter often differ. Statistical agencies, such as R. G. Dun and

Company, released data about the economy, such as failures by branch of business, on a regular

schedule. Sometimes on the day of release, they lacked accurate or complete information. After

the initial release, they updated reports, corrected errors, incorporated additional information,

and revised previous estimates.17

         To create the final data series, we begin with the latest book published by Dun and

Bradstreets, and then enter data on bankruptcies going backwards in time. Reverse chronological

order ensures that we enter Dun’s latest data. To create the initial data series, we begin with the

earliest issue containing information about business failures. We enter data for a particular month

the first time it appears, and do not update the entry if Dun and Bradstreet’s subsequently revises

the figure.

         These procedures provide two series. The initial series shows what people knew at the

time they made decisions. The final series shows what actually happened. For failures by

branches of business, the two series are extremely similar. The initial series, in other words,

contained few errors. So, we report only the final series. For failures by division of industry,


17
  Orphanides et. al (2000) and Orphanides (2001) emphasize the difference between initial and final data. Park and
Richardson (2010) illustrate the sizeable gaps between initial and final data series created in the early 20th century.


                                                          16
however, the initial and final series differ dramatically, particularly during the years before 1936.

These large errors arose because Dun’s repeatedly changed the way in which it classified firms

and the way in which it divided firms amongst industries. In this case, what people knew may

have differed from what actually occurred. Since these differences may have mattered, we plan

to disseminate both series.

        Our reconstruction efforts resulted in the following series. One is number of failures by

sector, 1895 to 1940. For the years before 1936, data for the three sectors – manufacturers,

traders, other – comes from branches of business. For the years 1936 to 1940, data for the

manufactures equals manufacturers in divisions of industry. Data for traders is the sum of

wholesale traders and retail traders for divisions of industry. Data for other is the sum of

construction and commercial services from divisions of industry. This series appears at the end

of our paper in Table 6. Two is liabilities of failures by sector, 1895 to 1940. The sources are the

same as for the previous series. This series appears in our paper as Table 7.

        Series three through six contain data about branches of business. Three is number of

failed manufacturing firms by branch of manufacturing, 1895 to 1935. This series appears as

Table 8. Four is liabilities of failed manufacturing firms by branch of manufacturing, 1895 to

1935. This series appears as an online appendix to the version of this paper posted at the National

Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) web site. Its dimensions prevented us from including it

in a published version of this essay. Five is number of failed trading firms by branch of trading,

1895 to 1935. This series appears as an online appendix at the NBER. Six is liabilities of failed

trading firms by branch of trading, 1895 to 1935. This series appears as an online appendix at the

NBER.




                                                 17
        Series seven through sixteen contain information about failures by divisions of industry.

All of these series extend from January 1936 through December 1940. Series seven indicates the

number of failed manufacturing firms by divisions of manufacturing. It appears in our essay as

Table 9. Eight indicates liabilities of failed manufacturing firms by divisions of manufacturing. It

appears as an online appendix at the NBER. Nine indicates the number of failed wholesale firms

by divisions of wholesalers. It appears in our essay as Table 10. Ten indicates liabilities of failed

wholesale firms by divisions of wholesalers. It appears as an online appendix at the NBER.

Eleven indicates the number of failed retailers by divisions of retailers. It appears in our essay as

Table 11. Twelve indicates liabilities of failed retailers by divisions of retailers. It appears as an

online appendix at the NBER. Thirteen indicates the number of failed construction firms by

divisions of construction. It appears in our essay as Table 12. Fourteen indicates liabilities of

failed construction firms by divisions of construction. It appears as an online appendix at the

NBER. Fifteen indicates the number of failed commercial service firms by divisions of

commercial services. It appears in our essay as Table 13. Sixteen indicates liabilities of failed

commercial service firms by divisions of commercial service. It appears as an online appendix at

the NBER.

        Series seventeen and eighteen refer to Section 77b. Seventeen indicates the number of

firms that applied for 77b status by sector from August 1935 to December 1938. It appears in our

essay as Table 14. Eighteen indicates liabilities of firms that applied for 77b status by sector

from August 1935 to December 1938. It appears as an online appendix at the NBER. Data for

Section 77b appears by sector, and not by division of industry, because Dun and Bradstreet’s did

not disaggregate the information at that level.




                                                  18
4. What Does the Data Reveal?

        In this section, we discuss patterns apparent in the data. We do this by plotting raw data

and exploratory series. The exploratory series are transformations of the raw data that remove

differences in scales and outliers, making it easier to compare the changes in level and trend in

difference branches of business.

        Figure (1) plots the number of failures by month in each sector (i.e. manufacturing,

trading, and other) as well as the total (i.e. sum of three sectors). All of the series exhibit an

upward trend, caused by the growth in the number of firms. The number of failures in

manufacturing and trading appear to be increasing at a similar rate. The number of failures

among brokers and traders (i.e. other) appears to be rising at a rate higher than other sectors. The

reason appears to be a growth in the number of middlemen, which results in the growth in the

number of failed middlemen, even though the rate at which middlemen fail remains constant.

        Each series fluctuate around its upward trend. Failures peak during downturns,

particularly the contractions in 1896, 1907, 1914, and the early 1930s. These contractions, as

well as the remaining recessions determined by the NBER, are highlighted by grey vertical

bands. In several instances, failures peak after the trough of a contraction and at the beginning of

the recovery. An example is the end of 1914, when failures in all sectors peak following the

outbreak of hostilities in Europe, which disrupted international financial and trading

relationships.

        World War One seems to have had a salutary effect on the survival rate of firms. After

the start of hostilities, failures fell in all sectors. Failures fell throughout the war. Failures

continued to fall for a few years following the armistice. Failures may have declined because

military expansion and international embargoes increased demand for domestic goods and




                                                    19
services. Wartime rationing and industrial planning may also have had an effect. The War

Industries Board allocated raw materials, labor, and purchases across existing firms. The Board

may have acted to ensure that all firms received ample opportunities for profit.

        During the recession of the early 1920s, failure rates more rapidly than at any other time.

The increase illustrates the severity of the contraction. Failures peaked at a hitherto unheard of

level. The peak occurred during the early months of the contraction, raising the question of

whether failures were a leading or lagging indicator of business cycles. After the peak, failures

remained at a plateau higher than before the World War.

        During the contraction from 1929 to 1933, failures increased to new heights. Failures

peaked during 1932 and were falling as the financial system collapsed at the beginning of 1933.

During the recover, failures fell quickly. Failures remained at a low level throughout the

recovery. Failures increased during the contraction of 1937. The increase was milder than at the

beginning of the decade or in early 1933.

        Figure (2) plots the total number of failures by month for each sector relative to the

average number of failures that occurred during each month from 1895 through 1910.

Specifically, this series is
                  ~
        ( 2)      N s , t  N s , t N s , t 1911

      ~
Here, N s ,t is the series that we plot. The letter s indicates sector. The letter t indicates month. Ns,t

indicates the number of failures in sector s in month t. N s ,t 1911 indicates the average for sector s

for all months before 1911 (i.e. 1895 to 1910). These graphs ease comparisons across sectors, by

plotting data for each sector on a scale running from 0 to 6. The scale indicates failures in that

month relative to average failures from 1895 to 1910, a period when the total number of failures




                                                    20
remained stable. The figure highlights the rapid growth in failures of brokers and traders, relative

to manufacturing and trading.

        Figures (3) and (4) plot the total number of failures by month for each branch of business

relative to the average number of failures that occurred during each month from 1895 through

1910. Specifically, this series is
                 ~
        (3)      N b , t  N b , t N b , t 1911

      ~
Here, N b,t is the series that we plot. The letter b indicates the branch of business. Nb,t indicates the

number of failures in sector s in month t. Nb,t 1911 indicates the average for branch b for all

months before 1911 (i.e. 1895 to 1910). Figure (3) focuses on manufacturers. In panel of the

figures portrays failures for an individual branch of business. Patterns differ among branches. In

some industries, such as hats and glass, failures appear to have been more volatile than in other

industries, such as printing and leather. In basic industries that supplied intermediate inputs for

other manufacturers – such as machinery, iron, and lumber – failures displayed little volatility,

except during the contractions of the 1930s, when these firms at the bottom of the industrial food

chain suffered disproportionate losses.

        Particular months deserve extra attention. In December 1927 and May 1932, the hat

manufactures experienced a large number of failures relative to the average (resulting in outliers

of 8.3 and 8.5, respectively). In October 1933, the chemical manufactures experienced a large

number of failures relative to the average (resulting in an outlier of 9.5). These outliers appear as

a dot on the top border of the figure.

        Figure (4) focuses on branches of business among trading firms. As with manufacturers,

patterns differ among branches. Failures appear to have fluctuated substantially in branches that

sold durable and luxury goods, such as clothing, jewelry, and hats. Failures appear to have been


                                                   21
stable in branches that distributed foodstuffs and other necessities, such as groceries and general

stores. The trend among liquor shops illustrates the effects of Prohibition. Failures increased

when the amendment prohibiting alcohol passed. Failures dropped near to zero thereafter,

because far fewer firms operated in this branch of business, and those that remained operated

illegally and did not report their activities. Particular months deserve extra attention. In May

1932, the clothing traders experience a large number of failures relative to the average (resulting

in an outlier for 9.5). This outlier appears as a dot on the top border of the figure.

        Figure (5) plots total liabilities of failed firms by month for each sector. Liabilities of

failed firms fluctuated in sync with numbers of failed firms. But, differences exist between the

series, particular the height and timing of peaks. For manufacturing firms for example, liabilities

peaked during the contraction in the mid 1920s, while numbers peaked during the late 1920s. For

trading firms, liabilities biggest increase came in the summer of 1914, when the onset of

hostilities interrupted transatlantic trade and finance. Particular months deserve extra attention.

In March 1921, April 1922, and December 1930, the Brokers and Traders sector experienced

large amounts of liabilities of failed businesses relative to the average (resulting in outliers of

15.1, 16.1, and 21, respectively). These outliers appear as a dot on the top border of the figure.

        Figure (6) plots the total liabilities of failed firms by month for each sector relative to the

average number of failures that occurred during each month from 1895 through 1910.

Specifically, this series is
                  ~
        ( 4)      Ls , t  Ls , t Ls , t 1911

      ~
Here, Ls ,t is the series that we plot. The letter L indicates liabilities. Other symbols have the same

definitions as before.




                                                  22
        Figures (7) and (8) plot total liabilities of failed firms by month for each branch of

business relative to the average number of failures that occurred during each month from 1895

through 1910. Specifically, this series is
                 ~
        (5)      Lb , t  Lb , t Lb , t 1911

      ~
Here, N b,t is the series that we plot. The letter b indicates the branch of business. Nb,t indicates the

number of failures in sector s in month t. Nb,t 1911 indicates the average for branch b for all

months before 1911 (i.e. 1895 to 1910). Figure (7) focuses on manufacturers. Liabilities varied

most in branches providing intermediate inputs for other industries, such as iron and machinery,

and in branches making durable luxuries, such as hats and glass. Figure (8) focuses on traders. In

branches that traded durables and luxuries, such as books, clothing, furniture, and jewelry,

liabilities of failed firms clearly peaked during the contraction from 1929 to 1933. At that time,

failures also peaked for hotels and other firms catering towards tourists. In industries trading in

perishables and foodstuffs, such as grocers and general stores, the Great Contraction did less

harm to businesses.

        Particular months deserve extra attention. In April 1897 and November 1921, the cotton

manufactures experience a large number of liabilities of failed businesses relative to the average

(resulting in outliers of 42 and 43, respectively). In December 1927, the glass manufactures

experienced a large number of liabilities of failed businesses relative to the average (resulting in

an outlier of 31). In July 1924 and October 1924, the hat manufactures experienced a large

number of liabilities of failed businesses relative to the average (resulting in outliers of 37 and

43, respectively). In January 1915 and January 1931, the machinery manufactures experienced a

large number of liabilities of failed businesses, relative to the average (resulting in outliers of 31

and 47, respectively). In October 1908, the milling manufactures experience a large number of


                                                   23
liabilities of failed businesses relative to the average (resulting in an outlier of 48). In October

1923, the printing manufactures experience a large number of liabilities of failed businesses

relative to the average (resulting in an outlier of 64). These outliers appear as a dot on the top

border of the figure.

        The chemical manufactures deserve extra attention. The liabilities of failed businesses for

chemical manufactures tend to be greater across the entire time period. While most branches of

business observe a small amount of outliers, the chemical manufactures observe 9 outliers across

the time periods. In December 1920, April 1922, May 1923, March 1924, December 1927,

February 1928, February 1932, July 1932, and February 1933, the chemical manufactures

experienced a large number of liabilities of failed businesses relative to the average (resulting in

outliers of 42, 50, 26, 681, 26, 32, 43, 48, and 43, respectively). These outliers appear as a dot on

the top border of the figure.

        For traders, particular months deserve extra attention. In June 1914, the dry goods traders

experience a large number of liabilities of failed businesses relative to the average (resulting in

an outlier of 59). In December 1923, the furniture traders experience a large number of liabilities

of failed business, relative to the average (resulting in an outlier of 30). In July 1920 and

February 1921, the hats traders experience a large number of liabilities of failed businesses

relative to the average (resulting in outliers of 52 and 43, respectively). In May 1915, January

1932, and April 1933, the chemical traders experienced a large number of liabilities of failed

businesses, relative to the average (resulting in outliers of 31, 38, and 68, respectively). In

January 1929, the paints traders experienced a large number of liabilities of failed businesses

relative to the average (resulting in an outlier of 35).




                                                  24
          The remaining figures focus on the average size of failed firms. Figure (9) plots the

average size of failures by month for each sector. Size is defined as total liabilities of failed firms

divided by the total number of failed firms. Specifically, size S for sector (or branch) i in month t

equals:

          ( 6)     Si , t  Li , t N i , t

Figure (10) plots the average size of failures by month for each sector relative to average size of

failures in that sector from 1895 through 1910. Specifically, this series is
                   ~
          (7 )     S i , t  S i , t S i , t 1911                                                    (1)

Figures (11) and (12) plot the average size of failures by month for each branch of business

relative to the average size in that branch from 1895 through 1910. Figure (11) focuses on

manufacturing. Figure (12) focuses on trading.

          Particular months deserve extra attention. In October 1916, March 1927, February 1931,

and July 1932, the cotton manufactures experienced an increase in the average size of failures

relative to the average (resulting in outliers of 22.6, 21, 29, and 29, respectively). In February

1913, the iron manufactures experienced an increase in the average size of failures relative to the

average (resulting in an average of 26.3). In January 1931, the machinery manufactures

experienced an increase in the average size of failures relative to the average (resulting in an

outlier of 20.4). In August 1908, the milling manufactures experienced an increase in the average

size of failures relative to the average (resulting in an outlier of 35). In October 1923, the

printing manufactures experienced an increase in the average size of failures relative to the

average (resulting in an outlier of 50). In August 1928, the wool manufactures experienced an

increase in the average size of failures relative to the average (resulting in an outlier of 27). In

March 1903, the chemical manufactures experienced an increase in the average size of failures



                                                     25
relative to the average (resulting in an outlier of 299). These outliers appear as a dot on the top

border of the figure.

       In trading branches, certain months deserve extra attention. In June 1906, the dry goods

traders experienced an increase in the average size of failures relative to the average (resulting in

an outlier of 37). In December 1923, the furniture traders experienced an increase in the average

size of failures relative to the average (resulting in an outlier of 25). In September 1935, the

jewelry traders experienced an increase in the average size of failures relative to the average

(resulting in an outlier of 15.9). In January 1901, the paint traders experienced an increase in the

average size of failures relative to the average (resulting in an outlier of 70).



Section 5: Discussion

       Business failures are important indicators of economic activity. Failures increase during

contractions and decrease during expansions. Businessmen understood these patterns centuries

ago. Their desire for information about general trends provided a market for information

agencies, such as R. G. Dun and Company and its successor, Dun and Bradstreet’s, which

gathered data on business failures from courthouses throughout the United States. This essay

reconstructs those series making them accessible at the level of month, branch of business, and

division of industry.

       This essay does not report data on failures aggregated geographically. Such data exists in

several sources. Beginning about 1894, Dun’s Review published quarterly data on failures at the

state level. After 1924, this data appeared in the Statistical Abstract of the United States

aggregated annually. About 1916, the Federal Reserve Bulletin began publishing Dun’s failure

data aggregated at the Federal Reserve district level. In 1894, Dun and Bradstreet’s begin to




                                                  26
report data aggregated by state and sector. The authors are currently collecting and cleaning

these series.

          Scholars may be interested in calculating rates of failure, which compare the number of

failures to the number of active firms. Beginning in 1925, data on the number of firms in

operation each year appears in the Statistical Abstract of the United States. Tables take the series

back to 1857. Identical information appears in the Historical Statistics of the United States. The

authors know of no data on the number of active firms reported by month, state, or sector.

Creating such series probably requires research in Dun and Bradstreet’s archives, as in Kim

(2003).

          Scholars may be interested in adjusting the liabilities of failed firms to account for

inflation and deflation, both of which occurred in the era under consideration. This exercise

raises puzzling issues. When deflating consumption and income, scholars typically employ price

indices constructed from baskets of goods comparable to the nominal series of interest. In the

case of liabilities of failed firms, the relevant price index is not obvious. Scholars might use

indices that represent the consumption habits of creditors of firms that fail. Most of these

individuals inhabited the upper decile (and higher) of the income distribution. Scholars might

also use a series related to the industry under consideration. This seems sensible for industries,

like grocers, whose assets consisted largely of inventories for which retail and wholesale price

series exist. In other industries, like steel manufacturing, where assets consisted largely plant and

equipment, using the prices of variable inputs and outputs seems unappealing, although no better

alternative leaps to mind.

          Even though no obvious optimal method for deflating liabilities exists, the series

introduced in this essay should have many uses for scholars interested in economic history. For




                                                   27
example, the data may shed light on the connection between credit and economic activity. Banks

supply credit. Businesses require credit. Firms needs vary across industries. Data now exists

about all of these factors, allowing scholars to study links between contractions in banking and

industry. The data introduced in this essay also raise issues concerning the natures of recessions

in the first half of the twentieth century. The most severe contraction, of course, began in 1929

and continued through the 1930s. The contraction at the beginning of the 1920s appears,

however, to have forced more firms more rapidly out of business. Why did this happen? Did the

differences stem from government policies, the structure of the economy, or factors yet to be

considered? By collecting and disseminating data, the authors hope to help scholars answer such

questions.




                                                28
Table 1: Dun’s Branches of Business

                  Branch
Sector                                                                Including (but not limited to)
                  Long Title                         Short Title

Manufacturing     Chemicals, Drugs, and Paints(a)    Chemicals        Medicines, fertilizers, and oils.
                  Clothing and Millinery             Clothing         Millinery and tailors.
                  Cottons, Lace and Hosiery          Cotton           Cotton hosiery and lace concerns.
                  Glass and Earthenware              Glass            Pottery, lime, and cement works.
                  Hats, Gloves, and Furs             Hats             Manufactures of gloves and furs.
                  Iron, Foundries, and Nails         Iron             Furnaces, foundries, rolling mills, nail works.
                  Leather, Shoes and Harness         Leather          Tanners, saddlers, and harness makers.
                  Liquors and Tobacco                Liquors          Breweries, wineries, tobacco, cigars.
                  Lumber, Carpenters, and Coopers    Lumber           Saw, planing, sash, and door mills.
                  Machinery and Tools                Machinery        Manufactures of agricultural implements.
                  Milling and Bakers                 Milling          All grinding of grain.
                  Printing and Engraving             Printing         Book and newspaper publishing and maps.
                  Woolens, Carpets, and Knit Goods   Wool             Felt, wool hat, yarn and shoddy works.
                  All Other                          Other            All other branches of manufacturing.

Trading           Books and Papers                   Books            Book and picture dealers.
                  Clothing and Furnishings           Clothing         Clothing, furnishings and umbrellas.
                  Drugs and Paints(b)                Drugs            Drugs, Paints and oils.
                  Dry Goods and Carpets              Dry Goods        Dealers in curtains and gloves.
                  Furniture and Crockery             Furniture        Furniture and glassware.
                  General Stores                     General Stores   General stores.
                  Groceries, Meats, and Fish         Grocers          Grocers, meats, fish.
                  Hardware, Stoves, and Tools        Hardware         Hardware, cutlery and tinware.
                  Hats, Furs, Gloves                 Hats             Hats, furs, gloves.
                  Hotels and Restaurants             Hotels           Hotels, restaurants.
                  Jewelry and Clocks                 Jewelry          Jewelry and watches.
                  Liquors and Tobacco                Liquors          Sellers of beer, wine, tobacco, and cigars.
                  Shoes, Rubbers, and Trunks         Shoes            All rubber goods and harnesses.
                  All Other                          Other            All other branches of retail trade.

Brokers and Transporters (c)                         Brokers          All except incorporated railway companies.


Source: Dun’s Review, 8 February 1896, pp. 2-3; 6 June 1896 p. 2; 1 December 1900, p. 2; 3 November 1906, pp. 4-5.
Notes: (a) In October 1906, the category “Manufacturing: Chemicals, Drugs, and Paints” was split into “Manufacturing: Chemicals
and Drugs” and “Manufacturing: Paints and Oils”. (b) In October 1906, the category “Retail: Drugs and Paints” was split into “Retail:
Chemicals and Drugs” and “Retail: Paints and Oils.” (c) In various issues referred to as: (i) agents and brokers; (ii) agents, brokers,
etc.; (iii) other commercial, (iv) brokers, and (v) transporters and brokers.




                                                                  30
Table 2: Manufacturing Divisions of Industry, circa 1937

Industry                           Components

Chemicals and drugs                Chemicals, chemical products, drugs, perfumes, cosmetics,
                                   paints. (b)
Foods                              Baking, beverages-alcoholic, beverages-non-alcoholic,
                                   confectionaries, dairy products, fruits and vegetables, meats
                                   and fish, milling.
Forest products                    Lumber, furniture.
Fuels                              Coal, petroleum.
Iron and steel                     Iron and steel, iron and steel products.
Leather and leather products       Leather and shoes. (b)
Machinery                          Electrical apparatus, machine shops. (b)
Paper, printing, and publishing    Paper and paper products, printing and engraving, publishing.
Stone, clay, and glass products    Stone and stone products, clay and clay products, glass and
                                   glass products.
Textiles                           Textile mill products, men’s and boys’ clothing and
                                   accessories, women’s and children’s clothing and accessories,
                                   hosiery, underwear, knit goods. (b)
Transportation equipment           Automobiles and parts, automobile accessories. (b)
Other                              Furs, non-ferrous jewelry, rubber goods, tobacco products,
                                   general supplies. (b)


Source: Dun’s Statistical Review, 1937.

Note: (a) In various issues, category labeled ‘all other’ or ‘miscellaneous.’ (b) Description of
industry components ended with the notation “etcetera,” “all other,” or “all other” followed by
the name of the industry, such as “all other transportation equipment” or “all textile products.”




                                                31
Table 3: Divisions of Industry in Trade, circa 1937

Sector and Industry                   Components

Wholesale Trade
Automotive products                   (a)
Chemicals and drugs                   (a)
Clothing and furnishings              (a)
Dry goods and textiles                (a)
Farm products, foods, groceries       Confectionery, dairy products, groceries and meats, meats
                                          and fish, produce and fruits, beverages-alcoholic.(b)
Fuels                                 (a)
Lumber, building materials,           (a)
   hardware
Supply houses                         (a)
All other                             Electrical goods, furniture and house furnishings, machinery
                                          and equipment, paper and paper products, tobacco
                                          products. (b)

Retail Trade
Apparel                               (a)
Automotive products                   Automobiles, automobile accessories, garages and repair
                                          shops, filling stations. (b)
Farm Supplies and General Stores      (a)
Foods                                 (a)
Furniture, household furnishings      Furniture, house furnishings and appliances, radios.
General merchandise                   Department stores, variety stores, dry goods.
Lumber, Building Materials, and       (a)
   Hardware
Drugs                                 (a)
Restaurants                           (a)
All other                             Tobacco products, fuels, florist shops, jewelry, stationery,
                                          books, news dealers, toys, miscellaneous.


Source: Dun’s Statistical Review, 1937.

Note: (a) No subcomponent indicated. (b) Description of industry components ended with the
notation “etcetera,” “all other,” or “all other” followed by the name of the industry, such as “all
other transportation equipment” or “all textile products.”




                                                 32
Table 4: Divisions of Industry in Construction and Commercial Services, circa 1937

Sector and Industry                 Components

Construction
Building sub-contractors            Painting and decorating, heating and plumbing, electrical.(b)
Carpenters and builders             (a)
General Contractors                 (a)
Other Contractors                   (a)

Commercial Services
Haulage, buses, taxis.              (a), (b)
Hotels                              (a)
Laundries                           (a)
Undertakers                         (a)
All other                           Advertising, barber shops and beauty parlors, shoe repairing,
                                    photographers. (b)


Source: Dun’s Statistical Review, 1937.

Note: (a) No subcomponent indicated. (b) Description of industry components ended with the
notation “etcetera,” “all other,” or “all other” followed by the name of the industry, such as “all
other transportation equipment” or “all textile products.”




                                                 33
Table 5: Missing Data

Volume           Data not reported for Reason                Solution

January 1898     December 1897         Table not published   Took data from January 1899.
May 1933         April 1933            Table not published   Took data from May 1934
June 1933        May 1933              Table not published   Took data from June 1934
July 1933        June 1933             Table not published   Took data from July 1934
August 1933      July 1933             Table not published   Took data from August 1934

September 1933   August 1933           Table not published   Took data from September 1934
October 1933     September 1933        Table not published   Estimate data. See Section 2.
November 1933    October 1933          Table not published   Estimate data. See Section 2.
December 1933    November 1933         Table not published   Took data from December 1934
January 1934     December 1933         Table not published   Estimate data. See Section 2.

April 1934       March 1934            Table not published   Estimate data. See Section 2.
October 1934     September 1934        Table not published   Took data from October 1935
November 1934    October 1934          Table not published   Took data from November 1935
January 1935     December 1934         Table not published   Took data from January 1936
April 1935       March 1935            Table not published   Took data from April 1936


Source: Dun’s Review or Dun and Bradstreet’s for week and month indicated.




                                            34
Table 6: Number of Failures by Manufacturing, Trading, and Brokers and Transporters,
1895 to 1939

             Manu.   Trad.   B&T   Total                 Manu.   Trad.   B&T   Total

1895   Jan     237   1,380    13   1,630   1898    Jan     233   1,093    29   1,355
       Feb     199     927     9   1,135           Feb     210     924    21   1,155
       Mar     215     800    22   1,037           Mar     244     900    33   1,177
       Apr     228     758    13     999           Apr     200     709    18     927
       May     190     656     7     853           May     211     711    33     955
       Jun     185     814     4   1,003           Jun     245     872    32   1,149
       Jul     163     717    21     901           Jul     208     645    29     882
       Aug     226     783    16   1,025           Aug     145     582    21     748
       Sep     198     659     9     866           Sep     189     698    23     910
       Oct     252     921    16   1,189           Oct     176     605    19     800
       Nov     250     850    22   1,122           Nov     122     632    24     778
       Dec     292   1,116    29   1,437           Dec     232   1,074    44   1,350

1896   Jan     318   1,342    25   1,685   1899    Jan     160    837     22   1,019
       Feb     249     884    30   1,163           Feb     153    595     22     770
       Mar     268     892    23   1,183           Mar     198    743     42     983
       Apr     262     722    16   1,000           Apr     155    490     21     666
       May     256     637    24     917           May     145    420     16     581
       Jun     284     779    15   1,078           Jun     169    643     22     834
       Jul     271     836    29   1,136           Jul     116    457     18     591
       Aug     298     780    29   1,107           Aug     123    470     21     614
       Sep     364   1,119    31   1,514           Sep     184    582     30     796
       Oct     249     979    26   1,254           Oct     145    443     22     610
       Nov     232     862    26   1,120           Nov     204    646     36     886
       Dec     367   1,520    44   1,931           Dec     173    781     33     987

1897   Jan     266   1,323    32   1,621   1900    Jan     163    796     30     989
       Feb     241     891    26   1,158           Feb     196    646     39     881
       Mar     271     859    23   1,153           Mar     219    754     51   1,024
       Apr     220     704    17     941           Apr     178    487     42     707
       May     199     702    35     936           May     196    698     53     947
       Jun     238     750    24   1,012           Jun     200    534     50     784
       Jul     213     716    19     948           Jul     183    550     60     793
       Aug     207     698    16     921           Aug     174    519     42     735
       Sep     231     760    21   1,012           Sep     250    710     31     991
       Oct     189     664    22     875           Oct     200    541     41     782
       Nov     209     810    22   1,041           Nov     193    617     40     850
       Dec     292   1,417    24   1,733           Dec     257    992     42   1,291




                                              35
Table 6 (continued)

             Manu.    Trad.   B&T   Total                 Manu.   Trad.   B&T   Total

1901   Jan     237    1,380    13   1,630   1904    Jan     233   1,093    29   1,355
       Feb     199      927     9   1,135           Feb     210     924    21   1,155
       Mar     215      800    22   1,037           Mar     244     900    33   1,177
       Apr     228      758    13     999           Apr     200     709    18     927
       May     190      656     7     853           May     211     711    33     955
       Jun     185      814     4   1,003           Jun     245     872    32   1,149
       Jul     163      717    21     901           Jul     208     645    29     882
       Aug     226      783    16   1,025           Aug     145     582    21     748
       Sep     198      659     9     866           Sep     189     698    23     910
       Oct     252      921    16   1,189           Oct     176     605    19     800
       Nov     250      850    22   1,122           Nov     122     632    24     778
       Dec     292    1,116    29   1,437           Dec     232   1,074    44   1,350

1902   Jan     318    1,342    25   1,685   1905    Jan     160    837     22   1,019
       Feb     249      884    30   1,163           Feb     153    595     22     770
       Mar     268      892    23   1,183           Mar     198    743     42     983
       Apr     262      722    16   1,000           Apr     155    490     21     666
       May     256      637    24     917           May     145    420     16     581
       Jun     284      779    15   1,078           Jun     169    643     22     834
       Jul     271      836    29   1,136           Jul     116    457     18     591
       Aug     298      780    29   1,107           Aug     123    470     21     614
       Sep     364    1,119    31   1,514           Sep     184    582     30     796
       Oct     249      979    26   1,254           Oct     145    443     22     610
       Nov     232      862    26   1,120           Nov     204    646     36     886
       Dec     367    1,520    44   1,931           Dec     173    781     33     987

1903   Jan     266    1,323    32   1,621   1906    Jan     163    796     30     989
       Feb     241      891    26   1,158           Feb     196    646     39     881
       Mar     271      859    23   1,153           Mar     219    754     51   1,024
       Apr     220      704    17     941           Apr     178    487     42     707
       May     199      702    35     936           May     196    698     53     947
       Jun     238      750    24   1,012           Jun     200    534     50     784
       Jul     213      716    19     948           Jul     183    550     60     793
       Aug     207      698    16     921           Aug     174    519     42     735
       Sep     231      760    21   1,012           Sep     250    710     31     991
       Oct     189      664    22     875           Oct     200    541     41     782
       Nov     209      810    22   1,041           Nov     193    617     40     850
       Dec     292    1,417    24   1,733           Dec     257    992     42   1,291




                                               36
Table 6 (continued)

             Manu.    Trad.   B&T   Total                 Manu.   Trad.   B&T   Total

1907   Jan     265    1,058    32   1,355   1910    Jan     325   1,133    52   1,510
       Feb     213      688    23     924           Feb     263     774    30   1,067
       Mar     198      619    36     853           Mar     224     694    30     948
       Apr     218      543    38     799           Apr     322     793    45   1,160
       May     212      614    31     857           May     218     628    39     885
       Jun     189      597    29     815           Jun     211     586    21     818
       Jul     211      531    35     777           Jul     300     810    37   1,147
       Aug     217      621    12     850           Aug     266     622    31     919
       Sep     231      606    19     856           Sep     275     639    31     945
       Oct     330      761    48   1,139           Oct     322     763    37   1,122
       Nov     305      840    35   1,180           Nov     260     698    45   1,003
       Dec     324      940    52   1,316           Dec     294     789    45   1,128

1908   Jan     402    1,473    74   1,949   1911    Jan     364   1,249    50   1,663
       Feb     393    1,170    58   1,621           Feb     285     871    42   1,198
       Mar     344      951    44   1,339           Mar     303     790    31   1,124
       Apr     370      868    71   1,309           Apr     338     833    35   1,206
       May     345      982    52   1,379           May     264     702    40   1,006
       Jun     288      791    33   1,112           Jun     239     592    33     864
       Jul     314      871    47   1,232           Jul     285     801    41   1,127
       Aug     253      907    39   1,199           Aug     227     660    39     926
       Sep     254      736    36   1,026           Sep     236     561    30     827
       Oct     292      840    55   1,187           Oct     341     794    34   1,169
       Nov     273      799    48   1,120           Nov     286     777    42   1,105
       Dec     299      884    24   1,207           Dec     334     850    42   1,226

1909   Jan     294    1,141    36   1,471   1912    Jan     374   1,463    60   1,897
       Feb     231      841    33   1,105           Feb     387   1,092    60   1,539
       Mar     318      935    21   1,274           Mar     321   1,004    67   1,392
       Apr     253      706    31     990           Apr     313     913    53   1,279
       May     231      766    31   1,028           May     286     871    47   1,204
       Jun     195      833    33   1,061           Jun     247     727    32   1,006
       Jul     274      796    35   1,105           Jul     302     889    39   1,230
       Aug     222      673    22     917           Aug     284     765    53   1,102
       Sep     192      594    27     813           Sep     325     799    43   1,167
       Oct     308      827    29   1,164           Oct     321     767    62   1,150
       Nov     247      679    37     963           Nov     327     806    42   1,175
       Dec     264      833    33   1,130           Dec     352     915    44   1,311




                                               37
Table 6 (continued)

             Manu.    Trad.   B&T   Total                 Manu.   Trad.   B&T   Total

1913   Jan     395    1,351    68   1,814   1916    Jan     417   1,494    98   2,009
       Feb     340    1,064    50   1,454           Feb     418   1,186    84   1,688
       Mar     317      818    55   1,190           Mar     408   1,180   102   1,690
       Apr     341      906    67   1,314           Apr     335     976    88   1,399
       May     313      888    45   1,246           May     384   1,017    81   1,482
       Jun     343      756    46   1,145           Jun     285     894    48   1,227
       Jul     290      829    50   1,169           Jul     328     815    64   1,207
       Aug     331      781    33   1,145           Aug     335     997    62   1,394
       Sep     352      823    60   1,235           Sep     316     786    52   1,154
       Oct     422      954    58   1,434           Oct     285     886    69   1,240
       Nov     382      937    58   1,377           Nov     362     820    69   1,251
       Dec     417    1,038    59   1,514           Dec     323     872    57   1,252

1914   Jan     407    1,390    60   1,857   1917    Jan     361   1,124    55   1,540
       Feb     374    1,068    63   1,505           Feb     262     841    62   1,165
       Mar     366    1,031    67   1,464           Mar     314     856    62   1,232
       Apr     347      920    69   1,336           Apr     281     724    64   1,069
       May     322      833    66   1,221           May     343     895    58   1,296
       Jun     297      826    37   1,160           Jun     327     799    60   1,186
       Jul     360      989    62   1,411           Jul     312     770    55   1,137
       Aug     327      868    77   1,272           Aug     313     748    88   1,149
       Sep     421    1,106    88   1,615           Sep     257     658    48     963
       Oct     435    1,176    75   1,686           Oct     311     722    49   1,082
       Nov     480    1,264    71   1,815           Nov     301     608    72     981
       Dec     484    1,380    74   1,938           Dec     309     685    61   1,055

1915   Jan     551    2,184   113   2,848   1918    Jan     299    801     78   1,178
       Feb     525    1,663    90   2,278           Feb     255    663     62     980
       Mar     504    1,501    85   2,090           Mar     298    762     82   1,142
       Apr     490    1,484    89   2,063           Apr     242    605     58     905
       May     390    1,231    86   1,707           May     243    572     65     880
       Jun     404    1,274    76   1,754           Jun     241    508     55     804
       Jul     383    1,283    73   1,739           Jul     220    509     57     786
       Aug     352      971    72   1,395           Aug     197    465     58     720
       Sep     298    1,053    63   1,414           Sep     189    445     40     674
       Oct     407    1,094    98   1,599           Oct     195    406     59     660
       Nov     419    1,080    66   1,565           Nov     182    341     47     570
       Dec     393    1,212    99   1,704           Dec     205    417     61     683




                                               38
Table 6 (continued)

             Manu.    Trad.   B&T   Total                 Manu.   Trad.   B&T   Total

1919   Jan     180     438     55    673    1922    Jan     533   2,033   157   2,723
       Feb     161     384     57    602            Feb     481   1,714   136   2,331
       Mar     196     368     65    629            Mar     563   1,761   139   2,463
       Apr     174     319     50    543            Apr     488   1,572   107   2,167
       May     165     310     56    531            May     508   1,377    75   1,960
       Jun     140     292     53    485            Jun     409   1,259    72   1,740
       Jul     139     280     33    452            Jul     467   1,218    68   1,753
       Aug     133     299     36    468            Aug     420   1,231    63   1,714
       Sep     137     295     41    473            Sep     444   1,049    73   1,566
       Oct     121     305     37    463            Oct     464   1,178    66   1,708
       Nov     150     354     47    551            Nov     456   1,230    51   1,737
       Dec     169     369     43    581            Dec     449   1,301    64   1,814

1920   Jan     140      381    48     569   1923    Jan     499   1,569    58   2,126
       Feb     132      313    47     492           Feb     348   1,115    45   1,508
       Mar     160      350    56     566           Mar     437   1,179    66   1,682
       Apr     137      312    55     504           Apr     388   1,088    44   1,520
       May     135      363    49     547           May     401   1,069    60   1,530
       Jun     197      421    56     674           Jun     348     970    40   1,358
       Jul     218      409    54     681           Jul     350     828    53   1,231
       Aug     235      377    61     673           Aug     385     888    46   1,319
       Sep     223      398    56     677           Sep     324     863    39   1,226
       Oct     327      534    62     923           Oct     498   1,110    65   1,673
       Nov     310      667    73   1,050           Nov     495   1,131    78   1,704
       Dec     421    1,007    97   1,525           Dec     495   1,254    92   1,841

1921   Jan     415    1,388    92   1,895   1924    Jan     505   1,538    65   2,108
       Feb     348    1,187   106   1,641           Feb     398   1,250    82   1,730
       Mar     298      951    87   1,336           Mar     484   1,254    79   1,817
       Apr     337    1,063    87   1,487           Apr     438   1,178    91   1,707
       May     294      988    74   1,356           May     507   1,215    94   1,816
       Jun     321      917    82   1,320           Jun     439   1,084    84   1,607
       Jul     342    1,021    81   1,444           Jul     416   1,124    75   1,615
       Aug     373    1,085   104   1,562           Aug     414   1,024    82   1,520
       Sep     365    1,014    87   1,466           Sep     360     883    63   1,306
       Oct     426    1,175   112   1,713           Oct     411   1,186    99   1,696
       Nov     445    1,415   128   1,988           Nov     361   1,193    99   1,653
       Dec     531    1,795   118   2,444           Dec     475   1,464   101   2,040




                                               39
Table 6 (continued)

             Manu.    Trad.   B&T   Total                 Manu.   Trad.   B&T   Total

1925   Jan     480    1,757    80   2,317   1928    Jan     553   1,946   144   2,643
       Feb     409    1,285    99   1,793           Feb     468   1,581   127   2,176
       Mar     429    1,345    85   1,859           Mar     546   1,566   124   2,236
       Apr     430    1,427    82   1,939           Apr     432   1,276   110   1,818
       May     400    1,286    81   1,767           May     470   1,407   131   2,008
       Jun     431    1,229    85   1,745           Jun     513   1,325   109   1,947
       Jul     418    1,184    83   1,685           Jul     450   1,161   112   1,723
       Aug     365    1,069    79   1,513           Aug     493   1,247   112   1,852
       Sep     388    1,015    62   1,465           Sep     454   1,073   108   1,635
       Oct     408    1,111    62   1,581           Oct     528   1,369   126   2,023
       Nov     442    1,146    84   1,672           Nov     519   1,202   117   1,838
       Dec     490    1,307    81   1,878           Dec     498   1,324   121   1,943

1926   Jan     510    1,696    90   2,296   1929    Jan     614   1,769   152   2,535
       Feb     447    1,282    72   1,801           Feb     478   1,378   109   1,965
       Mar     469    1,424    91   1,984           Mar     512   1,349   126   1,987
       Apr     494    1,378    85   1,957           Apr     499   1,388   134   2,021
       May     437    1,216    77   1,730           May     515   1,266   116   1,897
       Jun     435    1,160   113   1,708           Jun     496   1,154   117   1,767
       Jul     396    1,122    87   1,605           Jul     461   1,190   101   1,752
       Aug     449    1,071    73   1,593           Aug     482   1,163   117   1,762
       Sep     374      958   105   1,437           Sep     427   1,039   102   1,568
       Oct     450    1,205   108   1,763           Oct     483   1,211   128   1,822
       Nov     440    1,285   105   1,830           Nov     481   1,166   149   1,796
       Dec     494    1,469   106   2,069           Dec     495   1,254    92   1,841

1927   Jan     501    1,842   122   2,465   1930    Jan     680   1,913   166   2,759
       Feb     411    1,508   116   2,035           Feb     526   1,605   131   2,262
       Mar     569    1,468   106   2,143           Mar     621   1,587   139   2,347
       Apr     492    1,342   134   1,968           Apr     534   1,500   164   2,198
       May     444    1,292   116   1,852           May     501   1,530   148   2,179
       Jun     427    1,310    96   1,833           Jun     507   1,393   126   2,026
       Jul     448    1,187   121   1,756           Jul     425   1,481   122   2,028
       Aug     438    1,174    96   1,708           Aug     566   1,234   113   1,913
       Sep     389    1,083   101   1,573           Sep     434   1,395   134   1,963
       Oct     488    1,170   129   1,787           Oct     499   1,474   151   2,124
       Nov     478    1,276   110   1,864           Nov     448   1,447   136   2,031
       Dec     597    1,430   135   2,162           Dec     437   1,834   154   2,425




                                               40
Table 6 (continued)

             Manu.    Trad.   B&T   Total                 Manu.   Trad.   B&T   Total

1931   Jan     476    2,541   164   3,316   1934    Jan     295    951     71   1,317
       Feb     583    1,831   149   2,563           Feb     248    716     85   1,049
       Mar     492    1,843   179   2,604           Mar     301    695    106   1,102
       Apr     430    1,710   158   2,383           Apr     281    669    102   1,052
       May     456    1,570   126   2,248           May     246    632     99     977
       Jun     385    1,435   109   1,993           Jun     279    659     95   1,033
       Jul     445    1,322   141   1,983           Jul     235    579     98     912
       Aug     352    1,381   136   1,944           Aug     237    597     95     929
       Sep     375    1,374   113   1,936           Sep     214    512     64     790
       Oct     520    1,605   143   2,362           Oct     258    716    117   1,091
       Nov     409    1,545   131   2,195           Nov     223    597    103     923
       Dec     458    2,013   154   2,758           Dec     225    638    100     963

1932   Jan     528    2,595   175   3,458   1935    Jan     269    826     89   1,184
       Feb     461    2,002   128   2,732           Feb     229    660    116   1,005
       Mar     508    2,108   201   2,951           Mar     223    654     99     976
       Apr     641    2,006   169   2,816           Apr     260    777     78   1,115
       May     672    1,987   129   2,788           May     243    692     92   1,027
       Jun     614    1,910   164   2,688           Jun     228    657     76     961
       Jul     622    1,790   184   2,596           Jul     237    620     74     931
       Aug     649    1,970   177   2,796           Aug     197    648     65     910
       Sep     513    1,528   141   2,182           Sep     189    560     57     806
       Oct     542    1,581   150   2,273           Oct     287    710    100   1,097
       Nov     480    1,521   132   2,133           Nov     235    615     77     927
       Dec     495    1,686   169   2,469           Dec     245    616     79     940

1933   Jan     456    2,182   172   2,919   1936    Jan     680   1,913   166   2,759
       Feb     423    1,721   157   2,378           Feb     526   1,605   131   2,262
       Mar     368    1,336   150   1,948           Mar     621   1,587   139   2,347
       Apr     356    1,352   147   1,921           Apr     534   1,500   164   2,198
       May     383    1,282   161   1,909           May     501   1,530   148   2,179
       Jun     362    1,153   133   1,648           Jun     507   1,393   126   2,026
       Jul     325      976   120   1,421           Jul     425   1,481   122   2,028
       Aug     357    1,001   114   1,472           Aug     566   1,234   113   1,913
       Sep     273      728   115   1,116           Sep     434   1,395   134   1,963
       Oct     314      780   112   1,206           Oct     499   1,474   151   2,124
       Nov     311      820   106   1,237           Nov     448   1,447   136   2,031
       Dec     258      774   100   1,132           Dec     437   1,834   154   2,425




                                               41
Table 6 (continued)

             Manu.    Trad.   B&T   Total                 Manu.   Trad.   B&T   Total

1937   Jan     136     588     87     811   1940    Jan     223    901    113   1,237
       Feb     120     506     95     721           Feb     204    724    114   1,042
       Mar     126     571    123     820           Mar     216    863    118   1,197
       Apr     135     561     90     786           Apr     261    880    150   1,291
       May     153     604     77     834           May     263    859    116   1,238
       Jun     134     470     66     670           Jun     226    779    109   1,114
       Jul     131     431     56     618           Jul     216    844    115   1,175
       Aug     148     480     79     707           Aug     209    821     98   1,128
       Sep     127     392     65     584           Sep     187    682    107     976
       Oct     196     542     77     815           Oct     214    782    115   1,111
       Nov     199     537    106     842           Nov     202    729     93   1,024
       Dec     248     653    108   1,009           Dec     200    781    105   1,086

1938   Jan     241    1,018   118   1,377
       Feb     211      817   105   1,149
       Mar     241      821   105   1,167
       Apr     210      872    90   1,172
       May     217      799   107   1,123
       Jun     198      769   106   1,073
       Jul     210      732    96   1,038
       Aug     173      751    91   1,015
       Sep     184      600    82     866
       Oct     172      735    90     997
       Nov     196      685   103     984
       Dec     175      615    85     875

1939   Jan     298    1,142   127   1,567
       Feb     234      879    89   1,202
       Mar     267      935   120   1,322
       Apr     272      950   109   1,331
       May     263      952   119   1,334
       Jun     209      792   118   1,119
       Jul     242      843    68   1,153
       Aug     210      813   103   1,126
       Sep     187      757    99   1,043
       Oct     235      901    98   1,234
       Nov     263      822    99   1,184
       Dec     239      798   116   1,153




                                               42
Sources: Dun’s Review and Dun and Bradstreets, see text and appendices for details.

Notes: Manu. indicates the manufacturing sector. Trad. indicates the trading sector. B & T
indicates the sector brokers and traders which is often referred to as other.




                                               43
Table 7: Liabilities of Failed Businesses by Manufacturing, Trading, and Brokers and
Transporters, 1895 to 1939

Year   Month       Manu.      Trading       B&T            Total


1895   Jan      3,308,905   11,225,899    802,000     15,336,804
       Feb      3,904,779    7,430,489    659,000     11,994,268
       Mar     13,010,307    6,834,041    638,263     20,482,611
       Apr      4,520,649    6,316,710    129,100     10,966,459
       May      3,400,901    6,142,205    684,500     10,227,606
       Jun     12,156,408    7,231,021    444,767     19,832,196
       Jul      2,866,517    6,704,539    862,142     10,433,198
       Aug      4,131,488    6,266,841    380,000     10,778,329
       Sep      5,207,110    5,458,767    289,775     10,955,652
       Oct      6,901,941    8,280,188    204,621     15,386,750
       Nov      4,247,983    6,987,043    915,303     12,150,329
       Dec     10,263,085   13,828,679    560,094     24,651,858

1896   Jan      8,585,696   12,142,629   1,007,418    21,735,743
       Feb      5,502,308    6,606,076   1,022,067    13,130,451
       Mar      9,419,322   12,675,607     464,012    22,558,941
       Apr      6,652,521    5,529,745     305,431    12,487,697
       May      4,624,228    7,094,767     577,353    12,296,348
       Jun      8,209,984    7,324,786     125,732    15,660,502
       Jul      7,568,940    6,906,335   1,025,820    15,501,095
       Aug     13,100,249    9,056,008   5,852,380    28,008,637
       Sep     11,810,007   12,775,874   5,189,036    29,774,917
       Oct      6,936,394    7,416,822     527,050    14,880,266
       Nov      4,659,615    7,480,238     561,003    12,700,856
       Dec     11,394,587   14,037,733   1,929,061    27,361,381

1897   Jan      8,572,946    9,386,957     399,682    18,359,585
       Feb      7,107,041    6,133,258     432,213    13,672,512
       Mar      6,732,157    8,526,389     717,268    15,975,814
       Apr     12,437,979    4,658,564     516,934    17,613,477
       May      4,599,845    4,839,010   1,880,534    11,319,389
       Jun      6,365,010    7,733,065     653,935    14,752,010
       Jul      2,547,540    4,140,366     429,821     7,117,727
       Aug      3,583,367    4,176,868     414,193     8,174,428
       Sep      3,315,917    4,514,894   2,478,222    10,309,033
       Oct      2,878,842    4,944,357   1,754,552     9,577,751
       Nov      4,331,380    5,452,596   1,826,219    11,610,195
       Dec      5,393,064    9,993,584     463,502    15,850,150




                                                     44
Table 7 (continued)

Year   Month      Manu.      Trading        B&T            Total


1898   Jan     3,054,055    7,022,014      375,444    10,451,513
       Feb     3,639,339    5,148,032      713,270     9,500,641
       Mar     6,952,762    5,300,769      740,880    12,994,411
       Apr     5,034,708    3,987,467      345,627     9,367,802
       May     5,287,701    5,087,995      754,383    11,130,079
       Jun     6,799,579    6,410,349      790,265    14,000,193
       Jul     4,303,665    3,371,414    2,426,376    10,101,455
       Aug     1,881,233    3,819,156      378,266     6,078,655
       Sep     3,923,199    4,404,852      596,617     8,924,668
       Oct     7,146,710    5,097,533    1,882,511    14,126,754
       Nov     3,223,613    3,977,051      909,811     8,110,475
       Dec     6,297,797    8,291,420    1,287,036    15,876,253

1899   Jan     2,209,568    5,270,292      242,037     7,721,897
       Feb     4,325,548    4,349,330      337,729     9,012,607
       Mar     4,206,948    5,417,996      792,583    10,417,527
       Apr     2,775,659    2,495,899      518,538     5,790,096
       May     1,322,466    2,413,235       84,985     3,820,686
       Jun     1,883,165    3,064,612      352,343     5,300,120
       Jul     1,903,644    2,254,622      713,931     4,872,197
       Aug     1,850,579    2,873,741    1,064,771     5,789,091
       Sep     1,653,754    3,513,851    1,812,079     6,979,684
       Oct     2,297,505    2,167,434    1,200,806     5,665,745
       Nov     2,986,626    3,846,108    1,214,114     8,046,848
       Dec     3,376,702   11,257,651    2,829,038    17,463,391

1900   Jan     3,194,233    6,079,045    1,031,186    10,304,464
       Feb     4,257,638    4,810,258      863,152     9,931,048
       Mar     5,950,682    5,429,344    1,407,035    12,787,061
       Apr     4,514,003    2,441,451    2,806,415     9,761,869
       May     3,412,320    5,619,082   14,739,749    23,771,151
       Jun     3,276,589    3,640,461    1,274,809     8,191,859
       Jul     5,177,682    3,324,366    1,269,727     9,771,775
       Aug     2,945,607    3,585,667      792,629     7,323,903
       Sep     4,494,101    4,635,107      895,110    10,024,318
       Oct     3,195,362    5,351,188      526,241     9,072,791
       Nov     3,883,165    7,506,358      910,793    12,300,316
       Dec     7,400,760    6,993,265      861,093    15,255,118




                                                     45
Table 7 (continued)

Year   Month       Manu.     Trading       B&T           Total


1901   Jan      4,700,984   5,311,804   1,208,023   18,483,573
       Feb      4,398,741   4,444,873   2,443,597   15,812,553
       Mar      3,404,497   4,796,229     994,738   13,770,595
       Apr      1,997,694   3,168,823     404,705   13,136,688
       May      2,393,726   3,500,966   2,095,731    9,817,998
       Jun      4,795,406   3,641,512   2,102,641    8,469,502
       Jul      3,240,128   3,353,914     441,891    8,812,097
       Aug      4,611,870   4,174,102     672,894   10,491,498
       Sep      3,215,391   3,928,288   1,117,694   12,864,701
       Oct      4,537,281   4,311,788   1,831,558   10,525,728
       Nov      3,507,695   4,836,275     726,476    8,535,459
       Dec      4,157,570   6,592,066   2,030,805   13,481,919

1902   Jan      6,308,948   7,116,972     886,581   10,417,205
       Feb      4,915,015   4,737,491   1,649,523    9,780,370
       Mar      3,551,941   3,662,864     902,423    9,964,930
       Apr      2,908,817   3,947,455     503,069    8,056,866
       May      3,993,934   3,952,540   1,163,366    8,907,301
       Jun      3,261,365   5,728,300   1,184,252    8,777,913
       Jul      2,568,855   2,806,868   1,557,128    6,148,930
       Aug      2,762,180   3,333,158   1,973,187    6,140,566
       Sep      3,493,763   5,441,272   1,096,223    8,039,947
       Oct      5,370,187   4,649,552     831,795    6,751,992
       Nov      3,391,060   5,029,843     855,813    8,866,798
       Dec      4,662,824   5,675,165   1,603,040   10,823,354

1903   Jan      5,736,316   6,343,179     899,484   11,952,455
       Feb      3,867,951   4,582,704   2,456,799   10,859,619
       Mar      4,088,451   4,943,062   1,426,487   10,949,033
       Apr      6,396,295   4,586,595     829,077    8,059,649
       May      3,403,615   6,645,447   2,265,144   12,992,809
       Jun      2,642,516   3,443,456   2,240,682    7,850,509
       Jul      6,378,761   3,571,503   6,800,981    6,919,014
       Aug      7,748,685   2,946,352     182,745    8,821,154
       Sep      3,421,112   3,211,523     596,933    6,255,995
       Oct     11,995,369   5,536,129     856,069   10,553,714
       Nov      6,049,207   8,120,271   2,252,831   11,980,782
       Dec      8,869,866   8,215,092   1,893,496   12,006,782




                                                    46
Table 7 (continued)

Year   Month      Manu.     Trading       B&T           Total


1904   Jan     6,687,636   8,224,937   3,571,000   18,483,573
       Feb     3,826,935   5,289,801   6,695,817   15,812,553
       Mar     4,172,865   5,682,726   3,915,004   13,770,595
       Apr     5,222,923   5,815,702   2,098,063   13,136,688
       May     3,509,884   5,214,499   1,093,615    9,817,998
       Jun     3,998,749   4,042,919     427,834    8,469,502
       Jul     3,737,771   4,386,030     688,296    8,812,097
       Aug     3,030,570   3,728,468   3,732,460   10,491,498
       Sep     4,581,683   6,742,853   1,540,165   12,864,701
       Oct     4,603,272   5,199,218     723,238   10,525,728
       Nov     3,540,983   3,929,143   1,065,333    8,535,459
       Dec     6,037,202   6,173,348   1,271,369   13,481,919

1905   Jan     4,678,692   5,275,640     462,873   10,417,205
       Feb     3,826,854   5,413,983     539,533    9,780,370
       Mar     3,441,145   5,647,113     876,672    9,964,930
       Apr     3,883,260   3,646,128     527,478    8,056,866
       May     4,059,426   4,276,016     571,859    8,907,301
       Jun     3,453,843   4,635,698     688,372    8,777,913
       Jul     3,519,739   2,169,086     460,105    6,148,930
       Aug     2,501,694   3,287,586     351,286    6,140,566
       Sep     3,418,632   4,262,987     358,328    8,039,947
       Oct     3,444,815   3,036,631     270,546    6,751,992
       Nov     4,317,443   4,256,184     293,171    8,866,798
       Dec     3,707,086   5,847,451   1,268,817   10,823,354

1906   Jan     3,125,038   5,565,384   3,262,033   11,952,455
       Feb     4,653,832   3,566,881   2,638,906   10,859,619
       Mar     5,253,301   4,916,157     779,575   10,949,033
       Apr     2,122,328   3,190,302   2,747,019    8,059,649
       May     4,038,273   4,812,842   4,141,694   12,992,809
       Jun     2,796,750   3,454,412   1,599,347    7,850,509
       Jul     2,761,640   3,657,982     499,392    6,919,014
       Aug     3,089,172   3,552,039   2,179,943    8,821,154
       Sep     2,569,642   3,199,879     486,474    6,255,995
       Oct     5,394,552   3,361,816   1,797,346   10,553,714
       Nov     3,291,192   4,390,415   4,299,175   11,980,782
       Dec     6,579,642   4,518,027     909,113   12,006,782




                                                   47
Table 7 (continued)

Year   Month       Manu.      Trading       B&T            Total


1907   Jan      6,064,564    6,799,517     764,045    13,628,126
       Feb      4,369,883    5,452,969     460,918    10,283,770
       Mar      3,344,610    3,273,720   1,545,365     8,163,695
       Apr      6,060,341    3,485,251   1,536,504    11,082,096
       May      4,758,725    4,035,245   1,171,440     9,965,410
       Jun     12,086,525    3,698,084     660,956    16,445,565
       Jul      4,449,226    4,802,907   3,082,577    12,334,710
       Aug     11,047,249    3,740,828     409,672    15,197,749
       Sep     10,602,834    4,605,406   3,726,987    18,935,227
       Oct     12,766,068    6,210,789   8,438,133    27,414,990
       Nov     10,927,598    5,640,065   1,069,348    17,637,011
       Dec     20,162,821    6,953,367   9,180,688    36,296,876

1908   Jan     10,267,087   13,484,007   3,348,420    27,099,514
       Feb     12,011,375    8,672,143   6,381,053    27,064,571
       Mar     10,978,395    9,303,362   1,260,349    21,542,106
       Apr      7,705,119    6,125,061   6,486,288    20,316,468
       May      6,988,988    5,570,684   1,083,709    13,643,381
       Jun      5,491,340    5,854,765   3,362,688    14,708,793
       Jul      5,835,018    6,160,713   2,226,395    14,222,126
       Aug     15,152,880    5,867,597   2,761,901    23,782,378
       Sep      4,710,229   11,771,895     816,062    17,298,186
       Oct      7,142,381    6,190,162   2,566,125    15,898,668
       Nov      5,277,420    5,731,104   1,591,388    12,599,912
       Dec      5,268,783    6,930,464   1,940,334    14,139,581

1909   Jan      5,802,733    7,196,828   1,008,524    14,008,085
       Feb      8,161,384    6,410,597   2,162,832    16,734,813
       Mar      5,950,881    7,087,912     679,369    13,718,162
       Apr      5,352,208    5,346,274   6,126,734    16,825,216
       May      7,156,140    4,974,243   2,253,377    14,383,760
       Jun      5,629,570    5,122,270   1,855,282    12,607,022
       Jul      3,807,201    4,750,213     970,479     9,527,893
       Aug      4,010,002    4,554,995   1,055,579     9,620,576
       Sep      3,423,271    4,265,308     757,450     8,446,029
       Oct      5,497,919    6,546,525     485,418    12,529,862
       Nov      4,375,395    4,877,164     560,046     9,812,605
       Dec      4,052,519    7,768,711   2,803,897    14,625,127




                                                     48
Table 7 (continued)

Year   Month       Manu.      Trading        B&T            Total


1910   Jan      8,679,469   11,000,265   12,336,020    32,015,754
       Feb     12,821,996    6,438,345    8,174,488    27,434,829
       Mar      5,716,263    6,415,712    1,496,597    13,628,572
       Apr     10,068,448    5,288,917    2,395,226    17,752,591
       May      3,677,256    3,916,851    1,996,000     9,590,186
       Jun      3,346,332    7,152,383    1,318,739    11,817,454
       Jul      7,732,411    5,299,487      758,855    13,790,753
       Aug      7,751,674    4,064,256      626,133    12,442,063
       Sep     10,295,428    5,273,496      364,258    15,933,182
       Oct      7,135,602    8,043,499    3,798,595    18,977,696
       Nov      4,598,639    5,471,332    1,254,045    11,324,016
       Dec      7,093,367    6,626,460    3,318,254    17,038,081

1911   Jan      9,243,380   10,882,400    3,964,869    24,090,649
       Feb      6,336,597   10,010,117      739,757    17,086,471
       Mar      7,959,200    8,871,267    1,644,174    18,474,641
       Apr      8,905,340    7,538,976      480,463    16,924,776
       May      5,863,260    6,002,124    1,604,405    13,469,789
       Jun      7,253,635    4,890,724    1,507,666    13,652,025
       Jul      5,990,915    5,640,801      518,354    12,150,070
       Aug      5,636,068    4,954,483      526,080    11,116,631
       Sep      4,145,110    3,816,927    3,938,531    11,900,568
       Oct      9,545,812    7,486,602    2,237,682    19,270,106
       Nov      6,867,347    6,541,789    1,857,201    15,266,337
       Dec      9,624,959    7,603,469      431,174    17,659,602

1912   Jan      5,804,353   11,773,349    2,192,828    19,770,530
       Feb     11,245,116    8,792,306    1,440,501    21,477,923
       Mar      8,656,688    7,812,285    5,294,897    21,763,870
       Apr      7,020,912    7,698,686    2,155,129    16,874,727
       May      6,279,293    7,594,751    1,403,418    15,277,462
       Jun      6,107,759    5,864,224      885,728    12,847,711
       Jul      6,167,222    7,147,419    2,783,819    16,098,460
       Aug      7,259,346    7,272,305    1,621,515    16,153,166
       Sep      7,152,623    5,691,662      436,226    13,280,511
       Oct      6,309,830    6,239,674    3,212,833    15,762,337
       Nov      7,230,614    6,751,891    1,663,600    15,646,105
       Dec      7,486,076    9,141,413    1,537,100    18,164,589




                                                  49
Table 7 (continued)

Year   Month       Manu.      Trading        B&T            Total


1913   Jan      8,762,357   10,889,112    3,321,300    22,972,769
       Feb     14,172,504   13,368,418      600,336    28,141,258
       Mar      7,699,806   12,332,579    5,685,865    25,718,250
       Apr      6,662,356    9,310,301    2,472,698    18,445,355
       May      7,839,778    7,213,147    1,810,879    16,863,804
       Jun     10,366,468    7,469,167    2,931,990    20,767,625
       Jul      7,990,054    9,429,012    2,906,639    20,325,705
       Aug     11,254,770    7,621,846    1,972,300    20,848,916
       Sep     13,320,101    6,173,106    3,169,487    22,662,694
       Oct     10,454,594    8,431,721    1,359,151    20,245,466
       Nov     12,653,747    8,982,316    2,563,422    24,199,485
       Dec     11,955,993   13,894,487    5,630,481    31,480,961

1914   Jan     16,780,939   15,890,980    6,702,428    39,374,347
       Feb      6,335,413   11,879,463    4,139,317    22,354,193
       Mar     11,528,528    8,730,127    1,234,631    21,493,286
       Apr      6,424,059   10,627,229    3,497,856    20,549,144
       May     10,340,189    7,846,495    5,260,812    23,447,496
       Jun      9,568,017   47,253,914    1,059,333    57,881,214
       Jul      9,474,100    8,370,548    2,532,550    20,377,198
       Aug     16,168,970    8,410,833   18,888,313    43,468,116
       Sep      7,575,263   11,273,779    4,168,985    23,018,027
       Oct     12,793,065   11,534,606    5,374,507    29,702,178
       Nov     13,079,589   10,070,005    2,339,904    25,489,458
       Dec     15,668,147   13,976,873    1,254,142    30,899,162

1915   Jan     27,041,279   20,227,896    2,871,400    49,640,575
       Feb      9,646,346   16,117,468    6,640,816    32,404,630
       Mar      9,524,230   12,366,775    1,767,125    23,658,130
       Apr      9,705,889   26,909,676    6,902,305    43,517,870
       May      6,721,884   12,595,669    1,735,659    21,053,212
       Jun      7,604,300    9,150,948    1,557,870    18,313,118
       Jul      5,517,570    9,773,498    3,643,835    18,934,903
       Aug      9,197,401    6,917,555    1,618,596    17,733,552
       Sep      4,739,110    9,631,735    1,837,235    16,208,070
       Oct      8,637,922    9,955,202    6,929,256    25,522,380
       Nov      6,748,987    7,472,292    1,473,155    15,694,434
       Dec      6,941,566    9,114,933    3,548,775    19,605,274




                                                  50
Table 7 (continued)

Year   Month       Manu.      Trading       B&T            Total


1916   Jan     11,759,745   12,360,538   1,743,003    25,863,286
       Feb      7,227,216    9,190,214   2,326,735    18,744,165
       Mar      4,820,249    9,497,409   2,567,637    16,885,295
       Apr      6,452,195    7,086,599   4,843,843    18,382,637
       May      5,192,040   10,134,979   4,139,417    19,466,436
       Jun      3,445,297    7,834,870     649,174    11,929,341
       Jul      3,986,305    6,224,397   1,436,797    11,647,499
       Aug     10,884,301    6,557,808   2,686,600    20,128,709
       Sep      5,447,313    5,160,449     961,316    11,569,078
       Oct      3,802,162    5,486,200   1,487,292    10,775,654
       Nov      4,859,478    5,532,625   3,712,518    14,104,621
       Dec      5,122,279    6,318,479   5,304,516    16,745,274

1917   Jan      6,368,502    8,572,518   3,342,100    18,283,120
       Feb      5,662,955    6,305,312   4,649,616    16,617,883
       Mar      8,050,840    6,030,825   3,324,431    17,406,096
       Apr      5,993,875    5,228,813   1,364,525    12,587,213
       May      4,939,547    6,057,723     774,621    11,771,891
       Jun      9,425,189    4,809,368   3,820,596    18,055,153
       Jul      5,845,584    6,536,659   4,858,181    17,240,424
       Aug      7,690,699    5,484,805   4,909,703    18,085,207
       Sep      5,714,051    5,052,748   1,136,252    11,903,051
       Oct      6,076,970    5,267,817   1,467,225    12,812,012
       Nov      7,293,649    5,203,531   1,138,425    13,635,605
       Dec      6,481,646    5,566,550   1,995,520    14,043,716

1918   Jan      9,554,710    6,325,652   3,398,425    19,278,787
       Feb      4,232,561    6,640,086   1,956,535    12,829,182
       Mar      5,201,447    6,298,165   6,172,719    17,672,331
       Apr      7,067,268    4,940,862   2,263,719    14,271,849
       May      4,340,250    3,853,095   4,941,327    13,134,672
       Jun      4,697,733    4,225,484   1,683,524    10,606,741
       Jul      4,462,265    3,629,182   1,698,125     9,789,572
       Aug      3,276,753    3,828,931     879,076     7,984,760
       Sep      8,522,922    5,706,635   3,177,573    17,407,130
       Oct      6,744,940    3,538,936   3,696,430    13,980,306
       Nov      8,783,588    4,506,156     525,422    13,815,166
       Dec      6,497,257    4,417,787   1,334,439    12,249,483




                                                     51
Table 7 (continued)

Year   Month       Manu.      Trading        B&T            Total


1919   Jan      5,125,067    4,340,455    1,270,876    10,736,398
       Feb      5,158,233    3,647,513    2,683,437    11,489,183
       Mar      4,955,895    4,405,443    4,234,133    13,595,471
       Apr      6,107,171    3,309,861    2,033,430    11,450,462
       May      7,997,719    2,779,326    1,179,606    11,956,651
       Jun      3,559,430    2,323,175    3,600,116     9,482,721
       Jul      2,297,812    1,880,664    1,328,534     5,507,010
       Aug      3,150,514    2,077,093      704,786     5,932,393
       Sep      3,135,883    2,373,589    3,281,847     8,791,319
       Oct      2,303,885    2,846,047    1,722,034     6,871,966
       Nov      5,833,209    2,751,618      592,494     9,177,321
       Dec      1,989,398    4,935,659    1,375,285     8,300,342

1920   Jan      2,586,859    2,993,219    1,659,954     7,240,032
       Feb      4,011,361    2,992,512    2,759,269     9,763,142
       Mar      3,277,324    3,507,682    5,914,310    12,699,316
       Apr      2,601,053    3,276,615    7,346,467    13,224,135
       May      5,053,683    4,479,950    1,292,644    10,826,277
       Jun      6,486,097    7,019,269   19,485,599    32,990,965
       Jul     12,986,467    6,389,106    2,530,839    21,906,412
       Aug     14,502,294    7,756,155    6,114,446    28,372,895
       Sep     14,036,461    8,545,168    6,972,659    29,554,288
       Oct     19,173,090   10,505,115    9,236,454    38,914,659
       Nov     15,442,866   12,706,890    2,608,374    30,758,130
       Dec     27,834,916   18,386,660   12,649,963    58,871,539

1921   Jan     21,808,187   22,594,162    7,734,282    52,136,631
       Feb     19,326,430   23,379,032   18,146,987    60,852,449
       Mar     16,545,691   25,394,954   25,468,264    67,408,909
       Apr     14,111,238   17,066,816    7,389,715    38,567,769
       May     13,566,725   19,351,037   24,148,709    57,066,471
       Jun     14,997,408   13,475,783    6,166,184    34,639,375
       Jul     23,983,572   14,438,577    4,352,004    42,774,153
       Aug     16,479,817   20,474,508    5,950,084    42,904,409
       Sep     14,152,877   19,949,946    2,918,014    37,020,837
       Oct     15,277,350   20,416,577   17,364,732    53,058,659
       Nov     23,871,636   23,370,389    6,227,814    53,469,839
       Dec     38,786,254   34,882,504   13,833,624    87,502,382




                                                  52
Table 7 (continued)

Year   Month       Manu.      Trading        B&T            Total


1922   Jan     23,165,663   34,171,786   16,458,331    73,795,780
       Feb     28,369,357   30,634,612   13,604,424    72,608,393
       Mar     23,522,390   27,884,251   20,201,551    71,608,192
       Apr     20,014,796   25,927,906   27,115,935    73,058,637
       May     13,958,773   25,446,464    4,997,649    44,402,886
       Jun     11,575,842   20,837,492    5,829,116    38,242,450
       Jul     14,794,771   17,225,857    7,989,685    40,010,313
       Aug     13,101,361   18,345,843    8,832,514    40,279,718
       Sep     14,987,180   16,837,937    5,083,009    36,908,126
       Oct     15,736,462   15,329,960    3,581,016    34,647,438
       Nov     15,007,973   18,741,023    6,516,301    40,265,297
       Dec     20,690,820   20,004,976   17,373,225    58,069,021

1923   Jan     23,120,095   23,306,193    2,784,209    49,210,497
       Feb     16,613,006   21,001,282    3,013,651    40,627,939
       Mar     25,042,509   20,770,025    2,580,604    48,393,138
       Apr     31,928,723   15,494,505    4,068,713    51,491,941
       May     16,686,434   18,959,619    5,376,224    41,022,277
       Jun     11,660,051   12,412,517    4,605,708    28,678,276
       Jul     19,138,803   10,701,300    5,881,085    35,721,188
       Aug     15,987,913   13,124,649    5,222,160    34,334,722
       Sep     13,570,980   11,462,277    3,665,392    28,698,649
       Oct     59,137,741   17,412,238    2,752,762    79,301,741
       Nov     29,155,918   17,193,748    3,942,042    50,291,708
       Dec     19,275,032   28,091,919    4,247,779    51,614,730

1924   Jan     28,875,260   19,525,282    2,871,966    51,272,508
       Feb     16,478,308   17,598,487    1,865,242    35,942,037
       Mar     72,838,426   19,239,933    5,572,667    97,651,026
       Apr     23,136,875   18,718,944    7,048,633    48,904,452
       May     17,756,977   15,346,023    3,487,905    36,590,907
       Jun     16,645,661   14,809,593    2,643,777    34,099,031
       Jul     20,022,429   12,420,599    4,370,210    36,813,238
       Aug     29,924,175   16,360,776    8,869,030    55,153,981
       Sep     19,468,185   10,125,648    4,702,443    34,296,276
       Oct     15,619,253   16,121,861    4,357,690    36,098,804
       Nov     10,252,127   15,781,521    5,090,262    31,123,910
       Dec     15,752,584   27,141,448    2,385,249    45,279,281




                                                  53
Table 7 (continued)

Year   Month       Manu.      Trading        B&T            Total


1925   Jan     11,909,187   24,654,579   17,799,266    54,354,032
       Feb     15,334,214   21,066,839    3,721,964    40,123,017
       Mar     13,374,584   17,594,994    3,035,153    34,004,731
       Apr     13,097,046   21,535,911    2,555,665    37,188,622
       May     18,183,856   15,819,957    3,022,739    37,026,552
       Jun     16,159,040   17,213,189    3,329,267    36,701,496
       Jul     10,931,798   15,961,174    7,612,219    34,505,191
       Aug     22,338,628   13,460,130    1,360,103    37,158,861
       Sep      8,167,172   14,989,871    7,530,276    30,687,319
       Oct     11,264,337   13,529,784    4,749,749    29,543,870
       Nov     13,993,701   18,907,091    3,021,629    35,922,421
       Dec     12,931,276   20,635,051    2,961,833    36,528,160

1926   Jan     16,083,950   21,511,872    6,055,622    43,651,444
       Feb     10,822,319   20,317,275    3,036,754    34,176,348
       Mar      9,861,821   18,622,793    2,137,933    30,622,547
       Apr     16,733,792   19,093,768    2,659,761    38,487,321
       May     16,157,115   15,709,760    1,676,443    33,543,318
       Jun     10,091,603   15,525,130    3,790,790    29,407,523
       Jul     11,167,484   14,614,282    3,898,243    29,680,009
       Aug     12,515,585   14,095,543    1,518,532    28,129,660
       Sep     10,092,741   11,242,485    8,654,591    29,898,817
       Oct     11,649,671   15,874,320    5,706,729    33,230,720
       Nov     16,097,444   14,157,616    2,438,933    32,693,993
       Dec     16,758,491   20,578,954    8,282,133    45,619,578

1927   Jan     19,996,202   24,530,455    6,763,575    51,290,232
       Feb     10,518,450   23,405,612   13,016,654    46,940,716
       Mar     22,367,655   28,191,482    7,331,768    57,890,905
       Apr     25,277,590   22,307,734    5,570,403    53,155,727
       May     13,801,558   19,977,866    4,005,349    37,784,773
       Jun     13,586,903   17,856,038    3,022,224    34,465,165
       Jul     16,742,565   16,832,346    9,575,063    43,149,974
       Aug     14,921,067   14,702,047    9,572,839    39,195,953
       Sep     15,348,867   12,051,799    5,385,459    32,786,125
       Oct     17,134,042   14,657,147    4,444,683    36,235,872
       Nov     12,785,562   16,949,262    6,411,749    36,146,573
       Dec     29,024,365   16,732,633    5,305,255    51,062,253




                                                  54
Table 7 (continued)

Year   Month       Manu.      Trading        B&T            Total


1928   Jan     14,870,665   26,445,860    6,317,886    47,634,411
       Feb     12,751,295   24,951,932    7,367,415    45,070,642
       Mar     20,411,956   26,186,339    8,215,850    54,814,145
       Apr     13,236,432   16,048,734    5,699,979    34,985,145
       May     14,229,730   18,900,104    2,987,156    36,116,990
       Jun     12,722,577   13,780,748    3,323,748    29,827,073
       Jul     12,932,132   12,899,466    3,755,035    29,586,633
       Aug     16,877,179   19,096,017   22,228,634    58,201,830
       Sep     14,727,430   13,567,064    5,662,192    33,956,686
       Oct     13,490,206   17,268,263    4,232,005    34,990,474
       Nov     15,445,845   17,223,965    7,931,625    40,601,435
       Dec     17,782,672   18,932,934    4,058,554    40,774,160

1929   Jan     16,689,855   32,023,675    5,163,615    53,877,145
       Feb     11,890,514   17,890,726    4,254,532    34,035,772
       Mar     15,000,572   17,190,437    4,164,682    36,355,691
       Apr     10,422,876   19,101,961    5,744,865    35,269,702
       May     18,953,812   18,191,399    4,070,654    41,215,865
       Jun     12,721,101   13,930,961    4,722,699    31,374,761
       Jul     12,767,455   14,605,398    5,052,666    32,425,519
       Aug     13,856,696   16,001,656    3,888,100    33,746,452
       Sep     14,914,403   16,659,658    2,550,670    34,124,731
       Oct     12,071,429   14,463,657    4,778,495    31,313,581
       Nov     14,179,628   16,122,076   21,744,159    52,045,863
       Dec     33,266,079   28,549,762    5,649,273    67,465,114

1930   Jan     19,499,985   29,813,921   11,871,265    61,185,171
       Feb     20,723,948   20,908,939    9,693,478    51,326,365
       Mar     19,413,521   24,293,438   13,139,056    56,846,015
       Apr     19,668,738   23,426,764    5,963,806    49,059,308
       May     23,133,319   21,285,493   11,122,650    55,541,462
       Jun     26,273,117   22,824,630   14,033,015    63,130,762
       Jul     13,368,613   21,571,609    4,886,195    39,826,417
       Aug     22,734,635   17,829,159    8,616,859    49,180,653
       Sep     16,448,056   19,310,626   11,188,339    46,947,021
       Oct     17,989,289   22,095,565   16,211,723    56,296,577
       Nov     19,437,989   21,217,042   14,605,699    55,260,730
       Dec     19,948,173   28,353,028   35,382,160    83,683,361




                                                  55
Table 7 (continued)

Year   Month       Manu.      Trading        B&T             Total


1931   Jan     47,632,817   43,070,912    3,904,483     94,608,212
       Feb     25,303,533   30,852,003    3,452,076     59,607,612
       Mar     24,072,068   30,347,959    5,966,529     60,386,550
       Apr     18,719,144   26,386,171    5,762,820     50,868,135
       May     18,506,051   25,069,472    9,795,689     53,371,212
       Jun     21,908,716   25,934,212    3,812,720     51,655,648
       Jul     20,586,167   28,091,055   12,320,631     60,997,853
       Aug     16,967,317   25,847,665   10,210,150     53,025,132
       Sep     14,857,220   24,657,926    7,740,504     47,255,650
       Oct     27,333,523   29,485,979   14,840,934     70,660,436
       Nov     26,112,447   27,229,022    7,318,143     60,659,612
       Dec     22,453,828   38,385,309   12,373,813     73,212,950

1932   Jan     31,679,673   54,504,792   10,675,740     96,860,205
       Feb     33,879,266   41,005,168   10,015,672     84,900,106
       Mar     31,293,421   44,117,955   18,348,935     93,760,311
       Apr     43,137,272   41,736,272   16,194,239    101,068,693
       May     30,077,030   35,586,225   18,100,266     83,763,521
       Jun     25,636,083   36,834,321   14,461,648     76,931,452
       Jul     37,228,284   34,918,899   15,042,456     87,189,639
       Aug     27,446,216   36,903,639   12,666,363     77,031,212
       Sep     22,311,776   26,470,634    7,345,224     56,127,634
       Oct     18,896,406   26,116,260    7,857,308     52,869,974
       Nov     23,918,463   23,094,842    6,607,822     53,621,127
       Dec     24,576,891   29,890,367    9,721,385     64,188,643

1933   Jan     30,747,022   36,910,410   11,433,170     79,100,602
       Feb     24,362,503   32,056,385    9,157,180     65,576,068
       Mar     17,582,887   23,204,442    7,712,883     48,500,212
       Apr     18,736,800   25,954,034    6,406,550     51,097,384
       May     19,020,791   20,877,074    8,073,708     47,971,573
       Jun     13,047,309   17,877,258    4,420,342     35,344,909
       Jul      8,281,762   13,544,487    5,654,854     27,481,103
       Aug     15,192,247   18,217,330    9,366,472     42,776,049
       Sep      7,645,807    9,368,531    4,832,568     21,846,906
       Oct      8,849,876   13,284,745    8,447,349     30,581,970
       Nov      7,808,470   12,263,223    5,281,683     25,353,376
       Dec      8,657,552    9,446,519    9,096,361     27,200,432




                                                  56
Table 7 (continued)

Year   Month       Manu.      Trading       B&T            Total


1934   Jan      9,265,377   18,110,930   5,529,121    32,905,428
       Feb      5,942,434    9,170,903   4,331,381    19,444,718
       Mar     12,239,398   10,107,625   4,880,488    27,227,511
       Apr     10,299,796   10,168,341   5,318,838    25,786,975
       May      9,673,606    9,537,033   3,350,196    22,560,835
       Jun      9,581,352   10,319,006   3,967,935    23,868,345
       Jul      6,785,970    8,123,489   4,416,058    19,325,517
       Aug      7,489,195    7,569,397   3,401,311    18,459,903
       Sep      7,467,011    7,238,145   1,734,991    16,440,147
       Oct      5,927,218    9,564,499   4,476,731    19,968,448
       Nov      6,395,716    6,965,606   4,988,469    18,349,791
       Dec      7,577,863    7,829,749   4,502,998    19,910,610

1935   Jan      5,318,989    8,129,322   5,375,386    18,823,697
       Feb      6,383,020    7,632,816   4,721,821    18,737,657
       Mar      6,842,092    6,674,817   5,005,931    18,522,840
       Apr      5,600,643    9,790,405   2,672,875    18,063,923
       May      6,204,585    7,293,578   2,171,464    15,669,627
       Jun      4,827,324    6,847,207   8,788,566    20,463,097
       Jul      6,838,016    8,614,404   4,994,341    20,446,761
       Aug      5,853,045    6,855,162   5,137,389    17,845,596
       Sep      4,211,994   10,240,316   7,385,616    21,837,926
       Oct      7,657,955    8,513,850   6,072,136    22,243,941
       Nov      6,929,315    6,738,534   6,355,323    20,023,172
       Dec      6,244,945    7,987,525   3,210,179    17,442,649

1936   Jan      5,834,000    7,968,000   4,302,000    18,104,000
       Feb      3,360,000    8,506,000   2,223,000    14,089,000
       Mar      4,371,000    6,766,000   5,134,000    16,271,000
       Apr      4,959,000    7,061,000   2,137,000    14,157,000
       May      2,709,000    7,356,000   5,310,000    15,375,000
       Jun      2,541,000    4,948,000   1,688,000     9,177,000
       Jul      2,347,000    4,370,000   3,187,000     9,904,000
       Aug      1,852,000    4,419,000   2,000,000     8,271,000
       Sep      3,212,000    4,902,000   1,705,000     9,819,000
       Oct      3,469,000    3,723,000   1,074,000     8,266,000
       Nov      3,631,000    4,833,000   3,068,000    11,532,000
       Dec      3,121,000    7,088,000   2,079,000    12,288,000




                                                     57
Table 7 (continued)

Year   Month       Manu.      Trading       B&T            Total


1937   Jan      2,502,000    4,818,000   1,341,000     8,661,000
       Feb      2,711,000    4,612,000   2,448,000     9,771,000
       Mar      2,744,000    5,511,000   2,667,000    10,922,000
       Apr      2,165,000    4,358,000   2,383,000     8,906,000
       May      2,465,000    4,856,000   1,043,000     8,364,000
       Jun      2,883,000    4,401,000     907,000     8,191,000
       Jul      2,988,000    3,904,000     874,000     7,766,000
       Aug      5,603,000    5,242,000   1,071,000    11,916,000
       Sep      3,954,000    4,498,000   1,366,000     9,818,000
       Oct      7,200,000    5,399,000   1,480,000    14,079,000
       Nov      7,723,000    6,118,000   2,559,000    16,400,000
       Dec     17,862,000    7,493,000   2,463,000    27,818,000

1938   Jan      8,553,000   11,357,000   1,505,000    21,415,000
       Feb     10,139,000    9,160,000   1,764,000    21,028,000
       Mar     27,065,000   11,496,000   1,764,000    40,325,000
       Apr      7,535,000    9,716,000   3,896,000    21,147,000
       May      6,860,000   10,326,000   1,953,000    19,139,000
       Jun      5,939,000    7,904,000   2,075,000    15,918,000
       Jul      5,957,000    7,811,000     993,000    14,761,000
       Aug      6,147,000    8,763,000   1,472,000    16,382,000
       Sep      5,227,000    7,985,000   1,129,000    14,341,000
       Oct      4,110,000    7,927,000   1,182,000    13,219,000
       Nov      4,434,000    5,997,000   1,871,000    12,302,000
       Dec      6,285,000   27,818,000   2,425,000    36,528,000

1939   Jan      7,467,000   10,688,000   2,635,000    20,790,000
       Feb      5,258,000    7,020,000   1,304,000    13,582,000
       Mar      8,264,000    8,354,000   2,384,000    19,002,000
       Apr      8,647,000    8,633,000   1,299,000    18,579,000
       May      5,207,000    8,601,000   2,089,000    15,897,000
       Jun      4,789,000    6,092,000   1,700,000    12,581,000
       Jul      6,907,000    7,367,000     725,000    14,999,000
       Aug      4,453,000    6,864,000   1,320,000    12,637,000
       Sep      3,466,000    5,612,000   1,467,000    10,545,000
       Oct      6,959,000    8,586,000   1,919,000    17,464,000
       Nov      4,606,000    7,243,000   1,352,000    13,201,000
       Dec      5,129,000    6,260,000   1,854,000    13,243,000




                                                     58
Table 7 (continued)

 Year   Month      Manu.     Trading       B&T           Total


1940    Jan     4,942,000   8,214,000   2,123,000   15,279,000
        Feb     4,939,000   6,303,000   2,230,000   13,472,000
        Mar     4,336,000   5,925,000   1,420,000   11,681,000
        Apr     6,925,000   6,864,000   2,458,000   16,247,000
        May     4,588,000   6,709,000   1,771,000   13,068,000
        Jun     5,039,000   6,611,000   2,084,000   13,734,000
        Jul     7,117,000   7,655,000   1,441,000   16,213,000
        Aug     4,459,000   6,704,000   1,834,000   12,997,000
        Sep     4,779,000   5,184,000   1,434,000   11,397,000
        Oct     5,329,000   5,958,000   1,428,000   12,715,000
        Nov     9,137,000   6,001,000   1,434,000   16,572,000
        Dec     5,995,000   5,606,000   1,708,000   13,309,000


Sources: Dun’s Review and Dun and Bradstreets, see text and appendices for details.

Notes: Manu. indicates the manufacturing sector. Trading indicates the trading sector. B & T
indicates the sector brokers and traders which is often referred to as other.




                                                    59
Table 8: Failures by Branch of Business in Manufacturing




                                                                                                                                                                       Manufacturing
              Chemicals (a)




                                                                                                                  Machinery
                              Paints (a)




                                                                                                                                                   Woolens
                                           Clothing




                                                                                                                                        Printing
                                                                                                         Lumber
                                                                                               Liquors
                                                                                     Leather




                                                                                                                              Milling
                                                      Cotton




                                                                                                                                                              Other
                                                               Glass


                                                                       Hats

                                                                              Iron
Year   Mon

1895   Jan     5              (a)          26           2        6      5      6     19        14        28        7          19         7            5 88            237
       Feb     6                           18           2        3      4     20      8        12        32        4          11        10            3 66            199
       Mar    14                           20           5        9      3     29     17        12        30        9          12         9            1 45            215
       Apr    11                           17           9        5      4     25     14         7        33        8          14         8            1 72            228
       May     9                           17           6        4      5     16     14        14        21        2           9         7            3 63            190
       Jun    10                           31           2        2            13      9        11        23        5          10         7            2 60            185
       Jul     9                           20           4        3      3      9      7         5        11        4          12         8            3 65            163
       Aug     7                           25           4        7      6     14     13        14        12       11          11        10            2 90            226
       Sep     8                           25           4        8      8     20      8        17        22        7           5        16            2 48            198
       Oct    12                           37           3        6      7     19     12        12        29        5           9         9            3 89            252
       Nov     8                           34           2        5     11     17     11        14        28        6          13         6            7 88            250
       Dec     9                           35           5        8     13     21     13         9        29       15          11        16            4 104           292

1896   Jan    10                           30          3        9       8     12     20        26        47       20          22        24          7         80      318
       Feb     8                           33          4        5       5      8     12        10        44        8          13        14          4         81      249
       Mar    12                           31          3        6       3     11     15        16        55        8          19        13          5         71      268
       Apr     4                           21         10        6       5     13     11        14        49        6          17        16         15         75      262
       May     7                           36          7        8       3      8     11        10        37       10           8        14          9         88      256
       Jun     9                           26          6        6       2      6     16        10        35       11          19        21          3        114      284
       Jul     8                           37          4        8       3      9      9         9        38        4          10        20          9        103      271
       Aug     7                           20          7       10       4     12     14         8        40       12          18        14          6        126      298
       Sep    13                           25          6        6       5     10     25        17        50       19          12        14         10        152      364
       Oct     8                           28          8        3       2      8     16        11        27       16          15        21          3         83      249
       Nov     9                           27          7        4       6      4      9         6        27       12          11        16          6         88      232
       Dec     7                           40          2        9       9     13     22        21        44       13          21        27          8        131      367

1897   Jan    11                           27          4       10       4     11     18        19        36       15           9        14            4      84       266
       Feb    11                           17          5        8       2      8     18        11        37       13          10        13            5      83       241
       Mar    13                           14         11        4       3      7     16        15        42       15          15        26            6      84       271
       Apr     3                           26         14        4       1      9     14        11        26        5          15        13            6      73       220
       May     6                           21          3        4       2      7     16        10        27        8           7        12            3      73       199
       Jun     5                           25          3        9       5     15     14        18        27       17          12        24            1      63       238
       Jul     5                           20          4        5       6      6     12         7        24       16          16         6            3      83       213
       Aug     3                           17          6        5       1     10     11        18        35       19           6        12            2      62       207
       Sep     6                           18          2        4       3     17     26         9        32       22          17        17            2      56       231
       Oct     6                           21          1        9       4      4      9         7        33       18          11        15            1      50       189
       Nov     4                           31          4        2      12      3     15         8        36       12           9        12            0      61       209
       Dec     5                           32          2        7      16     11     10        18        33       17          23        18            6      94       292




                                                                              60
Table 8 (continued)




                                                                                                                                                                       Manufacturing
              Chemicals (a)




                                                                                                                  Machinery
                              Paints (a)




                                                                                                                                                   Woolens
                                           Clothing




                                                                                                                                        Printing
                                                                                                         Lumber
                                                                                               Liquors
                                                                                     Leather




                                                                                                                              Milling
                                                      Cotton




                                                                                                                                                              Other
                                                               Glass


                                                                       Hats

                                                                              Iron
Year   Mon

1898   Jan     8              (a)          20           3       9       2      8     17        11        34       18          21        11                   71       233
       Feb     8                           14           2       8       6      3     17        10        31       18          13        10            6      64       210
       Mar    14                           22           2       6       3      9     12        12        31       27          11        20            5      70       244
       Apr     2                           21           2       4       1      3     10         2        37       20          11        13            3      71       200
       May     5                           17           2       6       3      1     10         6        39       26           8        21            7      60       211
       Jun     7                           31           2      10       5      8      8         9        34       26          11        17            1      76       245
       Jul     3                           17           2       7              3     16         7        17       16          19        15            4      82       208
       Aug     6                           12           2       5       1      2      6         9        17       11           8         7            4      55       145
       Sep     2                           24           2       6       3      8      9         4        23       18           7        20                   63       189
       Oct     5                           18           4       3       3      2     14         9        28       14           6         9            9      52       176
       Nov     2                           18           1       1       5      5      5         2        18        9           4         7            3      42       122
       Dec     4                           22           2      10       2      3     14        20        53       13          16        11            4      58       232

1899   Jan          4                      17           1        7      1      1      9         5        29        6           7        16            2      55       160
       Feb          3                      16           2        4      1      1     11        10        28        9          10        14            4      40       153
       Mar          5                      26           3        2      4      2     10         5        38       10          11        13            3      66       198
       Apr          2                      17           2        4      2      1     12        10        21       13          10        12            3      46       155
       May          2                      23           1        2      2      4      8         7        23        4           7         8            3      51       145
       Jun          5                      20           1        4      6      2      8         9        27       15           5        19            1      47       169
       Jul          2                      14           2        3      1      3      1         5        26        8          13         4            1      33       116
       Aug          2                       9                    1             1      7         5        29       10           7        15            2      35       123
       Sep          4                      22           1        1      2      1      7         5        33       23          12        10            2      61       184
       Oct          2                      20                    4      3             8         4        28        7           7        10            1      51       145
       Nov          5                      27                    1      5             8         6        30       15          16        11            3      77       204
       Dec          2                      30           1        2             3      4         8        30        9           5        13            1      65       173

1900   Jan          2                      21           1        1      2             3         5        28       20           8         7            2       63      163
       Feb          4                      19                    5                   11         7        34       12          14        12            2       76      196
       Mar          3                      12           1        1      2      5     11        10        30       15          15        18            3       93      219
       Apr          4                      26           0        2      2      1      7        11        23       18           7        11            2       64      178
       May          4                      26           1        2      4      5      9         5        38       14           8        10            5       65      196
       Jun          2                      36           1        1                   10        10        34       16          18         2            4       66      200
       Jul          6                      19                    2      3      5     12         5        27       14          11        10            1       68      183
       Aug          2                      24           2        2      1      5      5         8        23       18          11        13            1       59      174
       Sep          6                      29           1        1      4      7      8         9        28       25           8        14            2      108      250
       Oct          4                      29           1        2      3      3     12        14        31       15          16         7            1       62      200
       Nov          1                      34                    5      2      3     10         7        26       13          11        18            1       62      193
       Dec          4                      46                    2      4      6     11         8        27       10          19         6            4      110      257




                                                                              61
Table 8 (continued)




                                                                                                                                                                       Manufacturing
              Chemicals (a)




                                                                                                                  Machinery
                              Paints (a)




                                                                                                                                                   Woolens
                                           Clothing




                                                                                                                                        Printing
                                                                                                         Lumber
                                                                                               Liquors
                                                                                     Leather




                                                                                                                              Milling
                                                      Cotton




                                                                                                                                                              Other
                                                               Glass


                                                                       Hats

                                                                              Iron
Year   Mon

1901   Jan          8                      40           3        1      5      9      9         6        29       15          10        10            5      104      254
       Feb          6                      31           1        5      2      2     17         9        25       18          11        13            4       68      212
       Mar          4                      33           2        2      1      2      9        21        31       12          21         8            3       95      244
       Apr          5                      20           1        1      3      1      7        11        24        8          10         8                    64      163
       May          3                      38                    3      2      4      9         4        30       13          14        11            4       72      207
       Jun          3                      27           4        4      2      2     14         8        22       12          11        12            5       59      185
       Jul          3                      31           2        3      3      2      7         6        19        1          11        11            3       53      155
       Aug          2                      28                    3      4      4     11         7        28       15          16        12            2       61      193
       Sep          1                      35           2               4      3     10        11        27       12          16        12            2       58      193
       Oct          4                      32                    4      5      2      9        11        32        6          11        10            3       76      205
       Nov          0                      37           1        5      5      1      6         9        25       11          23        17            1       75      216
       Dec          4                      35           2        2      1      5     10         8        28       10          13        13            4       79      214

1902   Jan          8                      43           1        1      4      6     14        13        31       12          17        10            5       99      264
       Feb          6                      25           4        1      6      2      8        12        42       17          11        14            5       85      238
       Mar          5                      18                    1      1      1      8         5        29       14          16        18            1      127      244
       Apr          5                      33           2        1      2      4      6         8        35       14          12        11            3       84      220
       May          3                      35           2        2      2      3     18         8        45       17          20        18            1      110      284
       Jun          5                      38           3               4      3      7         8        27        6          11         9            2       45      168
       Jul          6                      30                    1      1      2     11        10        16       11          21        13            3       66      191
       Aug          4                      35                    2             3     12         8        23       11          18        14                    83      213
       Sep          9                      48           1        4      3      2      7        10        34       11          11        17            4       72      233
       Oct          5                      52           4        3      3      6      9        15        29        7          17        10            3       94      257
       Nov          3                      45           1        3      6      5     10         9        26       14           9         9            1       72      213
       Dec          4                      33           4        3     11      3     10         5        23       12          18        16            4       78      224

1903   Jan          4                      33           1       3       6      4     12        10        32       16          20        27            3       78      249
       Feb          2                      28                   1       7      9     15        15        23       15          20        16            2       77      230
       Mar          1                      37           2       2       5            16         5        32       12          16        16            1       71      216
       Apr                                 48                   1       5      5      9        12        29        9          11        11                    72      212
       May     6                           30                   3       2      6      4         8        29       17          13        14            2       83      217
       Jun     5                           22                   2              3      8         6        12       21           8         8            1       60      156
       Jul     9                           40           1       4       3      4     14        13        21       16          10         8            3      107      253
       Aug     5                           34           2       5       8      7      9         5        22       30          17        15            1       81      241
       Sep     5                           26           2      12      10      2     10         5        27       17          20        11            5       79      231
       Oct     4                           46           5       5      10      7     13        15        30       25          22        16            8      110      316
       Nov     6                           36                  10       5      6      8        22        26       26          25         8            1       88      267
       Dec    10                           66           3       6       8     11     15        16        38       31          26        19            4      198      451




                                                                              62
Table 8 (continued)




                                                                                                                                                                       Manufacturing
              Chemicals (a)




                                                                                                                  Machinery
                              Paints (a)




                                                                                                                                                   Woolens
                                           Clothing




                                                                                                                                        Printing
                                                                                                         Lumber
                                                                                               Liquors
                                                                                     Leather




                                                                                                                              Milling
                                                      Cotton




                                                                                                                                                              Other
                                                               Glass


                                                                       Hats

                                                                              Iron
Year   Mon

1904   Jan          2                      40           2      10       2      8      5        17        41       18          21        23            4       78      271
       Feb          1                      20           3      14       6      6      6         9        24       15          17        21            7       74      223
       Mar          4                      33           4       5       1      8     11        10        25       21          23        16            1       73      235
       Apr          6                      41           3      11       5      8      9        13        28       17          15        18            5       85      264
       May          2                      45           4       8       1     13     12        10        22       29          15        14            5       65      245
       Jun          6                      43           3       7       4      6      8         6        22       18          11        15            3       73      225
       Jul          7                      57           1       4       5      9     15        14        30       10          19         9            4       80      264
       Aug          3                      43           2       6       3      1      5         8        32       14          15        10            2       54      198
       Sep          3                      21           2       6       5      6      5         7        22       11          16        17            3       50      174
       Oct                                 37           4       4       7      4     14         7        26       12          28        14            3       66      226
       Nov          7                      31           2       3       4      4      6         8        20       11          18        16            1       86      217
       Dec          5                      50           3       8       3      8     10         9        29       21          20        11            4      125      306

1905   Jan     5                           42           2       8       6      4      7        14        22       17          24        18            3      84       256
       Feb    11                           23           1       5       3      4     11         9        39       21          21        14            2      70       234
       Mar    11                           33           3      13       1      9      6        11        45       25          15        20            4      90       286
       Apr     6                           23           1       8       9      3      5         9        23       18          15        18            5      51       194
       May     2                           45           1       3       2      8      5         7        16       18          17        14            3      68       209
       Jun     4                           50           1      10       1      7      5         9        32       12          16         6                   94       247
       Jul     2                           25           1       3       4      3      1        11        25       15          19        11            1      52       173
       Aug     6                           30                   4       4      4      5         7        27       10          17         9            2      82       207
       Sep     6                           36                  10       3      2      9        10        28       16          20        14            6      74       234
       Oct     3                           33           1       7       5      4     10         6        27       11          20        14            2      94       237
       Nov     8                           29           2       9       7      4      5         6        22       21          12        15                   57       197
       Dec     2                           57           1       6      12      2      8         8        30       12          16        19            2      77       252

1906   Jan          5                      36                   8       4      3      3        10        19       14          15        10            5       88      220
       Feb          4                      31                   9       2      6      7         5        27        7          17         9            1       98      223
       Mar          7                      36                   5       3      5      5        17        31       17           5         8            4      106      249
       Apr          1                      33                   6       5      3      6         7        18        8          14         7                    79      187
       May          4                      27                   9       2      4      4         7        27       12           6        10            1       66      179
       Jun          3                      36           1       5       2      3      6         8        19        7           9        11            1       91      202
       Jul          5                      14           2       3       1      2      3         4        15        8          11         8            1       67      144
       Aug          3                      40                   6       3      2      3         3        15        8          15        14                    82      194
       Sep          2                      34                  15       4      1     10         8        27       14          10        13                    65      203
       Oct          6             2        36           1       8       3      3      2        13        35       22          19        10                    90      250
       Nov          2                      35           1      11       4      6      9         8        28        4          14        12            1       77      212
       Dec          3                      39           1       8       3      8      2         7        30       11          15        11            2       87      227




                                                                              63
Table 8 (continued)




                                                                                                                                                                       Manufacturing
              Chemicals (a)




                                                                                                                  Machinery
                              Paints (a)




                                                                                                                                                   Woolens
                                           Clothing




                                                                                                                                        Printing
                                                                                                         Lumber
                                                                                               Liquors
                                                                                     Leather




                                                                                                                              Milling
                                                      Cotton




                                                                                                                                                              Other
                                                               Glass


                                                                       Hats

                                                                              Iron
Year   Mon

1907   Jan          4                      44           7       9       3      7      7        10        37       19          12        12            7       87      265
       Feb                        1        33           2       5       1      4      5         5        32        8          18        14            1       84      213
       Mar                                 29           1       2       4      2      6        10        25        6          10         8            2       93      198
       Apr          3             3        38                   6       2      3      1        13        27       10          11        16            2       83      218
       May          2                      27           2       5       4      4      9         4        28       10          16        13            2       86      212
       Jun          1             1        24           4       6       2      7      5         5        29       12          15        18                    60      189
       Jul          2             1        24                   8       4      4      6         7        34       16          19        13                    73      211
       Aug          1                      27           2      10       6      3      4         9        31       16          17        13            2       76      217
       Sep          2                      28           3       7       1      8      7         9        39       20          21        13            1       72      231
       Oct          4             1        58           5      18       5      5      6        10        44       21          23        14            4      112      330
       Nov          6             1        39           3      11      13      9      5        10        35       29          28        16            2       98      305
       Dec          2             2        44                  15       9      5     11        10        48       21          27        13            1      116      324

1908   Jan          4             3        64           2      10      13      6      8        19        54       30          29        25            3      132      402
       Feb          5             5        40           2      18       7      6     12        17        46       31          27        18            6      153      393
       Mar          2             2        40           4      17       3      8      4        11        57       20          17        16            5      138      344
       Apr          8             1        53           4      13       1     10      7         8        63       14          27        23            4      134      370
       May          2             4        53           3      20       9      4      6        11        45       28          38        21            2       99      345
       Jun          4             3        46           4      10       2      5      7         6        30       16          23        18            3      111      288
       Jul          2             3        57           2      14       4      5      7        11        52       22          20        22                    93      314
       Aug          3             1        31           2       7       4     10     11        10        32       23          23        17            1       78      253
       Sep          5             1        38                  10       4      2      8        17        35       15          25        15            2       77      254
       Oct          1             1        45           1       8       6      1      2        10        40       20          34        18            3      102      292
       Nov          1             4        45           1       7       8      2      7         7        22       15          23        24            1      106      273
       Dec          3             3        40           1      14       9      3      3         8        46       38          22        16                    93      299

1909   Jan          3             2        37           6      13       3      9      7        15        42       17          31        19            3       87      294
       Feb          2             3        39           1       5       2      4     10         9        17       13          17        18            1       90      231
       Mar          2                      41           2      14       3      3      8        12        39       33          32        23            1      105      318
       Apr          2             4        40                  11       1      5      7         7        36       19          20        13            3       85      253
       May          3             2        25           1       9       1     10      6         9        37       20          14        12            5       77      231
       Jun          1             2        31                  11       3     10      5         7        22        8          17        12            3       63      195
       Jul                        1        43                  12       4      6      6        10        34       14          28        17            2       97      274
       Aug                        2        30                  11       4      3      8         8        21       16          20        15            5       79      222
       Sep          2             1        32           3       7       2      6      6         5        18        6          24         9            1       70      192
       Oct          2             5        42           1      12       6      3      9        15        38       25          14        23            4      109      308
       Nov          2             2        36                   3       8      2      3         9        35       10          21        17            3       96      247
       Dec          6             0        42           2       6       6      7      5         6        30       11          22        13            3      105      264




                                                                              64
Table 8 (continued)




                                                                                                                                                                       Manufacturing
              Chemicals (a)




                                                                                                                  Machinery
                              Paints (a)




                                                                                                                                                   Woolens
                                           Clothing




                                                                                                                                        Printing
                                                                                                         Lumber
                                                                                               Liquors
                                                                                     Leather




                                                                                                                              Milling
                                                      Cotton




                                                                                                                                                              Other
                                                               Glass


                                                                       Hats

                                                                              Iron
Year   Mon

1910   Jan          1             1        60           1      13       6      6      7        15        44       19          25        20            3      104      325
       Feb          5             5        38           3      10       6     15      6        10        22       14          20        13            1       95      263
       Mar          2                      29                   6       2      1      8         9        33        6          17        14                    97      224
       Apr                        2        60           1      13       3     13     11        12        37       11          24        15            2      118      322
       May          6             1        32           1       6       3      5      4         6        31        8          17        15            3       80      218
       Jun                                 28           2       7       3     11      6         8        19        7          12        10            1       97      211
       Jul          1             1        50                  15       4     10      1        14        51       12          21        18            1      101      300
       Aug          2             1        43           2       6       4      2      6         9        31       18          14        14            1      113      266
       Sep          2                      49           5       7       3      6      3         7        37       20          19        16            3       98      275
       Oct          3             2        54           2      10       9      4      9        13        39       27          24        14            5      107      322
       Nov          7                      47                  14       2      2      8         7        32       12          12        19            5       93      260
       Dec          2             4        40           2       9       8      5      2         8        51       13          16        19            6      109      294

1911   Jan                        4        64           2      13      12      8     10        12        46       16          23        17            7      130      364
       Feb          1             2        41                  11       2      6      8         9        34       23          14        12            4      118      285
       Mar          1             2        42           4      12       4      3      3        14        33       14          21        13            2      135      303
       Apr          2                      39           9      13       3     10      9         2        34       11          20        19            8      159      338
       May          1             3        38           2      10       4      7      7        10        41        9          14         9            3      106      264
       Jun          1             1        30           1       5       1      4      6         4        38       14          16        15            4       99      239
       Jul          2             3        44           1       7       7      7      7         8        27       13          12        19            6      122      285
       Aug          1             2        32           4       5       5      2      4         8        27       11          17        13            1       95      227
       Sep          3             4        21           2      11       1      3      3         7        31       14          22        14            3       97      236
       Oct          1             1        47           3      14      10      4      6        14        36       16          25        13            8      143      341
       Nov          1             1        40           6      15       8      1      7         4        33       17          13        11            4      125      286
       Dec          1             3        59           2      11      11      6      9        14        36       15          21        17            3      126      334

1912   Jan          3             1        60           1       8      16      8     10        12        40       20          35        25            5      130      374
       Feb          2             2        50           3      14      11     10     14        12        46       26          26        14            6      151      387
       Mar          3             2        51           5      17       2     10     13         9        40       23          18        16            2      110      321
       Apr          3                      47           2      14       1      7      9         9        31       23          21        16            7      123      313
       May          2             1        40           6      10       7      6      7        12        36       13          28        11            2      105      286
       Jun          2                      44                   4       6      7      9         6        27       11          13         9            1      108      247
       Jul          1             1        55           3      15       7      9      8         6        35       14          26        10            6      106      302
       Aug          2             1        43           3       9       6      4      5         8        28       10          26        15            1      124      284
       Sep          4             2        65           3       9       4      5     13         9        29       15          28        15                   124      325
       Oct          3                      59                   8      11      4      7         9        33       23          28        13            2      121      321
       Nov          4             2        66           3       7       8      3      6        12        34       25          26        13            2      116      327
       Dec          8             1        67           4       6      19      7     12        11        42       30          17        16            1      111      352




                                                                              65
Table 8 (continued)




                                                                                                                                                                        Manufacturing
              Chemicals (a)




                                                                                                                   Machinery
                              Paints (a)




                                                                                                                                                    Woolens
                                            Clothing




                                                                                                                                         Printing
                                                                                                          Lumber
                                                                                                Liquors
                                                                                      Leather




                                                                                                                               Milling
                                                       Cotton




                                                                                                                                                               Other
                                                                Glass


                                                                        Hats

                                                                               Iron
Year   Mon

1913   Jan          6             4        63            4      13       5      9     13        14        47       21          31        17            2      146      395
       Feb          7             2        60            4      10      10      4     11         7        37       21          25        15            1      126      340
       Mar          4             2        43            1      12       4      7      9        18        44       23          21        20            2      107      317
       Apr          1                      47            4      15       5      8     11        13        46       25          22         9            2      133      341
       May          6             6        60            3      14       4      6      8         3        42       13          15        16            4      113      313
       Jun          4             5        65            4       9       6     11     11         7        41       19          20        15            5      121      343
       Jul          1             6        44            2      15       6      7      7         7        36       20          20        12            2      105      290
       Aug          2             3        47            2       7       8     11      7         7        33       23          19        25            4      133      331
       Sep          3                      66                   12      10      9     20         5        35       28          16         7            4      137      352
       Oct          5                      75            6      12      10      9     11         8        56       35          27        12            6      150      422
       Nov          2             2        57            4      16       7      6     13        11        47       34          25        14            1      143      382
       Dec          2                      67            5      12      30      8      5         5        41       25          21        16            4      174      417

1914   Jan          2             1         80           4      18      21      3     15        11        42       14          20        20            4      152      407
       Feb          5             7         46           2      11       7      5      9         9        43       25          24        15            2      164      374
       Mar          6             4         58           7       5       9      8      9         2        36       19          20        23            3      157      366
       Apr          4             1         51           3      15      10      9      6        14        55       18          21        18            3      117      347
       May          4             1         64           4       7       7      2     19         4        27       19          16        15            4      129      322
       Jun          1             3         56           3       7      12      6      4         5        32       23          15        15            4      111      297
       Jul          6                       59           2       6      11     16      9         8        50       19          17        22            8      127      360
       Aug          9                       53                  14       7      7     10        11        26       23          21         9            6      131      327
       Sep          7                       75           2      10      16      5     11        10        45       36          31        16                   157      421
       Oct                        1         45           5       9       9      9     16        11        52       34          39        27            3      175      435
       Nov          4             4         91           3       9      26      4      7        22        39       39          37        20            4      171      480
       Dec          3             1        111           5      12      30      6     10        15        37       28          28        21            7      170      484

1915   Jan          2         12           113           4      14      16      7     10        11        62       47          33        26            5      189      551
       Feb          2          6           103           3       8      17      7      7        14        37       27          44        27            8      215      525
       Mar          1          4            83           3      14      10     11     17        16        51       23          31        31            7      202      504
       Apr          2                       77           6      18      12     10     16        20        50       26          38        23            6      186      490
       May          2             1         58           1      14      12      6      7        18        43       15          34        29            6      144      390
       Jun          1             3         56           3      10      12     11     10        17        36       23          36        19            3      154      404
       Jul                        1         74           1      10       1      3      8        12        39       23          30        25            2      154      383
       Aug          5             5         55           2      10       6      9      9         7        32       20          23        11            4      154      352
       Sep          1             3         41           4      13       5      4      8        17        20       19          23        25            5      110      298
       Oct          4             1         66           2       8       3      6      9        17        31       26          33        21            3      177      407
       Nov          3             2         77           5       7      10      7      9        17        43       15          24        21            2      177      419
       Dec          4             2         55           3      11       5     10     16        16        40       26          26        18                   161      393




                                                                               66
Table 8 (continued)




                                                                                                                                                                       Manufacturing
              Chemicals (a)




                                                                                                                  Machinery
                              Paints (a)




                                                                                                                                                   Woolens
                                           Clothing




                                                                                                                                        Printing
                                                                                                         Lumber
                                                                                               Liquors
                                                                                     Leather




                                                                                                                              Milling
                                                      Cotton




                                                                                                                                                              Other
                                                               Glass


                                                                       Hats

                                                                              Iron
Year   Mon

1916   Jan                        1        66           3      13       6      6     10        16        40       18          50        18            2      168      417
       Feb          4             2        52           4      11       5      4     16        10        35       20          45        20            2      188      418
       Mar          3             4        51           2       9      12      2     11        18        43       19          34        19            2      179      408
       Apr          3             2        38           4       9       5      8      3         7        37       12          45        15                   147      335
       May          3             1        53           1       6       8      6     11        11        39       19          39        21            3      163      384
       Jun          2                      47                   9       3      1     10         8        27       19          32        13            5      109      285
       Jul                        1        39           3       8       2      3      6        12        46       19          43        13                   133      328
       Aug                        3        46           4       5       2      4      9         7        42       19          40        18            2      134      335
       Sep          2             2        44           3       7       4      3      9         8        25       21          41        25            1      121      316
       Oct          4                      29           2       7       8      1      4        14        34       13          30        15            1      123      285
       Nov          1                      53           2       3       6      1     10         7        49       16          51        12            1      150      362
       Dec          5                      47                   6       4      2      4        15        38       14          45        15            1      127      323

1917   Jan          3             1        51                   6       3      3      6        11        52       16          45        13            4      147      361
       Feb          4             1        30           3       8       3      3      3        10        41       12          26        10            3      105      262
       Mar          4             1        30           1      10       3      7     11        14        50       10          23        12            1      137      314
       Apr          7                      42                  10       7      2      6         5        37       15          38         6            2      104      281
       May          5             3        61         11       13       9      4      6         7        42       18          39        15                   110      343
       Jun          4             1        49          5        7       3      2     10         3        52       26          19        11            1      134      327
       Jul          5             1        38          1        8       5      1      7        12        52       21          21        17            2      121      312
       Aug          2                      53          3        7              2     11         4        40       25          21        16            3      126      313
       Sep          4             1        43          2        4       3      5      6         4        40       14          23         9            2       97      257
       Oct          9                      43          1        7       5      5      2         8        41       31          15         9            3      132      311
       Nov          4             1        47          3        6       5      4      7        13        36       12          20        15                   128      301
       Dec          3             1        48          3       10       7      6      6        10        34       18          15        12            1      135      309

1918   Jan          2             1        50           1       9       3      1      3           9      35       20          24        13                   128      299
       Feb          4             1        32           4       8       2      3      7           5      26       13          25        13                   112      255
       Mar          6             1        37           3       6       4      3      6           5      43       22          19        19                   124      298
       Apr          3             1        28           2       6       1      5     13           9      26       15          12        20                   101      242
       May          3             4        21           5      11       5      2     11           5      24       11          19        12            2      108      243
       Jun          5                      26           4       5       4      3      7           8      25       15          18        11            1      109      241
       Jul          5             3        19           1       3       2      2      5           8      38       11          16        10            1       96      220
       Aug          3             1        23                   6       2      2      9           1      19       18           8        15                    90      197
       Sep          2                      23                   4       1      2      6           7      29       16          10         9            3       77      189
       Oct                                 34           2       7       3      4      5           6      22       18          12         6                    76      195
       Nov          1             1        22           3       7       4      5      7           7      23       14           3        11                    74      182
       Dec          1             2        21           1       5       3      6      7           9      27       20           9         7            1       86      205




                                                                              67
Table 8 (continued)




                                                                                                                                                                        Manufacturing
              Chemicals (a)




                                                                                                                   Machinery
                              Paints (a)




                                                                                                                                                    Woolens
                                            Clothing




                                                                                                                                         Printing
                                                                                                          Lumber
                                                                                                Liquors
                                                                                      Leather




                                                                                                                               Milling
                                                       Cotton




                                                                                                                                                               Other
                                                                Glass


                                                                        Hats

                                                                               Iron
Year   Mon

1919   Jan          4                      23            2        5      6      2        2         6      29       11           4        10                   76       180
       Feb          4             2        23            2        6      3      3        3         2      12       19           9         6            1      66       161
       Mar          6                      20            2        3      1      1        4         6      31       23          11         8            3      77       196
       Apr          2             1        15                     6      3      2        7         5      23       17          13         4            1      75       174
       May          6             1        17            5        5      2      2        5         4      22       16          10         3                   67       165
       Jun          2                      10            2        3      1      1        8         4      10       10          16         4                   69       140
       Jul          4             1         9                     3      3      1        6         4      23        9          16         4                   56       139
       Aug          1                       9            3        3             3        2         3      14       14          14         4                   63       133
       Sep          4                      10            3        2      1      2        4         1      19       14          11         4            1      61       137
       Oct          3                       6                     3      1      1        2         3      19        9          21         6                   47       121
       Nov          2             2        15            1        4      1      2        3         3      22       18          17         1                   59       150
       Dec                        1        17            1        2      4      3        7         8      16       17          30         5                   58       169

1920   Jan    3                            15            2        3      2      2      2           4      13       18          24         5                    47      140
       Feb    5                            13            2               1      1      5           4      10       12          29         1                    49      132
       Mar    1                   1        15                     2      3      8     11           3      19       11          24         2            1       59      160
       Apr    2                            21            1        1      6      1      3           3      11        9          18         2                    59      137
       May    2                            19            2        4      3      1      6           2      13       12          20         5            1       45      135
       Jun    3                   5        32                     2      9      2      4           4      14       17          17         5                    83      197
       Jul    3                   1        31            2        1      9      2      2           9      15       20          33         3            4       83      218
       Aug    4                            29            3        3     15      1     10           4      12       25          24         2            1      102      235
       Sep    2                   2        38            2        2      3      5      7           8      21       25          14         3            3       88      223
       Oct    6                   1        77            5        2     20      5     10           3      24       26          24         3                   121      327
       Nov    3                            61            3        3      9            13           9      17       36          27        12            4      113      310
       Dec   11                   1        84            8        3     13      7     18           8      38       37          28         7            4      154      421

1921   Jan   13                   2         74           9        9     20      8     19         9        39       38          31        14            5      125      415
       Feb    4                   1         60           3        4      6      6     17         6        25       39          26        14            2      135      348
       Mar    6                   2         54           1        3      9      8     11         4        27       24          23         9            1      116      298
       Apr    8                   2         63           5        5     11      2     15         4        27       27          35         7            5      121      337
       May   10                   3         42           6        4      8      5     20         6        21       32          32        11            1       93      294
       Jun    6                             51           1              10      6     14        11        35       42          24        12            7      102      321
       Jul   10                   1         54           6        2     11     13     14         7        28       40          31         7            1      117      342
       Aug    5                   2         49           6        4     14     10     17         9        42       34          35         7            2      137      373
       Sep    9                   3         82           4        4     28      4      9         7        24       42          29        14            5      101      365
       Oct    3                             92           1        4     22      3     10        11        29       48          35        14            3      151      426
       Nov    8                   1         89           3        1     25      8     20        15        27       41          44        16            4      143      445
       Dec    7                   3        138           7        6     22      7     19         8        30       54          40        18            8      164      531




                                                                               68
Table 8 (continued)




                                                                                                                                                                       Manufacturing
             Chemicals (a)




                                                                                                                  Machinery
                             Paints (a)




                                                                                                                                                   Woolens
                                           Clothing




                                                                                                                                        Printing
                                                                                                         Lumber
                                                                                               Liquors
                                                                                     Leather




                                                                                                                              Milling
                                                      Cotton




                                                                                                                                                              Other
                                                               Glass


                                                                       Hats

                                                                              Iron
Year   Mon

1922   Jan    9                  1        104           3      10      25     14     28         5        38       37          49        13            5      192      533
       Feb    9                            82           4       7       4      9     21        19        38       46          38        17            2      185      481
       Mar    9                  1        100           7       6      17      8     23        11        41       67          51        11            4      207      563
       Apr   15                  2        100           6       9      16      8     25        15        19       50          37        14            7      165      488
       May    6                  2        100           4      16      18     11     21         6        42       38          47        14            8      175      508
       Jun    3                  3         54           3       9      13      6     18         9        26       43          53         9            6      154      409
       Jul   11                  2         96           4       6      18      3     13        13        25       43          43        15            6      169      467
       Aug    4                  2         74           2       4      15      1     17        16        34       28          39        12            3      169      420
       Sep   10                  2         76           3       6      24      6     20        13        34       45          33        14            1      157      444
       Oct    6                  3         62           1       9      22      7     16        13        33       53          46        14            3      176      464
       Nov    8                  3         68           2       5      17      5     19        10        35       51          47        20            2      164      456
       Dec    6                            81           2       6      30      4     20        10        35       48          35        18            4      150      449

1923   Jan    6                  4        86            5       8      14      4     24        12        33       50          53        18            1      181      499
       Feb    5                           42            1       3      10      7     17         9        29       50          38        13            8      116      348
       Mar   10                           49            5       7       9      7     19        11        40       43          53        18            4      162      437
       Apr    5                  1        54            3       4       8      1     13         8        41       38          44        11            2      155      388
       May    7                           54            5       6      13      3     22         8        35       28          44        12            1      163      401
       Jun    7                  1        54            6       3       9      7     19         5        30       33          26        13            2      133      348
       Jul    7                           46            4       7      17      8      6         5        30       48          38         8            5      121      350
       Aug    1                  3        46            2       9      14      8     13         5        35       38          33        14            5      159      385
       Sep    3                  1        38            3       5       9      4     11        11        37       31          27         8            4      132      324
       Oct   10                  1        54            4      11      13     18     14        15        54       49          39        19            2      195      498
       Nov    6                  1        56            8       5      28      5     19        11        41       55          51        17            4      188      495
       Dec    5                  1        66            3       5      17      7     28        10        48       32          39        14            4      216      495

1924   Jan    6                           70            2      11      13      8     26        17        28       32          53        15          9        215      505
       Feb    4                           53            2       8      10            12         7        34       33          41        11          3        180      398
       Mar    9                  1        52            4       6       6      8     24         8        44       58          42        15          8        199      484
       Apr    2                           53            2       9       7      6     14        11        35       47          29        25          4        194      438
       May    9                  3        69                    8      12      2     28         9        44       42          31        18         10        222      507
       Jun    8                  2        62                    5      12      9     16         4        35       51          28        17          6        184      439
       Jul    8                  3        44            3       5      10      2     20        12        33       30          30        11          3        202      416
       Aug   10                  1        53            2       5       9      3     17         6        29       37          38        21          5        178      414
       Sep    8                  1        48                    4      12      3     10         8        12       43          23        12          4        172      360
       Oct    2                           62                   11      21      3      6         9        29       31          38        18          4        177      411
       Nov    2                  2        45            1       8      12     11     14         6        27       26          41        12                   154      361
       Dec   10                  3        62                   12      18      5     13        11        28       41          55        16            7      194      475




                                                                                69
Table 8 (continued)




                                                                                                                                                                       Manufacturing
              Chemicals (a)




                                                                                                                  Machinery
                              Paints (a)




                                                                                                                                                   Woolens
                                           Clothing




                                                                                                                                        Printing
                                                                                                         Lumber
                                                                                               Liquors
                                                                                     Leather




                                                                                                                              Milling
                                                      Cotton




                                                                                                                                                              Other
                                                               Glass


                                                                       Hats

                                                                              Iron
Year   Mon

1925   Jan          3             3        52           3       5       9      6     20        11        35       35          65        13          4        216      480
       Feb          8             1        44                   8       4      4     12         5        33       29          52        18          6        185      409
       Mar          9             3        65                   3       3      6      9         7        31       43          45        15          3        187      429
       Apr          6             2        56                   5       8     11     18         8        35       35          42        11         10        183      430
       May          7             1        51                   8       5      6     14         9        30       30          44        23         10        162      400
       Jun          5                      41           2       7       3      5     16         8        53       48          29        18          9        187      431
       Jul          2                      51                   7       7      1      9         6        28       36          42        20          6        203      418
       Aug          5                      41                   7       8      1     21         4        31       25          41        18          3        160      365
       Sep          8             4        39           1       3       7      5      8         3        45       32          31        16          8        178      388
       Oct          7             2        50           2      10       6      2      9        10        34       39          37        17          8        175      408
       Nov          9             1        65           1       2       7      4     14        11        56       28          48        16                   180      442
       Dec          9             6        69           1              18      6     13         7        55       32          42        13            3      216      490

1926   Jan     7                  1        55           1       2      15     18     15         6        51       31          58        14          2        234      510
       Feb     1                  5        54           2       7      11     11     17         5        52       26          34        18          6        198      447
       Mar     6                  2        46                   9      21      4     13         5        60       24          45        25          2        207      469
       Apr     6                  1        59           3       1      13      9     13         6        50       27          44        21         12        229      494
       May     3                  2        63           4       5       3      6     12         9        57       32          40        22          3        176      437
       Jun     3                  3        44           1       6       8      2     10         6        51       28          46        20          3        204      435
       Jul     6                           45           1       6       9      5      5        13        53       10          42        21          3        177      396
       Aug     3                           52           2       4       6      4     12         4        43       23          39        24          3        230      449
       Sep    10                  2        36           1       3       5      3      4         4        46       27          38        21          3        171      374
       Oct     7                           41           3      10       5      3      8        10        55       32          42        14          4        216      450
       Nov     4                  1        39           2       7      14      5     10        10        66       19          34        19          4        206      440
       Dec     5                           51           1       5      11     10     14        11        60       33          38        11          3        241      494

1927   Jan          3             2        49                  10      14      8     14        12        57       22          44        27            9      230      501
       Feb          7                      33                   1       8      6      9         6        67       29          42        28            1      174      411
       Mar          7             1        50           2      13      11     11     16         5        78       28          52        19            5      271      569
       Apr          2             2        48           2       2      11     13     14         8        79       19          41        22            3      226      492
       May          5             1        38                  10       6     10      8         4        72       18          23        19            3      227      444
       Jun          5             1        45           3       3       4      4      7        11        70       17          34        21            2      200      427
       Jul          7                      41           1       9       9     17      9         4        69       14          38        26            4      200      448
       Aug          4                      27           2      10       6      8     16        13        64       15          29        19            1      224      438
       Sep          1             1        30           1       3      15      7      9        17        52       13          27        20            1      192      389
       Oct          8             1        42           4       7      12     11      8         6        75       21          39        22            1      231      488
       Nov          8                      42           3      10      22     15     13         9        72       23          37        19                   205      478
       Dec          7             2        49           2      13      35     10     17         9        95       35          55        22            6      240      597




                                                                              70
Table 8 (continued)




                                                                                                                                                                        Manufacturing
              Chemicals (a)




                                                                                                                   Machinery
                              Paints (a)




                                                                                                                                                    Woolens
                                           Clothing




                                                                                                                                         Printing
                                                                                                          Lumber
                                                                                               Liquors
                                                                                     Leather




                                                                                                                               Milling
                                                      Cotton




                                                                                                                                                               Other
                                                               Glass


                                                                       Hats

                                                                              Iron
Year   Mon

1928   Jan    2                   1        56           1      10      15     10     14         7         81       25          43        21            2      265      553
       Feb    8                   2        34           1       9      15     10     14         5         65       25          48         8            4      220      468
       Mar   11                   1        44           1      10      18     11     16         7         93       31          43        13            2      245      546
       Apr    9                   2        39                   9       5     12      7         8         70       32          42        19            5      173      432
       May    6                            43           2       9      12      9     14         6         77       27          31        11                   223      470
       Jun    6                   1        56           1       9       7     14     11         5         76       26          45        18            3      235      513
       Jul    5                            49           2       5       8      8     18         3         69       23          47        16            2      195      450
       Aug    4                            40           4      10      14     10      8         6         60       26          51        22            1      237      493
       Sep    7                   1        40           1       3      30     12     15         4         73       23          24         6            3      212      454
       Oct   12                   1        50                   7      26      7     14         6         94       26          47        18            3      217      528
       Nov    5                   1        55           2       7      26      7     18        12        105       39          29         9            2      202      519
       Dec   10                   3        51                   6      17      9      8         6        107       21          46        11            1      202      498

1929   Jan    8                   3        49           1      15      25      8     24         9         92       22          47        25                   286      614
       Feb    4                   2        40                   4      14     13     10         7         88       27          39        15                   215      478
       Mar   10                   2        45                   9      14     13     11         8        103       27          44        10            1      215      512
       Apr   14                   1        37           3       4       9     10     13         4         87       24          48        16            3      226      499
       May   10                   1        44           2      12      18     11     15        12        103       19          35        15            3      215      515
       Jun   16                   3        35           1       6       6     15     12         3        107       25          45        23            5      194      496
       Jul    6                            46           3       9      13     15     10         7         88       24          31        15            1      193      461
       Aug    9                   2        35           1       6      12     10      4         6        102       25          34        11                   225      482
       Sep    5                   3        37           3       9       8     13     11         3         77       16          38        10                   194      427
       Oct    2                   1        44                   8      21     11     17         4         94       24          36        10            1      210      483
       Nov   10                            49           2      12      18     15      6         7         82       26          37        13            1      203      481
       Dec    8                   3        39                   8      25     14     18         6        112       36          28        11            5      246      559

1930   Jan   11                   3        80           7      10      19      7     18         3        105       25          60        13                   319      680
       Feb   11                            39           2       3      14      9     13         4         94       27          38        17            3      252      526
       Mar   11                            60           3      11      16      9     11         3        111       33          42        16            2      293      621
       Apr    7                   2        41           1      10      16     10      4         3        106       32          38        15            3      246      534
       May    5                            34           3      13      17      8     14         4         94       35          29        21            3      221      501
       Jun    7                   2        63                   7      10      3      8         6         85       25          45        22            2      222      507
       Jul    8                   3        37           1       9      12     11     10         1         81       34          37        20            1      160      425
       Aug    9                   5        40           2       7      10     10     21        11         98       23          29        19            3      279      566
       Sep    9                            30           1       7      18     10     14         8         65       20          35        16            4      197      434
       Oct    4                   3        62                  12      33      9     15        14         54       25          35        20            2      211      499
       Nov    4                   1        48           2      14      20     11      8        10         71       23          27        18            1      190      448
       Dec    8                   1        45           4      12      30      6     14         6         77       28          34        15            6      251      437




                                                                               71
Table 8 (continued)




                                                                                                                                                                       Manufacturing
              Chemicals (a)




                                                                                                                  Machinery
                              Paints (a)




                                                                                                                                                   Woolens
                                           Clothing




                                                                                                                                        Printing
                                                                                                         Lumber
                                                                                               Liquors
                                                                                     Leather




                                                                                                                              Milling
                                                      Cotton




                                                                                                                                                              Other
                                                               Glass


                                                                       Hats

                                                                              Iron
Year   Mon

1931   Jan    6                   4        84           1      11      29     11     17         6        76       33          32        21         10        270      476
       Feb   13                            76           2       4      17     10     14         9        72       44          37        15          1        269      583
       Mar    5                            51           1       7      26     18     23         9        61       34          37        27          1        282      492
       Apr    8                   1        50           1       5      20     14     12         6        75       41          38        10          7        227      430
       May    9                   3        55                   9      20     19     14         4        65       31          43        27          3        250      456
       Jun    6                   1        39           1       7      10     11     26        10        57       26          64        21          3        167      385
       Jul   13                            39                  13      10     12     16         6        63       37          34        17          2        258      445
       Aug    6                   3        47           1       6      12     22     18         7        52       27          30        14          1        181      352
       Sep    8                   5        34                   6      21     21     14        10        49       11          40        23          9        198      375
       Oct    7                   4        59                   9      15     13     18        14        54       42          50        32          7        290      520
       Nov    9                   3        60           2      18      18     16     11        15        62       48          40        24          2        191      409
       Dec   12                   2        89           2      11      17     14     20         4        65       35          48        29          8        235      458

1932   Jan   15                   7        95           4      12      27     20     25        12        82       55          46        28          7        253      528
       Feb   18                   1        73           2      23      24     21     20         8        62       56          45        26          4        219      461
       Mar   11                   6        80           5      14      18     22     19         9        86       58          44        24          2        244      508
       Apr   17                   6        60           5      18      21     24     21        14        77       45          51        31          6        245      641
       May   10                   4        95           4      15      36     23     25         3        83       41          48        44         10        231      672
       Jun    8                   3        83           3      26      21     22     22         7        84       48          47        33          6        201      614
       Jul   14                   2        74           2      19      16     39     17         8        80       29          50        38          8        226      622
       Aug   17                   2        88           3      17      21     31     28         8        74       37          47        42          5        229      649
       Sep   10                   5        54           1      19      19     23     20        10        55       35          45        27          1        189      513
       Oct   13                   1        49           1      29      20     20     19        10        70       36          42        31          4        197      542
       Nov   12                   4        39           4      27      21     14     15        11        60       30          37        27          3        176      480
       Dec   11                   3        50           4      18      33     27     17        15        78       36          52        33          5        232      495

1933   Jan   15                   2        50           2      22      18     33     18        21        62       35          39        40            5      203      456
       Feb   12                   3        32           2      22       6     24     17        14        55       35          29        27            3      219      423
       Mar    5                   4        43           2      22      18     25     18        12        45       26          35        27            1      179      368
       Apr    8                   2        18           4      17      17     31     13         9        44       35          32        33            5      154      356
       May   17                            29           1      24      12     28     17         9        59       33          39        38            3      157      383
       Jun    6                   3        24                  17      13     22     11         4        40       24          31        32            4      131      362
       Jul    6                   1        28                  11      11     15     11         6        30       30          27        20            3      126      325
       Aug   24                   1        19           1      17       8     19     11         9        42       30          33        18            2      123      357
       Sep    7                            14                  15       6     11      8         6        33       14          23        17            1      118      273
       Oct    8                   1        14           1      18       6     13     11         7        37       16          26        19            2      135      314
       Nov    6                            15                  16      14     19      9         8        34       20          23        27            3      117      311
       Dec    6                   1        12           1      14       5     10     11         6        31       13          21        15            1      111      258




                                                                               72
Table 8 (continued)




                                                                                                                                                                        Manufacturing
               Chemicals (a)




                                                                                                                   Machinery
                               Paints (a)




                                                                                                                                                    Woolens
                                            Clothing




                                                                                                                                         Printing
                                                                                                          Lumber
                                                                                                Liquors
                                                                                      Leather




                                                                                                                               Milling
                                                       Cotton




                                                                                                                                                               Other
                                                                Glass


                                                                        Hats

                                                                               Iron
Year    Mon

1934    Jan     6                  1        23           2      20       8     18     12           5      24       25          25        20            1      105      295
        Feb    11                  2        20                   9       7      9     13           7      27       16          16        17            2       92      248
        Mar     4                  2        15                  17       6     12     19           6      40       21          17        16            1      125      301
        Apr     3                  3        12           1      13      12     18      7           5      36       20          27        10            1      113      281
        May     7                           13                  10      14     11      7           5      26       15          27        10                   101      246
        Jun     5                  1        24           1      12      18     19      9           2      32       22          25        17            4       88      279
        Jul     3                  1        23                   5      17      8     11           1      37       17          22         9                    81      235
        Aug     5                           22           1       5       8     16     11           1      32       14          21        16            1       84      237
        Sep     4                           12                  11       6      7      9           4      35       19          15         9            1       82      214
        Oct     3                  3        12                  11      12      6      7           6      24       22          22        12            6      112      258
        Nov     2                  1        19                   7      10      4     10           3      30       15          13        12            1       96      223
        Dec     3                  1        16                  12      11     11      7           5      32       15          20        14            2       76      225

1935    Jan          7             3        25           1      11      15     12      5           6      28       25          26        15            2       88      269
        Feb          8             2        29           3       8       7      9      9           2      32       16          13        10            1       80      229
        Mar          5             1        11                   9      11     15      6           1      33       11          16         9            2       93      223
        Apr          6             1        18           1       8       4     13     14           2      41       15          19        17            4       97      260
        May          9                      22                   7      14      9     11           5      28       18          16        10            1       93      243
        Jun          5             1        17                  12      12      5      9           2      17       24          30         4            2       88      228
        Jul          1             3        28                  11      22     10      9           1      33       17          19         7            1       75      237
        Aug          1                      17                  16       7      7      1                  23       16          26         9            2       72      197
        Sep          5             3        14           1       4      11      3      9           1      12       12          20        11            4       79      189
        Oct          4             2        25           1      12      19     17      8           2      35       21          26        12            1      102      287
        Nov          8                      27                   9      20     11     10           2      29       18          20         8                    73      235
        Dec          9                      21           2       9      21      8      8                  27       14          21         9            1       95      245




Sources: Dun’s Review and Dun and Bradstreets, see text and appendices for details.

Notes: (a) The categories “Chemicals” and “Paints” begin as a single category, “Chemicals and
Paints.” See text for details




                                                                               73
Table 9: Number of Failed Manufacturing Firms by Divisions of Manufacturing




                                 Forest Products




                                                                                                                                             Manufacturing
                                                                                                                   Transportation
                                                                            Machinery
             Chemicals




                                                                                                        Textiles
                                                                  Leather
                         Foods




                                                                                                Stone
                                                                                        Paper




                                                                                                                                    Other
                                                   Fuels

                                                           Iron
Year   Mon

1936   Jan   10          40      18                         8      8         5          12        5     39               4          25      174
       Feb    3          34      15                  3      6      4        12           8        1     30               2          21      137
       Mar    2          50      11                  3      5      4         6          17        7     27               3          23      158
       Apr    5          37      12                  4      7      9         2          13        4     48               2          18      161
       May    5          33      11                  2      9      7         6          17        1     26               8          21      146
       Jun   11          35      11                  3      5      8         7          13        2     27               1          20      143
       Jul    4          37       6                  6      6      8         5           7        6     22               2          22      131
       Aug    6          30       6                  1      6      2         7          10        2     18               3          13      104
       Sep    2          33      14                  1      8      3         6           7        1     20               2          10      107
       Oct    6          23       9                  2      3      3         4          14        6     17               4          14      105
       Nov    2          43      11                  3      4      2         8          11        5     30               6          14      139
       Dec    5          36      15                  4      6     10         9          11        3     27               2          13      141

1937   Jan       8       34       9                         8      7         9          10        3     25               1          22      136
       Feb       7       33       3                  6      5      4         8          20        5     16               3          10      120
       Mar       4       40       8                  1      6      5         8          10        5     22               1          16      126
       Apr       7       41      15                  1     10      6         4           8        5     22               1          15      135
       May       3       37      16                  5      6      5         5          14        7     39               3          13      153
       Jun       4       33      10                  3     13      6         2           5        3     40               2          13      134
       Jul       4       33      10                  1      5      3         6          12        4     36               4          13      131
       Aug       5       31      11                  8      5      9        10          21        2     30               6          10      148
       Sep       8       32      11                  1      4      3         6           9        4     13               8          28      127
       Oct       4       54      14                  4     11      4        14          13        3     44               8          23      196
       Nov       6       46      14                         9     10        13          15        5     41               7          33      199
       Dec       7       53      22                  3     12      5        17          13        8     61               9          38      248

1938   Jan   12          51      18                  3      9      6        24          14       7      59               3          35      241
       Feb    5          35      15                  3     14      5        12          18       4      61               4          35      211
       Mar    8          47      16                  4     13      8        18          22       7      58               5          35      241
       Apr   11          34      29                  7     14      4         9          11      10      50               3          28      210
       May   12          39      15                  4     15     11         7          19      10      50               5          30      217
       Jun    2          24      19                  8     15      7         8          16       4      62               6          27      198
       Jul    7          32      24                  2     14      7        13          20       6      58               3          24      210
       Aug    8          37      12                  2     11      6        12           9       7      41               6          22      173
       Sep    6          31      14                  8     11      6        18          18       9      33               4          26      184
       Oct   10          38      14                  4      8      5        12          16       7      30               7          21      172
       Nov    6          44      13                        10     10        12          15       7      51               8          20      196
       Dec   11          33      21                  3      8      5        11           8       4      44               3          24      175




                                                                            74
Table 9 (continued)




                                   Forest Products




                                                                                                                                               Manufacturing
                                                                                                                     Transportation
                                                                              Machinery
               Chemicals




                                                                                                          Textiles
                                                                    Leather
                           Foods




                                                                                                  Stone
                                                                                          Paper




                                                                                                                                      Other
                                                     Fuels

                                                             Iron
Year    Mon

1939    Jan     9          50      22                 9      14     16        20          21       8      65               4          60      298
        Feb    12          48      24                 6      11     13        11          22       4      48               1          34      234
        Mar     8          56      26                 3      14     11        17          18       8      72               4          30      267
        Apr     7          70      19                12      14     10        20          24       2      53               2          39      272
        May     7          68      25                 1      14      7        10          14       9      79               6          23      263
        Jun     9          45      13                 5      14     12        11          15       6      45               4          30      209
        Jul     3          58      16                 6       8      7        16          24       8      57               1          38      242
        Aug     7          50      20                 1       9     13         8          17       3      52               2          28      210
        Sep     9          44      20                 4       4      7        11          16       7      37               4          24      187
        Oct    14          46      18                 3      10     12        12          28       9      44               4          35      235
        Nov    11          64      16                 4       9     13         9          29      10      53               4          41      263
        Dec     9          37      16                 6      16      4        14          24       7      63               3          40      239

1940    Jan     8          52      17                 1      11     11         5          14       5      56               4          36      223
        Feb     7          56      17                 4       6     13        11          19       6      38               1          26      204
        Mar    12          49      28                 4      11      8         8          19       7      36               6          28      216
        Apr     6          70      22                10      14      6         7          31      12      52               4          27      261
        May    16          51      31                 5      10     13        14          27       5      52               3          36      263
        Jun     8          48      26                 6       9      8        13          20       4      57               5          22      226
        Jul    16          40      25                 9      15      4        14          12       3      54               5          19      216
        Aug    10          34      24                 5       8      9        14          23       4      47               4          27      209
        Sep     8          36      24                 6       7      8         7          20       3      40               7          21      187
        Oct     8          54      21                 8       7      6        13          21       2      50               3          21      214
        Nov    16          35      19                 7      14      6        12          19       2      40               5          27      202
        Dec    15          42      15                 7       7      9         6          11       3      53               1          31      200


Sources: Dun’s Review and Dun and Bradstreets, see text and appendices for details.




                                                                              75
Table 10: Number of Failed Wholesale Firms by Divisions of Wholesalers




                                                                                               Supply houses
                                                              Farm products
              Automotive




                                                                                                                        Wholesale
                                                  Dry Goods
                           Chemicals

                                       Clothing




                                                                                      Lumber



                                                                                                               Other
                                                                              Fuels
Year   Mon

1936   Jan        3            2       10                     43                3      5             6         17      89
       Feb        8            6        6                     36                6      9             3         24      98
       Mar        7            1        5             2       40                6      6             6         15      88
       Apr        4            6        5             1       38                2     10             7         20      93
       May        6            2        1             2       38                2     10             1         10      72
       Jun        2            2        5             3       31                3      5             4         17      72
       Jul        3            2        6             1       33                1      5             3         13      67
       Aug        4            3        5             1       29                1     11             3         13      70
       Sep        5            4        2                     28                2      6             2         20      69
       Oct        1            3        1                     29                2      6             3         10      55
       Nov        4            3        4             2       25                6      4             3         14      65
       Dec        9            3        4             3       28                1      4             8         18      78

1937   Jan    4             7             8           1       38                5      4             4         19       90
       Feb    9             6             3           2       28                3      3             3         11       68
       Mar    7             1             1           5       36                3     12             6         19       90
       Apr    5             4             6           5       31                2      9             6         23       91
       May    7             4             6           3       34                1      4             5         22       86
       Jun    8             5             7           1       26                1      3             2         13       66
       Jul    3             6             3           2       25                2      4             2          5       52
       Aug    3             1             5           4       32                4      6             3         19       77
       Sep    5             3             2           1       17                3      5             4         14       54
       Oct    6             4             3           3       43                2     10             4         21       96
       Nov    9            10             7           2       28                4      7             2         21       90
       Dec   13             3             5           6       31                3      6             9         31      107

1938   Jan    4                6       13             9       50                       9        8              24      123
       Feb    9                3       14             6       35                3      9       10              23      112
       Mar    9                7        9             4       43                3     12       10              28      125
       Apr   11                5       12             8       39                1      9       12              27      124
       May    6                3        7             3       35                6      7       11              31      109
       Jun    9                3        6             5       43                5     10       11              12      104
       Jul    8                4       10             2       25                2     11       10              31      103
       Aug   14                1        8             2       50                3     12        4              28      122
       Sep    5                3        4             4       28                3      6        5              14       72
       Oct    9                3        4             2       41                1      7       12              29      108
       Nov    6                3        8             3       42                3      5        8              21       99
       Dec    6                5       10             4       36                1      3        7              16       88




                                                                                      76
Table 10 (continued)




                                                                                                Supply houses
                                                               Farm products
               Automotive




                                                                                                                         Wholesale
                                                   Dry Goods
                            Chemicals

                                        Clothing




                                                                                       Lumber



                                                                                                                Other
                                                                               Fuels
Year    Mon

1939    Jan    8                8       13         10          57                3      9       16              43      167
        Feb    6                5        3          4          44                1      5       12              29      109
        Mar   12                6        5          4          56                2     13       16              29      143
        Apr    7                2       12         10          60                6     12       12              39      272
        May    9                8       17          6          59                4     11        7              31      152
        Jun    3                4        5          6          40                1      7        9              30      105
        Jul    7                7        5          4          42                4     10        8              27      114
        Aug    4                4        9          3          48                3     15        4              27      117
        Sep    7                6        7          5          37                2      9        5              27      105
        Oct    6                3        6          3          47                      13        8              43      129
        Nov    6                9        7          8          42                2     12       10              29      125
        Dec    7                5        6          3          38                1     15        7              26      108

1940    Jan    4                3        8             3       37                2     11        9              35      112
        Feb    8                2       10             3       35                2      9        6              27      102
        Mar    8                8        7             6       38                1     15        9              31      123
        Apr    2                3        6             7       37                3     15        7              34      114
        May    5                4       10             4       50                1      9       10              27      120
        Jun    2                7        6             1       46                3      5        8              35      113
        Jul    3                6        5             5       35                4     14       12              32      116
        Aug    8                6       11             6       35                3      7        7              19      102
        Sep    4                4        9             1       48                3      6        5              28      108
        Oct    5                1        6             3       46                4      8        7              35      115
        Nov    8                4        4             3       36                5      6        5              18       89
        Dec   10                5        4             8       44                3      6        5              17      102



Sources: Dun’s Review and Dun and Bradstreets, see text and appendices for details.




                                                                                       77
Table 11: Number of Failed Retailers by Divisions of Retailers




                                              Farm Supplies




                                                                                    Merchandise
                         Automotive




                                                                                                           Restaurants
                                                                       Furniture
               Apparel




                                                                                                  Lumber
                                      Drugs



                                                               Foods




                                                                                                                                  Retail
                                                                                                                         Other
Year    Mon

1936    Jan   169        48           53      42              174      26           48            41       43            60      704
        Feb   137        34           31      25              150      24           32            31       42            36      544
        Mar   105        38           43      33              193      15           28            40       55            52      602
        Apr    86        27           44      25              154      37           30            36       33            34      506
        May    93        48           46      26              172      24           20            32       37            35      533
        Jun    90        28           38      11              171      17           15            33       47            29      479
        Jul    66        24           26      16              130      14           11            15       35            28      365
        Aug    63        39           36      16              129      16           18            23       34            34      408
        Sep    46        28           30      16              118      10           11            18       32            19      328
        Oct    45        32           37      27              139      16           10            28       28            20      382
        Nov    56        38           21      28              144      20           15            23       37            27      409
        Dec    72        27           31      15              124      18           21            24       36            30      398

1937    Jan   121        29           20      23              159      22           23            27       43            31      498
        Feb    90        30           27      25              152      17           21            24       26            26      438
        Mar    71        47           25      22              162      22           34            20       39            39      481
        Apr    92        34           25      29              156      15           20            34       36            29      470
        May    92        43           36      28              174      24           21            24       48            28      518
        Jun    55        26           22      16              142      25           13            22       50            33      404
        Jul    51        35           29      11              140      17           14            24       25            33      379
        Aug    57        31           25      17              124      20           18            32       51            28      403
        Sep    43        31           20      22              113      22           12            20       28            27      338
        Oct    85        39           27      25              148      23           21            23       33            22      446
        Nov    76        35           32      23              152      20           19            21       46            23      447
        Dec   107        36           36      24              152      31           28            32       65            35      546

1938    Jan   234        62           48      41              222      58           52            36       83            59      895
        Feb   174        58           42      22              163      58           55            34       48            51      705
        Mar   174        68           31      21              171      60           31            44       51            45      696
        Apr   180        53           44      26              197      57           39            40       54            58      748
        May   170        67           32      18              177      68           36            36       48            38      690
        Jun   156        61           42      22              162      49           30            35       58            50      665
        Jul   135        59           35      17              157      48           30            34       70            44      629
        Aug   123        47           47      27              167      57           26            35       61            39      629
        Sep    95        41           37      23              145      43           20            30       61            33      528
        Oct   119        50           41      27              169      46           23            34       69            49      627
        Nov   120        55           28      28              179      37           34            28       46            31      586
        Dec   127        38           33      15              157      29           25            20       50            33      527




                                                                                   78
Table 11 (continued)




                                              Farm Supplies




                                                                                    Merchandise
                         Automotive




                                                                                                           Restaurants
                                                                       Furniture
               Apparel




                                                                                                  Lumber




                                                                                                                                  Retail
                                      Drugs



                                                               Foods




                                                                                                                         Other
Year    Mon


1939    Jan   268        65           53      42              215      51           59            40       127           55      975
        Feb   180        40           45      30              220      46           36            34       100           39      770
        Mar   165        54           47      16              232      60           35            39        90           54      792
        Apr   154        53           44      32              221      64           41            34        96           51      790
        May   167        57           56      22              208      61           44            36        98           51      800
        Jun   141        50           42      23              187      39           32            34       100           39      687
        Jul   168        42           39      21              202      43           30            34       108           42      729
        Aug   132        47           40      23              216      40           19            27       108           44      696
        Sep   124        41           47      17              193      38           23            38        91           40      652
        Oct   127        72           50      29              227      39           26            47       111           44      772
        Nov   136        53           31      13              219      37           26            45        88           49      697
        Dec   128        49           45      26              216      33           23            22       112           37      690
1940    Jan   201        53           54      28              176      27           51            44       106           49      789
        Feb   136        34           30      24              173      47           33            27        84           34      622
        Mar   157        47           40      23              227      29           42            39        95           41      740
        Apr   135        65           44      22              225      56           31            40       106           42      766
        May   174        39           44      20              206      42           27            40        98           49      739
        Jun   116        51           46       9              198      46           33            30       102           35      666
        Jul   123        58           51      19              208      50           40            33       112           34      728
        Aug   145        41           37      19              190      58           28            31       115           55      719
        Sep   102        42           46      16              169      35           17            29        92           26      574
        Oct   114        66           36      18              203      32           24            36       106           32      667
        Nov    73        64           35      18              206      48           22            40        94           40      640
        Dec   110        43           55      20              212      38           19            51        99           32      679



Sources: Dun’s Review and Dun and Bradstreets, see text and appendices for details.




                                                                                   79
Table 12: Number of Failed Construction Firms by Divisions of Construction




                                                                                                    Bld. Sub-Contr
             Bld. Sub-Contr




                                                                                                                                                               Construction
                                                                                                                                                Other Const.
                                                                        Construction
                                                         Other Const.




                                                                                                                                  Gen. Const.
                                           Gen. Const.




                                                                                                                     Carpenters
Year   Mon                    Carpenters                                               Year   Mon


1936   Jan   25               20            6                           51             1939   Jan   37               17                5             2         61
       Feb   22                9            5                           36                    Feb   28               14                2             3         47
       Mar   23               14           13                 1         51                    Mar   35               14                5             2         56
       Apr   14                9            8                 1         32                    Apr   31               14                3             4         52
       May   23               12            5                 6         46                    May   42               21                6             2         71
       Jun   14               15            4                 3         36                    Jun   30               17                4             1         52
       Jul   26               10            5                 1         42                    Jul   25               11                4                       40
       Aug   18                8            9                 1         36                    Aug   35               16                              1         52
       Sep   21               12           10                           43                    Sep   33                9            9                           51
       Oct   17               12            5                           34                    Oct   29               12           13                 1         55
       Nov   23               12           11                           46                    Nov   28                8           11                 3         50
       Dec   24               12            6                 1         43                    Dec   26                7           24                 2         59

1937   Jan   25               11            9                           45             1940   Jan   28               14           23                 4         69
       Feb   21               14            8                           43                    Feb   40               13            9                 4         66
       Mar   28               29           12                 3         72                    Mar   38                4           20                 1         63
       Apr   27               25            6                 4         62                    Apr   53                9           14                 2         78
       May   32                9            9                           50                    May   40                9           19                 2         70
       Jun   22               11            6                 3         42                    Jun   45                5            8                 3         61
       Jul   16               10            4                 1         31                    Jul   41               11           11                 2         65
       Aug   28               12            7                 2         49                    Aug   28                8           12                 1         49
       Sep   22                9            5                 1         37                    Sep   33               13            5                 7         58
       Oct   20               14            3                           37                    Oct   51                9            6                 5         71
       Nov   35               18            5                 2         60                    Nov   29               18            5                 1         53
       Dec   29               22            2                           53                    Dec   27               18           10                 2         57

1938   Jan   40               15            4                 1         60
       Feb   32               10           11                 2         55
       Mar   32               10           11                 2         55
       Apr   23                8            5                 4         40
       May   34               21            5                           60
       Jun   25               17           16                 1         59
       Jul   25               14            6                           45
       Aug   27               20            9                 1         57
       Sep   24               16            8                 1         46
       Oct   21               16            6                           43
       Nov   35               11            5                 4         55
       Dec   28               15            2                 3         48




                                                                                       80
Sources: Dun and Bradstreets, see text and appendices for details.

Notes: Bld. Sub-Contr. indicates the building sub-contractors division. Gen Const. and Other
Constr. indicate General construction division and Other construction division, respectively.




                                               81
Table 13: Number of Failed Commercial Service Firms by Divisions of Commercial
Services




                                                                             Comm. Services




                                                                                                                                                                          Comm. Services
                                                       Undertakes




                                                                                                                                                     Undertakes
                                           Laundries




                                                                                                                                         Laundries
             Cleaners




                                                                                                           Cleaners
                        Haulage




                                                                                                                      Haulage
                                  Hotels




                                                                                                                                Hotels
                                                                    Other




                                                                                                                                                                  Other
Year   Mon                                                                                    Year   Mon


1936   Jan   16         12          6          3           7        15       59               1939   Jan   11         17          7          7           2        22      66
       Feb   12          6          3          3           4        13       41                      Feb   12         11          4          3           2        10      42
       Mar    8         13          6          5           7         8       47                      Mar    9         19          1          7           6        22      64
       Apr   10          9          4          5           2         8       38                      Apr   11         12          2          8           7        17      57
       May    7          6          5          2           3        12       35                      May   12         10          1          5           4        16      48
       Jun    7         12          6          2           4        12       43                      Jun   10         14          2          8           3        29      66
       Jul    7         10          2          1           4        10       34                      Jul    9          6          4                      3         6      28
       Aug   14          8          3          2           4         6       37                      Aug   10         12          3          5                    21      51
       Sep    6         13          5          3           3         9       39                      Sep   12          9          5          5           1        16      48
       Oct    2         18          5          1                     9       35                      Oct   10         10          4          6           1        12      43
       Nov   12          8          2                      2         5       29                      Nov   12         10          6          3           1        17      49
       Dec    7         10          1          2           5         7       32                      Dec    9         14          4          7           3        20      57

1937   Jan   11         11          2          2           5        11       42               1940   Jan    8         12          3          1           2        18      44
       Feb   12         12          4          4           3        17       52                      Feb   11         12          5          1           2        17      48
       Mar   15          8          3          1           7        17       51                      Mar   10         16          4          9           2        14      55
       Apr    5          7          3          4           4         5       28                      Apr   16         18          6          6           3        23      72
       May    6          8                     1           5         7       27                      May    9         22          5          2           1         7      46
       Jun    4          7          3          1           2         7       24                      Jun    8         17          2          4                    17      48
       Jul    9          8          2                      1         5       25                      Jul   13         16                     6           3        12      50
       Aug    5          8          3          2           2        10       30                      Aug   13          9          5          3           1        18      49
       Sep    4          8          4          1           2         9       28                      Sep   14         13          1          3           5        13      49
       Oct    4         16          3          3           2        12       40                      Oct   10          7          2          7           5        13      44
       Nov    4         22          2          3           4        11       46                      Nov    5          6          2          7           5        15      40
       Dec   16         16          3          7           2        11       55                      Dec   16          9          3          6           3        11      48

1938   Jan   16         16         1           3           2        20       58
       Feb   10         18         4           4           5         9       50
       Mar   10         18         4           4           5         9       50
       Apr   10          8         3           4           2        13       50
       May   14         10         3           6           4        10       47
       Jun   11         12         5           5           4        10       47
       Jul   11         19         2           4           8         7       51
       Aug   10          5         3           2           5         9       34
       Sep    9          8         1           6           1         8       33
       Oct    6         15         6           4           5        11       47
       Nov   10          5        10           4           5        14       48
       Dec    8          5         3           4           5        12       37




                                                                            82
Sources: Dun and Bradstreet, see text and appendices for details.

Notes: Comm. Service indicates the Commercial Services division




                                               83
Table 14: 77B Applications by Sector




                                                                      Comm. Services
                Manufacturing




                                                       Construction
                                ` Wholesale

                                              Retail




                                                                                       Other


                                                                                                Total
Year    Mon


1936    Jan     22                   6        11            1         19                        59
        Feb     37                   6        23            3         26                        95
        Mar     18                   5        12            2          5                8       50
        Apr     15                   6         5            0          6               11       43
        May     29                   8         4            3          4                5       53
        Jun     17                   7        12            1          7               15       59
        Jul     16                   5         8            0          8                4       41
        Aug     12                   3         2            0          4               12       33
        Sep     13                   2         2            0          3                8       28
        Oct     18                   6         5            1          6               15       51
        Nov      9                   3         3            2          9                8       34
        Dec     17                   4         2            0          4               12       39

1937    Jan     18                   2         4            1          2                5       32
        Feb     22                   3         4            1          6                9       45
        Mar     26                   3         7            1         11               34       82
        Apr     20                   6         7            0          1               17       51
        May     13                   9        10            0          6               14       52
        Jun     24                   7         5            1          5               20       62
        Jul     10                   3        13            1          5               21       53
        Aug     14                   3         4            0          4               20       45
        Sep     15                   6         4            1          3               13       42
        Oct     22                   8         8            0          5               14       57
        Nov     33                   8         8            0          5                8       62
        Dec     48                   3        18            0          8               12       89

1938    Jan     25               9            24            0               2          11       71
        Feb     40              14            20            3               3          14       94
        Mar     38              18            17            3               3          11       90
        Apr     27               8            14            1               9          19       78
        May     31               7            29            1               4          14       86
        Jun     26               5            16            3               5           8       63
        Jul     19               6            12            0               6          10       53
        Aug     22               8            14            0               0           6       50



Sources: Dun and Bradstreets, see text and appendices for details.
Notes: Comm. Service indicates the Commercial Services division




                                                                                               84
Figure 1: Number of Failures, by Sector and Month

                          Manufacturing                                           Trading
         700                                               3,000
         600                                               2,500
         500
                                                           2,000
Number




         400
                                                           1,500
         300
                                                           1,000
         200
         100                                                500

          0                                                     0
               1900    1910      1920      1930     1940            1900   1910     1920    1930   1940
                       Brokers and Traders                                         Total
         250                                               3,600
                                                           3,200
         200
                                                           2,800
Number




         150                                               2,400
                                                           2,000
         100                                               1,600
                                                           1,200
         50
                                                            800
          0                                                 400
               1900    1910      1920      1930     1940            1900   1910     1920    1930   1940
                               Month                                               Month

Source: Dun’s Review


                                                           85
Figure 2: Number of Failures, by Sector and Month, Relative to Average 1895 to 1910

                                   Manufacturing                                       Trading
                      6                                           6
Average 1895-1910=1




                      5                                           5

                      4                                           4

                      3                                           3

                      2                                           2

                      1                                           1

                      0                                           0
                          1900   1910    1920      1930   1940        1900      1910     1920    1930   1940
                                 Brokers and Traders                                    Total
                      6                                           6
Average 1895-1910=1




                      5                                           5

                      4                                           4

                      3                                           3

                      2                                           2

                      1                                           1

                      0                                           0
                          1900   1910    1920      1930   1940        1900      1910     1920    1930   1940
                                        Month                                           Month

Source: Dun’s Review, Authors’ calculations


                                                                 86
Figure 3: Manufacturing Failures by Branch and Month, Relative to Average 1895 to 1910
                                  Clothing                          Cot ton                           Glass                            Hats
Average 1895-1910=1



                      8                                8                                8                                8

                      6                                6                                6                                6

                      4                                4                                4                                4

                      2                                2                                2                                2

                      0                                0                                0                                0
                          1900   1910    1920   1930       1900   1910    1920   1930       1900   1910    1920   1930       1900   1910     1920   1930
                                    Iron                           Leat her                          Liquor                           Lumber
Average 1895-1910=1




                      8                                8                                8                                8

                      6                                6                                6                                6

                      4                                4                                4                                4

                      2                                2                                2                                2

                      0                                0                                0                                0
                          1900   1910    1920   1930       1900   1910    1920   1930       1900   1910    1920   1930       1900   1910     1920   1930
                                 Machinery                          Milling                          Ot her                           P aint s
Average 1895-1910=1




                      8                                8                                8                                8

                      6                                6                                6                                6

                      4                                4                                4                                4

                      2                                2                                2                                2

                      0                                0                                0                                0
                          1900   1910    1920   1930       1900   1910    1920   1930       1900   1910    1920   1930       1900   1910     1920   1930
                                  P rint ing                 Chemicals and P aint s                Chemicals                          Wool
Average 1895-1910=1




                      8                                8                                8                                8

                      6                                6                                6                                6

                      4                                4                                4                                4

                      2                                2                                2                                2

                      0                                0                                0                                0
                          1900   1910    1920   1930       1900   1910    1920   1930       1900   1910    1920   1930       1900   1910     1920   1930

                                        Month                            Month                            Month                            Mont h

Source: Dun’s Review, Authors’ calculations


                                                                                            87
Figure 4: Trading Failures by Branch and Month, Relative to Average 1895 to 1910
                                    Books                            Clothing                       Dry Goods                        Furniture
Average 1895-1910=1



                      8                                  8                               8                               8

                      6                                  6                               6                               6

                      4                                  4                               4                               4

                      2                                  2                               2                               2

                      0                                  0                               0                               0
                          1900    1910   1920     1930       1900   1910   1920   1930       1900   1910   1920   1930       1900   1910   1920   1930
                                 General Stores                      Groceries                       Hardware                          Hats
Average 1895-1910=1




                      8                                  8                               8                               8

                      6                                  6                               6                               6

                      4                                  4                               4                               4

                      2                                  2                               2                               2

                      0                                  0                               0                               0
                          1900    1910   1920     1930       1900   1910   1920   1930       1900   1910   1920   1930       1900   1910   1920   1930
                                    Hotels                            Jewelry                         Liquor                          Other
                      8                                  8                               8                               8
Average 1895-1910=1




                      6                                  6                               6                               6

                      4                                  4                               4                               4

                      2                                  2                               2                               2

                      0                                  0                               0                               0
                          1900    1910   1920     1930       1900   1910   1920   1930       1900   1910   1920   1930       1900   1910   1920   1930
                                     Shoes                     Chemicals and Paints                 Chemicals                         Paints
Average 1895-1910=1




                      8                                  8                               8                               8

                      6                                  6                               6                               6

                      4                                  4                               4                               4

                      2                                  2                               2                               2

                      0                                  0                               0                               0
                          1900    1910   1920     1930       1900   1910   1920   1930       1900   1910   1920   1930       1900   1910   1920   1930
                                    Month                             Month                            Month                           Month

Source: Dun’s Review, Authors’ calculations


                                                                                             88
Figure 5: Liabilities of Failed Businesses, by Sector and Month

                                  Manufacturing                                                     Trading
         80,000,000                                                      60,000,000

                                                                         50,000,000
         60,000,000
Number




                                                                         40,000,000

         40,000,000                                                      30,000,000

                                                                         20,000,000
         20,000,000
                                                                         10,000,000

                 0                                                               0
                       1900    1910       1920       1930         1940                1900   1910      1920   1930   1940
                               Brokers and Traders                                                   Total
         40,000,000                                                     120,000,000

                                                                        100,000,000
         30,000,000
                                                                         80,000,000
Number




         20,000,000                                                      60,000,000

                                                                         40,000,000
         10,000,000
                                                                         20,000,000

                 0                                                               0
                       1900    1910       1920       1930         1940                1900   1910      1920   1930   1940
                                        Month                                                         Month
Source: Dun’s Review


                                                                   89
Figure 6: Liabilities of Failed Businesses, by Sector and Month, Relative to Average 1895 to 1910

                                      Manufacturing                                       Trading
                      15.0                                          15.0

                      12.5                                          12.5
Average 1895-1910=1




                      10.0                                          10.0

                       7.5                                           7.5

                       5.0                                           5.0

                       2.5                                           2.5

                       0.0                                           0.0
                             1900   1910    1920      1930   1940          1900   1910       1920   1930   1940
                                    Brokers and Traders                                    Total
                      15.0                                          15.0

                      12.5                                          12.5
Average 1895-1910=1




                      10.0                                          10.0

                       7.5                                           7.5

                       5.0                                           5.0

                       2.5                                           2.5

                       0.0                                           0.0
                             1900   1910    1920      1930   1940          1900   1910       1920   1930   1940
                                           Month                                            Month
Source: Dun’s Review, Authors’ calculations


                                                                    90
Figure 7: Manufacturing Liabilities of Failed Businesses by Branch and Month, Relative to Average 1895 to 1910
                                   Clothing                          Cotton                             Glass                            Hats
Average 1895-1910=1



                      25                               25                               25                                25
                      20                               20                               20                                20
                      15                               15                               15                                15
                      10                               10                               10                                10
                       5                                5                                5                                 5
                       0                                0                                0                                 0
                           1900   1910   1920   1930        1900   1910   1920   1930         1900   1910   1920   1930        1900   1910   1920   1930
                                     Iron                           Leather                            Liquor                           Lumber
Average 1895-1910=1




                      25                               25                               25                                25
                      20                               20                               20                                20
                      15                               15                               15                                15
                      10                               10                               10                                10
                       5                                5                                5                                 5
                       0                                0                                0                                 0
                           1900   1910   1920   1930        1900   1910   1920   1930         1900   1910   1920   1930        1900   1910   1920   1930
                                  Machinery                          Milling                           Other                           Printing
Average 1895-1910=1




                      25                               25                               25                                25
                      20                               20                               20                                20
                      15                               15                               15                                15
                      10                               10                               10                                10
                       5                                5                                5                                 5
                       0                                0                                0                                 0
                           1900   1910   1920   1930        1900   1910   1920   1930         1900   1910   1920   1930        1900   1910   1920   1930
                                     Wool                     Chemicals and Paints                   Chemicals                          Paints
Average 1895-1910=1




                      25                               25                               25                                25
                      20                               20                               20                                20
                      15                               15                               15                                15
                      10                               10                               10                                10
                       5                                5                                5                                 5
                       0                                0                                0                                 0
                           1900   1910   1920   1930        1900   1910   1920   1930         1900   1910   1920   1930        1900   1910   1920   1930
                                     Mont h                           Month                            Mont h                            Mont h

Source: Dun’s Review, Authors’ calculations


                                                                                             91
Figure 8: Trading Liabilities of Failed Businesses by Branch and Month, Relative to Average 1895 to 1910
                                     Books                             Clothing                        Dry Goods                         Furniture
                      30                                  30                               30                               30
Average 1895-1910=1




                      20                                  20                               20                               20

                      10                                  10                               10                               10

                       0                                   0                                0                                0
                           1900    1910   1920     1930        1900   1910   1920   1930        1900   1910   1920   1930        1900   1910     1920   1930
                                  General Stores                      Groceries                        Hardware                            Hats
                      30                                  30                               30                               30
Average 1895-1910=1




                      20                                  20                               20                               20

                      10                                  10                               10                               10

                       0                                   0                                0                                0
                           1900    1910   1920     1930        1900   1910   1920   1930        1900   1910   1920   1930        1900   1910     1920   1930
                                     Hotels                            Jewelry                           Liquor                           Other
                      30                                  30                               30                               30
Average 1895-1910=1




                      20                                  20                               20                               20

                      10                                  10                               10                               10

                       0                                   0                                0                                0
                           1900    1910   1920     1930        1900   1910   1920   1930        1900   1910   1920   1930        1900   1910     1920   1930
                                      Shoes                     Chemicals and Paints                   Chemicals                          Paints
                      30                                  30                               30                               30
Average 1895-1910=1




                      20                                  20                               20                               20

                      10                                  10                               10                               10

                       0                                   0                                0                                0
                           1900    1910   1920     1930        1900   1910   1920   1930        1900   1910   1920   1930        1900   1910     1920   1930

                                      Mont h                             Mont h                           Mont h                               Mont h

Source: Dun’s Review, Authors’ Calculations


                                                                                                92
Figure 9: Average Size of Failures, by Sector and Month

                               Manufacturing                                             Trading
      160,000                                                     60,000

                                                                  50,000
      120,000
                                                                  40,000
$




       80,000                                                     30,000

                                                                  20,000
       40,000
                                                                  10,000

            0                                                         0
                 1900      1910       1920      1930      1940             1900   1910     1920    1930   1940
                            Brokers and Traders                                           Total
      400,000                                                     60,000

                                                                  50,000
      300,000
                                                                  40,000
$




      200,000                                                     30,000

                                                                  20,000
      100,000
                                                                  10,000

            0                                                         0
                 1900      1910       1920      1930      1940             1900   1910     1920    1930   1940
                                    Month                                                  Month
Source: Dun’s Review, Authors’ calculations


                                                             93
Figure 10: Average Size of Failures by Sector and Month, Relative to Average 1895 to 1910

                                   Manufacturing                                      Trading
                      8                                          8
Average 1895-1910=1




                      6                                          6


                      4                                          4


                      2                                          2


                      0                                          0
                          1900   1910     1920     1930   1940        1900     1910         1920   1930   1940
                                 Brokers and Traders                                    Total
                      8                                          8
Average 1895-1910=1




                      6                                          6


                      4                                          4


                      2                                          2


                      0                                          0
                          1900   1910     1920     1930   1940        1900     1910         1920   1930   1940
                                        Month                                           Month
Source: Dun’s Review, Authors’ calculations


                                                                 94
Figure 11: Average Size of Manufacturing Failures, by Branch and Month, Relative to Average 1895 to 1910
                                   Clothing                          Cotton                           Glass                             Hats
Average 1895-1910=1




                      20                               20                               20                               20

                      15                               15                               15                               15

                      10                               10                               10                               10

                       5                                5                                5                                5

                       0                                0                                0                                0
                           1900   1910   1920   1930        1900   1910   1920   1930        1900   1910   1920   1930        1900   1910   1920   1930
                                     Iron                           Leather                           Liquor                          Lumber
Average 1895-1910=1




                      20                               20                               20                               20

                      15                               15                               15                               15

                      10                               10                               10                               10

                       5                                5                                5                                5

                       0                                0                                0                                0
                           1900   1910   1920   1930        1900   1910   1920   1930        1900   1910   1920   1930        1900   1910   1920   1930
                                  M achinery                         M illing                         Other                           Printing
Average 1895-1910=1




                      20                               20                               20                               20

                      15                               15                               15                               15

                      10                               10                               10                               10

                       5                                5                                5                                5

                       0                                0                                0                                0
                           1900   1910   1920   1930        1900   1910   1920   1930        1900   1910   1920   1930        1900   1910   1920   1930
                                    Wool                     Chemicals and Paints                   Chemicals                          Paints
                      20                               20                               20                               20
Average 1895-1910=1




                      15                               15                               15                               15

                      10                               10                               10                               10

                       5                                5                                5                                5

                       0                                0                                0                                0
                           1900   1910   1920   1930        1900   1910   1920   1930        1900   1910   1920   1930        1900   1910   1920   1930

                                    Mont h                            Mont h                           Mont h                           Mont h

Source: Dun’s Review, Authors’ calculations


                                                                                             95
Figure 12: Average Size of Trading Failures, by Branch and Month, Relative to Average 1895 to 1910
                                      Books                             Clothing                         Dry Goods                         Furniture
 Average 1895-1910=1



                       12                                  12                               12                                12
                       10                                  10                               10                                10
                        8                                   8                                8                                 8
                        6                                   6                                6                                 6
                        4                                   4                                4                                 4
                        2                                   2                                2                                 2
                        0                                   0                                0                                 0
                            1900    1910   1920     1930        1900   1910   1920   1930         1900   1910   1920   1930        1900   1910   1920   1930
                                   General Stores                      Groceries                         Hardware                            Hats
 Average 1895-1910=1




                       12                                  12                               12                                12
                       10                                  10                               10                                10
                        8                                   8                                8                                 8
                        6                                   6                                6                                 6
                        4                                   4                                4                                 4
                        2                                   2                                2                                 2
                        0                                   0                                0                                 0
                            1900    1910   1920     1930        1900   1910   1920   1930         1900   1910   1920   1930        1900   1910   1920   1930
                                      Hotels                            Jewelry                            Liquor                           Other
 Average 1895-1910=1




                       12                                  12                               12                                12
                       10                                  10                               10                                10
                        8                                   8                                8                                 8
                        6                                   6                                6                                 6
                        4                                   4                                4                                 4
                        2                                   2                                2                                 2
                        0                                   0                                0                                 0
                            1900    1910   1920     1930        1900   1910   1920   1930         1900   1910   1920   1930        1900   1910   1920   1930
                                       Shoes                     Chemicals and Paints                    Chemicals                          Paints
 Average 1895-1910=1




                       12                                  12                               12                                12
                       10                                  10                               10                                10
                        8                                   8                                8                                 8
                        6                                   6                                6                                 6
                        4                                   4                                4                                 4
                        2                                   2                                2                                 2
                        0                                   0                                0                                 0
                            1900    1910   1920     1930        1900   1910   1920   1930         1900   1910   1920   1930        1900   1910   1920   1930

                                      Mont h                              Mont h                            Mont h                           Mont h

Source: Dun’s Review, Authors’ calculations


                                                                                                 96
Appendix 1. Dun’s Data on Bankruptcy by Branch of Business: Dates, Sources, and Notes.

       This appendix indicates the dates on which R. G. Dun and Company (and its successor,
Dun and Bradstreet’s) published information about business bankruptcies by branch of business.
Notes indicate whether definitions or the descriptions of the data series changed, whether data
was missing, and whether something about the reporting procedure was altered, new, or
noteworthy.

Data Reported in                             Initial Release for
Year Month Vol/#       Date         Page     Year Month

1896   Jan
       Feb    3/132    2/8/1896     2        1896    Jan (a)
       Mar    3/136    3/7/1896     2        1896    Jan-Feb
       Apr    3/141    4/11/1896    2        1896    Mar, Q.1
       May    3/145    5/9/1896     2        1896    Apr
       Jun    3/149    6/6/1896     2        1896    May
       Jul    3/154    7/11/1896    2        1896    Jun, Q.2
       Aug    4/158    8/8/1896     2        1896    Jul
       Sep    4/162    9/5/1896     2        1896    Aug
       Oct    4/167    10/10/1896   2        1896    Sep, Q.3
       Nov    4/171    11/7/1896    2        1896    Oct
       Dec    4/175    12/5/1896    2        1896    Nov

1897   Jan    4/180    1/9/1897     4        1897    Dec, Y 1896
       Feb    4/184    2/6/1897     2        1897    Jan.
       Mar    4/188    3/6/1897     2        1897    Feb
       Apr    4/193    4/10/1897             1897    Mar, Q.1
       May    4/197    5/8/1897     2        1897    Apr
       Jun    4/201    6/5/1897              1897    May
       Jul    4/206    7/10/1897    2        1897    Jun, Q.2
       Aug    5/210    8/7/1897     5        1897    Jul
       Sep    5/214    9/4/1897     2        1897    Aug
       Oct    5/219    10/9/1897    5        1897    Sep, Q.3
       Nov    5/223    11/6/1897    2        1897    Oct
       Dec    5/227    12/4/1897    2        1897    Nov

1898   Jan    Month missing from volume.
       Feb    5/236    2/5/1898      2      1898    Jan.
       Mar    5/240    3/5/1898      2      1898    Feb
       Apr    5/245    4/9/1898      3      1898    Mar. Q.1
       May    5/249    5/7/1898      2      1898    Apr
       Jun    5/253    6/4/1898      3      1898    May
       Jul    5/258    7/9/1898      4      1898    Jun, Q.2
       Aug    6/262    8/6/1898      2      1898    Jul
       Sep    6/266    9/3/1898      2      1898    Aug
       Oct    6/272    10/15/1898 4         1898    Sep, Q.3
       Nov    6/275    11/5/1898     2      1898    Oct
       Dec    6/279    12/3/1898     2      1898    Nov


Notes: (a) Data was also initially released for the months January 1895 to December 1895.




                                              97
Appendix 1 (continued)

Data Reported in                          Initial Release for
Year Month Vol/#      Date         Page   Year Month

1899   Jan   6/284    1/7/1899     5      1898    Dec, Y 1898
       Feb   6/288    2/4/1899     2      1899    Jan
       Mar   6/292    3/4/1899     2      1899    Feb
       Apr   6/297    4/8/1899     4, 5   1899    Mar, Q.1
       May   6/301    5/6/1899     2      1899    Apr
       Jun   6/305    6/3/1899     2      1899    May
       Jul   6/310    7/8/1899     4, 5   1899    Jun, Q.2
       Aug   6/314    8/5/1899     2      1899    Jul
       Sep   7/318    9/2/1899     2      1899    Aug
       Oct   7/324    10/14/1899   2, 3   1899    Sep, Q.3
       Nov   7/327    11/4/1899    2      1899    Oct
       Dec   7/332    12/9/1899    2      1899    Nov

1900   Jan   7/337    1/13/1900    2, 3   1899    Dec, Y 1899
       Feb   7/340    2/3/1900     2      1900    Jan
       Mar   7/344    3/3/1900     2      1900    Feb
       Apr   7/350    4/14/1900    2, 3   1900    Mar, Q.1
       May   7/353    5/5/1900     2      1900    Apr
       Jun   7/358    6/9/1900     2      1900    May
       Jul   7/363    7/14/1900    3, 4   1900    Jun, Q.2
       Aug   8/366    8/4/1900     2      1900    Jul
       Sep   8/370    9/1/1900     2      1900    Aug
       Oct   8/376    10/13/1900   2, 3   1900    Sep, Q.3
       Nov   8/379    11/3/1900    2      1900    Oct
       Dec   8/383    12/1/1900    2      1900    Nov

1901   Jan   9/388    1/5/1901     7      1900    Dec, Y 1899
       Feb   9/392    2/3/1900     2      1901    Jan
       Mar
       Apr   9/402    4/3/1901     7      1901    Mar, Q.1
       May   9/405    5/4/1901     7      1901    Apr
       Jun   9/410    6/8/1901     7      1901    May
       Jul   9/415    7/13/1901    7      1901    Jun, Q.2
       Aug   9/418    8/3/1901     7      1901    Jul
       Sep   9/423    9/7/1901     7      1901    Aug
       Oct   9/428    10/12/1901   7      1901    Sep, Q.3
       Nov   9/431    11/2/1901    7      1901    Oct
       Dec   9/436    12/7/1901    8      1901    Nov

1902   Jan   10/441   1/11/1902    8      1901    Dec, Y 1901
       Feb   10/445   2/8/1902     7      1902    Jan
       Mar   10/449   3/8/1902     7      1902    Feb
       Apr   10/454   4/12/1902    7      1902    Mar, Q.1
       May   10/457   5/3/1902     7      1902    Apr
       Jun   10/462   6/7/1902     7      1902    May
       Jul   10/467   7/12/1902    10     1902    Jun, Q.2
       Aug   10/470   8/2/1902     7      1902    Jul
       Sep   10/475   9/6/1902     7      1902    Aug




                                           98
Appendix 1 (continued)

Data Reported in                           Initial Release for
Year Month Vol/#       Date         Page   Year Month

1902   Oct   10/480    10/11/1902   11     1902    Sep, Q.3
       Nov   10/484    11/8/1902    11     1902    Oct
       Dec   10/488    12/6/1902    7      1902    Nov

1903   Jan   11/493    1/10/1903    7      1902    Dec, Y 1902
       Feb   11/497    2/7/1903     7      1903    Jan
       Mar   11/501    3/7/1903     7      1903    Feb
       Apr   11/506    4/11/1903    9      1903    Mar, Q.1
       May   11/509    5/2/1903     11     1903    Apr
       Jun   11/514    6/6/1903     10     1903    May
       Jul   11/519    7/11/1903    11     1903    June, Q.2
       Aug   11/523    8/8/1903     11     1903    Jul
       Sep   11/527    9/5/1903     10     1903    Aug
       Oct   11/532    10/10/1903   7      1903    Sep, Q.3
       Nov   11/536    11/7/1903    6      1903    Oct
       Dec   11/540    12/5/1903    6      1903    Nov

1904   Jan   12/545    1/9/1904     7      1903    Dec, Y 1903
       Feb   12/549    2/6/1904     7      1904    Jan
       Mar   12/553    3/5/1904     7      1904    Feb
       Apr   12/557    4/2/1904     6      1904    Mar, Q.1
       May   12/562    5/7/1904     5      1904    Apr
       Jun   12/566    6/4/1904     4      1904    May
       Jul   12/571    7/9/1904     5      1904    Jun, Q.2
       Aug   12/575    8/6/1904     4      1904    Jul
       Sep   12/579    9/3/1904     4      1904    Aug
       Oct   12/585    10/15/1904   5      1904    Sep, Q. 3
       Nov   12/588    11/5/1904    4      1904    Oct
       Dec   12/592    12/3/1904    4      1904    Nov

1905   Jan   13/598    1/14/1905    13     1905    Dec, Y 1905
       Feb   13/601    2/4/1905     6      1905    Jan
       Mar   13/605    3/4/1905     4      1905    Feb
       Apr   13/610    4/8/1905     6      1905    Mar, Q.1
       May   13/614    5/6/1905     4      1905    Apr
       Jun   13/618    6/3/1905     4      1905    May
       Jul   13/623    7/17/1905    5      1905    Jun, Q.2
       Aug   13/626    8/5/1905     4      1905    Jul
       Sep   13/630    9/2/1905     7      1905    Aug
       Oct   13/636    10/14/1905   7      1905    Sep, Q.3
       Nov   13/639    11/4/1905    13     1905    Oct
       Dec   13/643    12/2/1905    12     1905    Nov

1906   Jan   Missing from Volume
       Feb   14/652     2/3/1906    13     1906    Jan
       Mar   14/656     3/3/1906    8      1906    Feb
       Apr   14/662     4/14/1906   9      1906    Mar, Q.1




                                            99
Appendix 1 (continued)

Data Reported in                           Initial Release for
Year Month Vol/#      Date         Page    Year Month

1906   May   14/665   5/5/1906     9       1906    Apr
       Jun   14/670   6/9/1906     9       1906    May
       Jul   14/675   7/14/1906    4,5     1906    Jun, Q.2
       Aug   14/678   8/4/1906     4       1906    Jul
       Sep   14/683   9/8/1906     4       1906    Aug
       Oct   14/688   10/13/1906   5       1906    Sep
       Nov   14/691   11/3/1906    4       1906    Oct
       Dec   14/696   12/8/1906    4       1906    Nov

1907   Jan   15/700   1/5/1907     14      1906    Dec, Y 1906
       Feb   15/706   2/16/1907    10      1907    Jan
       Mar   15/709   3/9/1907     10      1907    Feb
       Apr   15/714   4/13/1907    10      1907    March, Q.1
       May   15/717   5/4/1907     8       1907    Apr
       Jun   15/722   6/8/1907     8       1907    May
       Jul   15/727   7/13/1907    5       1907    June, Q.2
       Aug   15/730   8/3/1907     8       1907    Jul
       Sep   15/735   9/7/1907     8       1907    Aug
       Oct   15/740   10/12/1907   10      1907    Sep, Q.3
       Nov   15/744   11/9/1907    8       1907    Oct
       Dec   15/749   12/14/1907   4       1907    Nov

1908   Jan   16/753   1/11/1908    18      1907    Dec, Y 1907
       Feb   15/757   2/8/1908     8       1908    Jan
       Mar   16/761   3/7/1908     8       1908    Feb
       Apr   16/766   4/11/1908    9,10    1908    Q.1, Mar
       May   16/770   5/9/1908     8       1908    Apr
       Jun   16/774   6/6/1908     8       1908    May
       Jul   16/779   7/11/1908    5,6     1908    Jun, Q.2
       Aug   16/783   8/8/1908     8       1908    Jul
       Sep   16/787   9/5/1908     8       1908    Aug
       Oct   16/792   10/10/1908   9, 10   1908    Q.3, Sep
       Nov   16/797   11/14/1908   9       1908    Oct
       Dec   16/801   12/12/1908   9       1908    Nov

1909   Jan   17/805   1/9/1909     16      1908    Y 1908, Dec
       Feb   17/811   2/20/1909    8       1909    Jan
       Mar   17/815   3/20/1909    9       1909    Feb
       Apr   17/818   4/10/1909    5, 6    1909    Q.1, Mar
       May   17/822   5/8/1909     8       1909    Apr
       Jun   17/826   6/5/1909     8       1909    May
       Jul   17/831   7/10/1909    5, 6    1909    Jun, Q.2
       Aug   17/835   8/7/1909     8       1909    Jul
       Sep   17/840   9/11/1909    9       1909    Aug
       Oct   17/844   10/9/1909    8, 9    1909    Sep
       Nov   17/848   11/6/1909    10      1909    Oct
       Dec   17/852   12/4/1909    10      1909    Nov




                                           100
Appendix 1 (continued)

Data Reported in                             Initial Release for
Year Month Vol/#       Date         Page     Year Month

1910   Jan   18/857    1/8/1910     92       1910    Y 1909, Dec
       Feb   18/861    2/5/1910     8        1910    Jan
       Mar   18/865    3/5/1910     10       1910    Feb
       Apr   18/870    4/9/1910     6, 7     1910    Mar, Q.1
       May   18/874    5/7/1910     7        1910    Apr
       Jun   18/879    6/11/1910    8        1910    May
       Jul   18/882    7/2/1910     7        1910    Jun
       Aug   18/887    8/6/1910     6        1910    Jul
       Sep   18/892    9/10/1910    6        1910    Aug
       Oct   18/896    10/8/1910    5, 6     1910    Q.3, Sep
       Nov   18/900    11/5/1910    6        1910    Oct
       Dec   18/904    12/3/1910    6        1910    Nov

1911   Jan   19/909    1/7/1911     14, 16   1911    Y 1910, Dec
       Feb   19/913    2/4/1911     7        1911    Jan
       Mar   19/917    3/4/1911     7        1911    Feb
       Apr   19/922    4/8/1911     7, 9     1911    Mar, Q.1
       May   19/926    5/6/1911     7        1911    Apr
       Jun   19/930    6/3/1911     9        1911    May
       Jul   19/936    7/15/1911    9        1911    Jun, Q.2
       Aug   19/939    8/5/1911     9        1911    Jul
       Sep   19/944    9/9/1911     9        1911    Aug
       Oct   19/949    10/14/1911   9        1911    Sep
       Nov   19/952    11/4/1911    9        1911    Oct
       Dec   19/957    12/9/1911    9        1911    Nov

1912   Jan   20/962    1/13/1912    8        1911    Dec
       Feb   20/965    2/3/1912     9        1911    Jan
       Mar   20/970    3/9/1912     9        1911    Feb
       Apr   20/975    4/13/1912    10       1911    Mar
       May   20/978    5/4/1912     9        1912    Apr
       Jun   20/983    6/8/1912     10       1912    May
       Jul   20/988    7/13/1912    9, 10    1912    Jun, Q.2
       Aug   20/991    8/3/1912     9        1912    Jul
       Sep   20/996    9/7/1912     9        1912    Aug
       Oct   20/1001   10/12/1912   9        1912    Sep, Q. 3
       Nov   20/1004   11/2/1912    9        1912    Oct
       Dec   20/1009   12/7/1912    9        1912    Nov

1913   Jan   21/1014   1/11/1913    9        1912    Dec
       Feb   21/1018   2/8/1913     10       1913    Jan
       Mar   21/1022   3/8/1913     16       1913    Feb
       Apr   21/1027   4/12/1913    8        1913    Mar
       May   21/1030   5/3/1913     8        1913    Apr
       Jun   21/1035   6/7/1913     8        1913    May
       Jul   21/1040   7/12/1913    9        1913    Jun, Q.2
       Aug   21/1044   8/9/1913     9        1913    Jul




                                             101
Appendix 1 (continued)

Data Reported in                                 Initial Release for
Year Month Vol/#         Date         Page       Year Month

1913   Sep     21/1048   9/6/1913     9          1913    Aug
       Oct     21/1053   10/11/1913   8, 9       1913    Sep, Q. 3
       Nov     21/1057   11/8/1913    9          1913    Oct
       Dec     21/1061   12/6/1913    9          1913    Nov

1914 Jan      22/1067 1/17/1914        9         1913    Dec
     Feb      22/1070 2/7/1914         9         1914    Jan
     Mar      22/1074 3/7/1914         9         1914    Feb
     Apr      22/1078 4/4/1914         9         1914    Mar
     May      22/1083 5/9/1914         7         1914    Apr
     June     22/1087 6/6/1914         3         1914    May
     Jul      22/1093 7/18/1914        7         1914    June, Q.2
     Aug      22/1096 8/8/1914         7         1914    Jul
     Sep      22/1100 9/5/1914         7         1914    Aug
     Oct      22/1105 10/10/1914 8               1914    Sep, Q.3
     Nov      22/1109 11/7/1914        9         1914    Oct
     Dec      22/1113 12/5/1914        9         1914    Nov
  November erroneously labeled October

1915   Jan     23/1117   1/9/1915     19, 21     1914    Y 1914, Dec
       Feb               2/6/1915     10         1915    Jan
       Mar               3/6/1915     9          1915    Feb
       Apr               4/3/1915     9, 10      1915    Q. 1, Mar
       May               5/8/1915     9          1915    Apr
       Jun               6/5/1915     9          1915    May
       Jul               7/10/1915    8          1915    Q.2, Jun
       Aug               8/7/1915     3          1915    Jul
       Sep               9/4/1915     8          1915    Aug
       Oct               10/9/1915    7, 8       1915    Sep, Q.3
       Nov               11/6/1915    8          1915    Oct
       Dec               12/4/1915    9          1915    Nov

1916   Jan               1/8/1916     19, 21     1915    Y 1915, Dec
       Feb               2/5/1916     8          1916    Jan
       Mar               3/4/1916     9          1916    Feb
       Apr               4/8/1916     6          1916    Q.1, Mar
       May               5/6/1916     9          1916    Apr
       Jun               6/8/1916     8          1916    May
       Jul               7/8/1916     6          1916    Q.2, Jun
       Aug               8/5/1916     8          1916    Jul
       Sep               9/2/1916     9          1916    Aug
       Oct               10/7/1916    6, 26      1916    Q.3, Sep
       Nov               11/4/1916    7          1916    Oct
       Dec               12/2/1916    5          1916    Nov

1917   Jan               1/6/1917       17          1917 Dec, Y 1916
       Feb               2/3/1917       8           1917 Jan
Notes: Volume Issue numbers are not published f rom 1915 to 1918




                                                  102
Appendix 1 (continued)

Data Reported in                           Initial Release for
Year Month Vol/#       Date         Page   Year Month

1917   Mar             3/3/1917     8      1917    Feb
       Apr             4/7/1917     7      1917    Mar, Q.1
       May             5/5/1917     9      1917    Apr
       Jun             6/2/1917     9      1917    May
       Jul             7/14/1917    8      1917    June, Q.2
       Aug             8/4/1917     7      1917    Jul
       Sep             9/8/1917     8      1917    Aug
       Oct             10/13/1917   21     1917    Sep, Q.3
       Nov             11/3/1917    9      1917    Oct
       Dec             12/8/1917    9      1917    Nov

1918   Jan             1/5/1918     17     1917    Dec, Y 1917
       Feb             2/2/1918     8      1918    Jan
       Mar             3/2/1918     8      1918    Feb
       Apr             4/6/1918     7      1918    Mar, Q.1
       May             5/4/1918     5      1918    Apr
       Jun             6/8/1918     9      1918    May
       Jul             7/18/1918    8      1918    Jun
       Aug             8/3/1918     8      1918    Jul
       Sep             9/7/1918     8      1918    Aug
       Oct             10/12/1918   8      1918    Sep, Q.3
       Nov             11/9/1918    7      1918    Oct
       Dec             12/7/1918    7      1918    Nov

1919   Jan   27/1327 1/11/1919      8      1916    Y 1918, Dec
       Feb   27/1331 2/8/1919       8      1916    Jan
       Mar   27/1335 3/8/1919       8      1916    Feb
       Apr   27/1340 4/12/1919      8      1916    Q.1, Mar
       May   27/1343 5/3/1919       8      1916    Apr
       Jun   27/1348 6/7/1919       8      1916    May
       Jul   27/1353 7/12/1919      8      1916    Q.2, Jun
       Aug   27/1357 8/9/1919       8      1916    Jul
       Sep   27/1361 9/6/1919       8      1916    Aug
       Oct   Missing from the Volume
       Nov   Missing from the Volume
       Dec   27/1367 12/6/1919      8      1916    Nov

1920   Jan   28/1372   1/10/1920    14     1920    Dec
       Feb   28/1376   2/7/1920     8      1920    Jan
       Mar   28/1380   3/6/1920     8      1920    Feb
       Apr   28/1385   4/10/1920    10     1920    Mar, Q.1
       May   28/1389   5/8/1920     10     1920    Apr
       Jun   28/1393   6/5/1920     8      1920    May
       Jul   28/1398   7/10/1920    8      1920    Jun, Q.2
       Aug   28/1402   8/7/1920     8      1920    Jul
       Sep   28/1406   9/4/1920     8      1920    Aug




                                           103
Appendix 1 (continued)

Data Reported in                             Initial Release for
Year Month Vol/#        Date         Page    Year Month

1920   Oct    28/1412   10/16/1920   9       1920    Sep, Q.3
       Nov    28/1415   11/6/1920    8       1920    Oct
       Dec    28/1419   12/4/1920    8       1920    Nov

1921   Jan    28/1423   1/8/1921     21      1921    Dec, Y 1920
       Feb    29/1428   2/5/1921     9       1921    Jan
       Mar    29/1432   3/5/1921     9       1921    Feb
       Apr    29/1438   4/16/1921    9       1921    Mar, Q.1
       May    29/1441   5/7/1921     8       1921    Apr
       Jun    29/1445   6/4/1921     8       1921    May
       July   29/1451   7/16/1921    8       1921    Jun, Q.2
       Aug    29/1454   8/6/1921     8       1921    Jul
       Sep    29/1458   9/3/1921     8       1921    Aug
       Oct    29/1464   10/15/1921   8       1921    Sep
       Nov    29/1467   11/5/1921    8       1921    Oct
       Dec    29/1471   12/2/1921    8       1921    Nov

1922   Jan    30/1476   1/7/1922     19      1921    Dec, Y 1921
       Feb    30/1480   2/4/1922     10      1922    Jan
       Mar    30/1484   3/4/1922     9       1922    Feb
       Apr    30/1490   4/15/1922    9       1922    Mar, Q.1
       May    30/1493   5/6/1922     8       1922    Apr
       Jun    30/1498   6/10/1922    8       1922    May
       Jul    30/1503   7/15/1922    11      1922    Jun, Q.2
       Aug    30/1507   8/12/1922    8       1922    Jul
       Sep    30/1511   9/9/1922     8       1922    Aug
       Oct    30/1517   10/21/1922   8       1922    Sep
       Nov    30/1520   11/11/1922   8       1922    Oct
       Dec    30/1524   12/9/1922    8       1922    Nov

1923   Jan    31/1529   1/13/1923    20      1922    Dec, Y 1922
       Feb    31/1533   2/10/1923    8       1923    Jan
       Mar    31/1537   3/10/1933    8       1923    Feb
       Apr    31/1542   4/14/1923    9       1923    Mar, Q.1.
       May    31/1545   5/5/1923     8       1923    Apr
       Jun    31/1550   6/9/1923     8       1923    May
       Jul    31/1555   7/14/1923    8       1923    Jun
       Aug    31/1558   8/4/1923     8       1923    Jul
       Sep    31/1563   9/8/1923     8       1923    Aug
       Oct    31/1568   10/13/1923   9       1923    Sep, Q.3
       Nov    31/1571   11/3/1923    9       1923    Oct
       Dec    31/1576   12/8/1923    9       1923    Nov

1924   Jan    32/1581   1/12/1924    10,27   1923    Y 1923. Dec
       Feb    32/1585   2/9/1924     9       1924    Jan
       Mar    32/1589   3/8/1924     9       1924    Feb




                                             104
Appendix 1 (continued)

Data Reported in                           Initial Release for
Year Month Vol/#       Date         Page   Year Month

1924   Apr   32/1594   4/12/1924    19     1924    Mar, Q.1
       May   32/1597   5/3/1924     8      1924    Apr
       Jun   32/1602   6/7/1924     8      1924    May
       Jul   32/1607   7/12/1924    8, 9   1924    Jun, Q.2.
       Aug   32/1611   8/9/1924     10     1924    Jul
       Sep   32/1615   9/6/1924     10     1924    Aug
       Oct   32/1620   10/11/1924   8, 9   1924    Sep, Q.3
       Nov   32/1624   11/8/1924    10     1924    Oct
       Dec   32/1628   12/6/1924    10     1924    Nov

1925   Jan   33/1633   1/10/1925    9      1924    Dec, Y 1924
       Feb   33/1637   2/7/1925     8      1925    Jan
       Mar   33/1641   3/7/1925     8      1925    Feb
       Apr   33/1646   4/11/1925    8, 9   1925    Mar, Q.1
       May   33/1650   5/9/1925     8      1925    Apr
       Jun   33/1654   6/6/1925     7      1925    May
       Jul   33/1659   7/11/1925    8,9    1925    Jun, Q.2
       Aug   33/1663   8/8/1925     8      1925    Jul
       Sep   33/1667   9/5/1925     8      1925    Aug
       Oct   33/1672   10/10/1925   8, 9   1925    Sep, Q.3
       Nov   33/1676   11/7/1925    8      1925    Oct
       Dec   33/1680   12/5/1925    7      1925    Nov

1926   Jan   34/1685   1/9/1925     25     1925    Y 1925, Dec
       Feb   34/1690   2/13/1926    8      1926    Jan
       Mar   34/1693   3/6/1926     8      1926    Feb
       Apr   34/1699   4/17/1926    7      1926    Mar
       May   34/1702   5/8/1926     8      1926    Apr
       Jun   34/1706   6/5/1926     8      1926    May
       Jul   34/1711   7/10/1926    8      1926    Jun
       Aug   34/1715   8/7/1926     8      1926    Jul
       Sep   34/1719   9/4/1926     8      1926    Aug
       Oct   34/1725   10/16/1926   8      1926    Sep
       Nov   34/1728   11/6/1926    8      1926    Oct
       Dec   34/1732   12/4/1926    8      1926    Nov

1927   Jan   35/1737   1/8/1927     25     1926    Y 1926, Dec
       Feb   35/1741   2/5/1927     8      1927    Jan
       Mar   35/1745   3/5/1927     8      1927    Feb
       Apr   35/1750   4/9/1927     8      1927    Mar
       May   35/1754   5/7/1927     8      1927    Apr
       Jun   35/1758   6/4/1927     8      1927    May
       Jul   35/1763   7/9/1927     8      1927    Jun
       Aug   35/1767   8/6/1927     8      1927    Jul
       Sep   35/1771   9/3/1927     8      1927    Aug
       Oct   35/1776   108/1927     8      1927    Sep




                                           105
Appendix 1 (continued)

Data Reported in                                 Initial Release for
Year Month Vol/#         Date         Page       Year Month

1927   Nov     35/1780   11/5/1927    8          1927    Oct
       Dec     35/1785   12/10/1927   8          1927    Nov

1928   Jan               1/14/1928    23         1927    Dec, Y 1927
       Feb               2/11/1928    8          1928    Jan
       Mar               3/10/1928    8          1928    Feb
       Apr               4/7/1928     8          1928    Mar, Q.1
       May               5/5/1928     8          1928    Apr
       Jun               6/9/1928     8          1928    May
       July              7/9/1928     8          1928    Jun
       Aug               8/14/1928    8          1928    Jul
       Sep               9/8/1928     8          1928    Aug
       Oct               10/6/1928    8          1928    Sep
       Nov               11/10/1928   8          1928    Oct
       Dec               12/8/1928    8          1928    Nov

1929   Jan               1/12/1929    10         1928    Dec, Y 1928
       Feb               2/9/1929     8          1929    Jan
       Mar               3/9/1929     8          1929    Feb
       Apr               4/6/1929     8          1929    Mar
       May               5/4/1929     8          1929    Apr
       Jun               6/8/1929     8          1929    May
       Jul               7/6/1929     8          1929    Jun
       Aug               8/10/1929    8          1929    Jul
       Sep               9/7/1929     8          1929    Aug
       Oct               10/5/1929    8          1929    Sep
       Nov               11/9/1929    8          1929    Oct
       Dec               12/7/1929    8          1929    Nov

1930   Jan     38/1894   1/11/1930    10         1929    Dec, Y 1929
       Feb     38/1898   2/8/1930     8          1930    Jan
       Mar     38/1902   3/8/1930     8          1930    Feb
       Apr     38/1906   4/5/1930     8          1930    Mar
       May     38/1911   5/10/1930    8          1930    Apr
       Jun     38/1915   6/7/1930     8          1930    May
       Jul     38/1920   7/12/1930    8          1930    Jun
       Aug     38/1924   8/9/1930     8          1930    Jul
       Sep     38/1929   9/13/1930    8          1930    Aug
       Oct     38/1934   10/18/1930   8          1930    Sep
       Nov     38/1937   11/8/1930    8          1930    Oct
       Dec     38/1941   12/6/1930    8          1930    Nov

1931   Jan      39/1946 1/10/1931       21          1930 Dec, Y 1930
       Feb      39/1951 2/14/1931       14          1931 Jan
       Mar      39/1955 3/14/1931       10          1931 Feb
       Apr      39/1959 4/11/1931       8           1931 Mar
Notes: Volume issue numbers are not published from 1928 to 1929




                                                  106
Appendix 1 (continued)

Data Reported in                                   Initial Release for
Year Month Vol/#          Date           Page      Year Month

1931   May      39/1963   5/9/1931       12        1931     Apr
       Jun
       Jul      39/1973   7/18/1931      2         1931     Jun
       Aug      39/1976   8/8/1931       6         1931     Jul
       Sep      39/1981   9/12/9131      3         1931     Aug
       Oct      39/1985   10/10/1931     2         1931     Sep
       Nov      39/1989   11/7/1931      2         1931     Oct
       Dec      39/1993   12/5/1931      3         1931     Nov

1932   Jan      40/1999   1/16/1932      3, 24     1931     Dec, Y 1931
       Feb      40/2004   2/20/1932      3         1932     Jan
       Mar      40/2009   3/26/1932      3         1932     Feb
       Apr      40/2011   4/9/1932       18        1932     Mar
       May      40/2016   5/14/1932      9         1932     Apr
       Jun      40/2021   6/18/1932      3         1932     May
       Jul      40/2025   7/16/1932      13        1932     Jun
       Aug      40/2030   8/20/1932      7         1932     Jul
       Sep      40/2034   9/17/1932      7         1932     Aug
       Oct      40/2038   10/15/1932     7         1932     Sep
       Nov      40/2042   11/12/1932     7         1932     Oct
       Dec      40/2046   12/10/1932     7         1932     Nov

1933   Jan      41/2051 1/14/1933        7         1933     Dec
       Feb      41/2055 2/11/1933        7         1933     Jan
       Mar      41/2059 3/11/1933        11        1933     Feb
       Apr      41/2061 4/12/1933        12-13     1933     Mar
              Tables not published from May-December 1933

1934   Jan      42/2070 1/1934           24, 27    1933     Dec, Y 1933
       Feb      42/2071 2/1934           21        1934     Jan
       Mar      42/2072 3/1934           21        1934     Feb
       Apr         Data not published.
       May      42/2074 5/1934           26        1934     Apr
       June     42/2075 6/1934           20        1934     May
       July     42/2076 7/1934           30        1934     Jun
       Aug      42/2077 8/1934           19        1934     Jul
       Sep      42/2078 9/1934           21        1934     Aug
       Oct         Data not published.
       Nov         Data not published.
       Dec      42/2081 12/1934          20        1934     Nov

1935   Jan         Data not published from Dec 1934 and Y. 1934
       Feb      43/2083 2/1935           20         1935 Jan
       Mar      43/2084 3/1935           24         1935 Feb
       Apr         Data not published.
       May      42/2074 5/1934           26         1934 Apr




                                                    107
Appendix 1 (continued)

Data Reported in                          Initial Release for
Year Month Vol/#        Date      Page    Year Month

1935   Jun    43/2087   6/1935    22      1935    May
       Jul    43/2088   7/1935    21      1935    Jun
       Aug    43/2089   8/1935    27      1935    Jul
       Sep    43/2090   9/1935    23      1935    Aug
       Oct    43/2091   10/1935   22      1935    Sep
       Nov    43/2092   11/1935   32      1935    Oct
       Dec    43/2093   12/1935   26      1935    Nov

1936   Jan      44/2094 1/1936    33,36   1935    Y 1935, Dec
       Feb      44/2095 2/1936    22      1936    Jan
       Mar      44/2096 3/1936    17      1936    Feb
       Tables are discontinued




                                          108
Appendix 2. Dun’s Data on Bankruptcy by Divisions of industry: Dates, Sources, Notes
Data Reported in                                      Initial Release for
Year Month Vol/#           Date           Page        Year Month

1932   Mar      40/2008 3/19/1932        3          1932 Jan, Feb
       Apr      40/2012 4/15/1932        3          1932 Mar
       May      40/2017 5/21/1932        3          1932 Apr
       June     40/2022 6/25/1932        4          1932 May
       Jul      40/2027 7/30/1932        13         1932 Jun
       Aug      40/2031 8/27/1932        7          1932 Jul
       Sep      40/2035 9/24/1932        7          1932 Aug
In August 1932 Trading Divisions are Split into Wholesalers and Retailers
       Oct      40/2039 10/22/1932 15               1932 Sep
       Nov      40/2043 11/19/1932 7                1932 Oct
       Dec      40/2047 12/17/1932 7                1932 Nov

1933  Jan     41/2052 1/21/1933       14              1933    Dec
      Feb     41/2056 2/18/1933       7               1933    Jan
      Mar     41/2060 3/18/1933       10              1933    Feb
      Apr     41/2061 4/12/1933       12-13           1933    Mar
Monthly Reviews are now published onwards
      May     41/2062 5/1933          24              1933    Apr
      Jun     41/2063 6/1933          28              1933    May
      Jul     41/2064 7/1933          25              1933    Jun
      Aug     41/2065 8/1933          26              1933    Jul
      Sep     41/2066 9/1933          21              1933    Aug
      Oct     41/2067 10/1933         27              1933    Sep
      Nov     41/2068 11/1933         26              1933    Oct
      Dec     41/2069 12/1933         26              1933    Nov

1934   Jan      42/2070    1/1934         24          1933    Dec
       Feb      42/2071    2/1934         22          1934    Jan
       Mar      42/2072    3/1934         22          1934    Feb
       Apr      42/2073    4/1934         26          1934    Mar
       May      42/2074    5/1934         227         1934    Apr
       Jun      42/2075    6/1934          23         1934    May
       Jul      42/2076    7/1934         31          1934    Jun
       Aug      42/2077    8/1934         23          1934    Jul
       Sep      42/2078    9/1934          23         1934    Aug
       Oct      42/2079    10/1934        21          1934    Sep
       Nov      42/2080    11/1934        24          1934    Oct
       Dec      42/2081    12/1934        21          1934    Nov

1935   Jan      43/2082    1/1935         21          1934    Dec
       Feb      43/2083    2/1935         21          1935    Jan
       Mar      43/2084    3/1935         25          1935    Feb
       Apr      43/2085    4/1935         25          1935    Mar
       May      43/2086    5/1935         23          1935    Apr
       Jun      43/2087    6/1935         23          1935    May
       Jul      43/2088    7/1935         23          1935    Jun
       Aug      43/2089    8/1935         28          1935    Jul




                                                       109
Appendix 2 (continued)

Data Reported in                         Initial Release for
Year Month Vol/#       Date       Page   Year Month

1935   Sep   43/2090   9/1935     24     1935    Aug
       Oct   43/2091   10/1935    23     1935    Sep
       Nov   43/2092   11/1935    33     1935    Oct
       Dec   43/2093   12/1935    27     1935    Nov

1936   Jan   44/2094   1/1936     37     1935    Dec
       Feb   44/2095   2/1936     21     1936    Jan
       Mar   44/2096   3/1936     17     1936    Feb
       Apr   44/2097   4/1936     22     1936    Mar
       May   44/2098   5/1936     20     1936    Apr
       Jun   44/2099   6/1936     17     1936    May
       Jul   44/2100   7/1936     21     1936    Jun
       Aug   44/2101   8/1936     29     1936    Jul
       Sep   44/2102   9/1936     22     1936    Aug
       Oct   44/2103   10/1936    11     1936    Sep
       Nov   44/2104   11/1936    12     1936    Oct
       Dec   44/2105   12/1936    11     1937    Nov

1937   Jan   Not published
       Feb              2/1937    37      1936    Dec
       Mar              3/1937    36      1937    Jan
       Apr              4/1937    34      1937    Feb
       May              5/1937    34      1937    Mar
       Jun              6/1937    34      1937    Apr
       Jul              7/1937    34      1937    May
       Aug              8/1937    36      1937    Jun
       Sep              9/1937    48     1937    Jul
       Oct              10/1937   36     1937    Aug
       Nov              11/1937   38     1937    Sep
       Dec              12/1937   36     1937    Oct

1938   Jan             1/1938     38     1937    Nov
       Feb             2/1938     40     1937    Dec
       Mar             3/1938     22     1938    Jan
       Apr             4/1938     38     1938    Feb
       May             5/1938     40     1938    Mar
       Jun             6/1938     36     1938    Apr

1939   Jan             1/1939     36     1938    Nov
       Feb             2/1939     36     1938    Dec
       Mar             3/1939     46     1939    Jan
       Apr             4/1939     40     1939    Feb
       May             5/1939     48     1939    Mar
       Jun             6/1939     38     1939    Apr
       Jul             7/1939     40     1939    May
       Aug             8/1939     38     1939    Jun
       Sep             9/1939     39     1939    Jul




                                          110
Appendix 2 (continued)

Data Reported in                     Initial Release for
Year Month Vol/#    Date      Page   Year Month

1939   Oct          10/1939   40     1939    Aug
       Nov          11/1939   34     1939    Sep
       Dec          12/1939   40     1939    Oct

1940   Jan          1/1940    41     1939    Nov
       Feb          2/1940    42     1939    Dec
       Mar          3/1940    40     1940    Jan
       Apr          4/1940    34     1940    Feb
       May          5/1940    22     1940    Mar
       Jun          6/1940    36     1940    Apr
       Jul          7/1940    36     1940    May
       Aug          8/1940    42     1940    Jun
       Sep          9/1940    34     1940    Jul
       Oct          10/1940   38     1940    Aug
       Nov          11/1940   47     1940    Sep
       Dec          12/1940   46     1940    Oct

1941   Jan          1/1941    42     1940    Nov
       Feb          2/1941    44     1940    Dec




                                     111
Appendix 3. Dun’s Data: Number of 77B Applicants: Data, Sources, Notes

Data Reported in                                    Initial Release for    Notes
Year Month Vol/#           Date          Page       Year Month

1935   Jul      43/2088    7/1935        23         1935    Jun           Jun 1934, 35
       Aug      43/2089    8/1935        24         1935    Jul           Jul 1934, 35
       Sep      43/2090    9/1935        20         1935    Aug           Aug 1934, 35
       Oct      43/2091    10/1935       18         1935    Sep           Sep 1934, 35
       Nov      43/2092    11/1935       27         1935    Oct           Oct 1934, 35
       Dec      43/2093    12/1935       23         1935    Nov           Nov 1934, 35

1936   Jan      44/2094    1/1936        29         1935    Dec           Dec 1934, 35
       Feb      44/2095    2/1936        26         1936    Jan           Jan 1935, 36
       Mar      44/2096    3/1936        20         1936    Feb            Feb 1935, 36
       Apr      44/2097    4/1936        19         1936    Mar           Mar 1935, 36
       May      44/2098    5/1936        17         1936    Apr           Apr 1935, 36
       Jun      44/2099    6/1936        13         1936    May           May 1935, 36
       Jul      44/2100    7/1936        17         1936    Jun           Jun 1935, 36
       Aug      44/2101    8/1936        25         1936    Jul           Jul 1935, 36
       Sep      44/2102    9/1936        17         1936    Aug           Aug 1935, 1936.
       Oct      44/2103    10/1936       21         1936    Sep           Sep 1935, 36
       Nov      44/2104    11/1936       17         1936    Oct           Oct 1935, 36
       Dec      44/2105    12/1936       16         1937    Nov           Nov 1935, 36

1937   Jan      Month missing from volume
       Feb               2/1937        40           1936    Dec
       Mar               3/1937        38           1937    Jan
       Apr               4/1937        36           1937    Feb
       May               5/1937        36           1937    Mar
       Jun               6/1937        36           1937    Apr
       Jul               7/1937        36           1937    May
       Aug               8/1937        38           1937    Jun
       Sep               9/1937        50           1937    Jul
       Oct               10/1937       38           1937    Aug
       Nov               11/1937       40           1937    Sep
       Dec               12/1937       38           1937    Oct

1938    Jan                1/1938        38         1937 Nov
        Feb                2/1938        39         1937 Dec
        Mar                3/1938        22         1938 Jan
        Apr                4/1938        38         1938 Feb
        May                5/1938        39         1938 Mar
        Jun                6/1938        36         1938 Apr
        Jul                7/1938        34         1938 May
        Aug                8/1938        39         1938 Jun
        Sep                9/1938        43         1938 Jul
Revision of the National Bankruptcy Act has eliminated section 77B; 77B data has been
discontinued




                                                      112
References

Clark, Victor S. (1929). History of Manufactures in the United States vol.1-3. New York.

Ellwick, George (1843). The bankrupt directory: being a complete register of all the bankrupts,
       with their residences, trades, and dates when they appeared in the London gazette, from
       December 1820 to April 1843. Simpkin.

Hutchinson, Ruth G., Arthur R. Hutchinson, and Mabel Newcomer (1938), "A Study in Business
       Mortality: Length of Life of Business Enterprises in Poughkeepsie, New York, 1843 –
       1936", American Economic Review 28, 3, pp.497 – 514

Kim, Duol (2003a), Firm Financing, Ownership Structure, and Market Competition in United
      States Manufacturing during the Nineteenth Century, Ph.D. Dissertation, UCLA

Madison, James H. (1974), "The Evolution of Commercial Credit Reporting Agencies in 19th
      Century America", Business History Review 48 no.2, pp.164-186

Madison, James H. (1975), "The Credit Reports of R.G.Dun & Co. as Historical Source",
      Historical Methods Newsletter

Moore, Geoffrey H., ed. (1961), Business Cycle Indicators: Contributions to the Analysis of
      Current Business Conditions, vol.I, II (Princeton: Princeton University Press)

Norris, James D. (1978), R.G.Dun & Co. 1841-1900: The Development of Credit-Reporting in
        the Nineteenth Century (Connecticut)

Olegario, Rowena. (2001), "Institution and Markets: U.S. Credit Reporting in Historical
       Perspective", mimeo

Orphanides, Athanasios, Richard Porter, David Reifschneider, Robert Tetlow and Frederico
        Finan (2000). "Errors in the Measurement of the Output Gap and the Design of
        Monetary Policy", Journal of Economics and Business, 52(1/2), 117-141,
        January/April.

Orphanides, Athanasios. (2001) “Monetary Policy Rules Based on Real-Time Data.” American
        Economic Review, 91(4), 964-985, September 2001.

Sutch, Richard (2006). “ Business incorporations and failures – number and liabilities: 1857-
         1998 .” Table Ch408-413 in Historical Statistics of the United States, Earliest Times to
         the Present: Millennial Edition, edited by Susan B. Carter, Scott Sigmund Gartner,
         Michael R. Haines, Alan L. Olmstead, Richard Sutch, and Gavin Wright. New York:
         Cambridge University Press. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/ISBN-9780511132971.Ch293-
         415




                                              113
Simpson, Paul and Paul S. Anderson (1957). “Liabilities of Business Failures as a Business
      Indicator.” The Review of Economics and Statistics Vol. 39, No. 2 (May, 1957), pp. 193-
      199.

U.S. Department of Commerce (1975), Historical Statistics of the United States: Colonial Times
       to 1970.

U.S. Department of Commerce (1975), Historical Statistics of the United States: Colonial Times
       to 1970.

Warren, Charles (1935), Bankruptcy in the United States. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Zarnowitz, Victor (1992), Business Cycles: Theory, History, Indicators, and Forecasting.
      Chicago: University of Chicago Press.




                                              114
