                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               ADOPTIVE EXPECTATIONS:
                        RISING SONS IN JAPANESE FAMILY FIRMS

                                        Vikas Mehrotra
                                         Randall Morck
                                        Jungwook Shim
                                    Yupana Wiwattanakantang

                                       Working Paper 16874
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w16874


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2011

We are grateful for helpful comments from Joseph Fan, Masaharu Hanazaki, Katsuyuki Kubo, Rafael
La Porta, Alice Nakamura, Seki Obata, Hernán Ortiz-Molina, Hugh Patrick, Juro Teranishi sensei,
Belen Villalonga, Bernard Yeung, and from seminar and conference participants at the University
of Alberta, the University of Calgary, the Chinese University of Hong Kong, Columbia University,
Dartmouth’s Tuck Business School, Hitotsubashi University, IIM-Bangalore, the Indian School of
Business, Kobe University, Kyoto University, London School of Economics, London Business School,
the University of Lugano, the National University of Singapore, Osaka University, Purdue University,
the 2010 Western Finance Association meetings in Victoria, and the 2010 NBER summer workshop
in corporate finance. We acknowledge financial support from the Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research
(the grant number 18203022) provided by the Japanese Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science
and Technology (MEXT), the Murata Foundation, the Japanese Bankers Association Foundation, the
Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council, and the Ishii Memorial Securities Research Promotion
Foundation. All remaining errors are the authors’ responsibility. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Vikas Mehrotra, Randall Morck, Jungwook Shim, and Yupana Wiwattanakantang. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Adoptive Expectations: Rising Sons in Japanese Family Firms
Vikas Mehrotra, Randall Morck, Jungwook Shim, and Yupana Wiwattanakantang
NBER Working Paper No. 16874
March 2011
JEL No. G3,J12,N25

                                              ABSTRACT

The practice of adopting adults, even if one has biological children, makes Japanese family firms unusually
competitive. Our nearly population-wide panel of postwar listed nonfinancial firms shows inherited
family firms more important in postwar Japan than generally realized, and also performing well –
an unusual finding for a developed economy. Adopted heirs’ firms outperform blood heirs’ firms,
and match or nearly match founder-run listed firms. Both adopted and blood heirs’ firms outperform
non-family firms. Using family structure variables as instruments, we find adopted heirs “causing”
elevated performance. These findings are consistent with adult adoptees displacing blood heirs in the
left tail of the talent distribution, with the “adopted son” job motivating star managers, and with the
threat of displacement inducing blood heirs to invest in human capital, mitigating the so-called “Carnegie
conjecture” that inherited wealth deadens talent.


Vikas Mehrotra                                       Jungwook Shim
University of Alberta                                Business School
School of Business                                   National University of Singapore
Edmonton, AB, Canada T6G2R6                          Mochtar Riady Building
vmehrotr@ualberta.ca                                 Singapore 119245
                                                     bspv11@nus.edu.sg
Randall Morck
Faculty of Business                                  Yupana Wiwattanakantang
University of Alberta                                Business School
Edmonton, AB T6G 2R6                                 National University of Singapore
CANADA                                               BIZ 1 2-7, 15 Kent Ridge Drive
and NBER                                             Singapore 119245
randall.morck@ualberta.ca                            bizyw@nus.edu.sg
                    You can’t choose your sons, but you can choose your sons-in-law.

                                                               Adage explaining why Japanese business
                                                                   families rejoice at the birth of a girl1

1.      Introduction
If talent and intelligence were reliably inherited, biologically or environmentally, family firms
should dominate economic activity. However, such traits are, at most, unreliably passed along
(Herrnstein and Murray 1994; Heckman1995). Moreover, restricting the top job to family truncates
non-family executives’ career options, inducing an adverse selection problem in the hiring and
retention of outsiders (Aronoff and Ward 2000) and limiting the efficacy of CEO tournaments in
eliciting lower-level executives’ effort (Lazear and Rosen 1981; Demsetz 1996; Frank and Cook
1996). Perhaps most damning, the US Gilded Age tycoon Andrew Carnegie (1899) famously
conjectures that inherited wealth “generally deadens the talents and energies” – a premise
supported in US tax data (Holtz-Eakin et al. 1993). Given this threefold competitive disadvantage,
the wisdom of the Chinese proverb “wealth shall not pass to a third generation” follows.
         The benefits of entrusting corporate governance to business families are less definitive.
Theses that family firms excel at long-term thinking or lessen agency conflicts lack empirical
support (Bertrand and Schoar 2006). Rather, the evidence suggests that family control is a feasible
second best solution around dysfunctional institutions, such as weak shareholder rights (La Porta
et al. 1999; Burkart, Panunzi and Shleifer 2003) or widespread corruption (Khanna and Palepu
2000; Khanna and Rivkin 2001), which correlate strongly with families dominating big business (La
Porta et al. 1999; Fogel 2007). Consistent with this, family firms generally perform better in less
developed economies (Khanna and Yafeh 2007) and worse in more developed economies
(Bennedsen et al. 2007; Morck, Wolfenzon, and Yeung 2005; Villalonga and Amit 2006).2
         Japan is a high-income economy with well-developed institutions (La Porta et al. 1997), and
its big businesses are generally described as professionally managed (Chandler 1977; Porter 1990).
However, using a panel of nearly all nonfinancial firms listed from 1949 (when stock markets
reopened) through 1970, and followed until 2000, we find inherited family control commonplace in
large Japanese businesses. Moreover, we show firms controlled by heirs to outperform otherwise
similar professionally managed firms. These results are highly robust and an analysis of succession
events suggests family control “causes” good performance, rather than the converse.
         To explain this seeming paradox, we highlight two unique facts about Japanese family
businesses. First, business families in Japan continue to practice a form of arranged marriage called
omiai (lit. arranged seeing), where the daughter meets an approved groom, selected by the
patriarch. Second, Japanese families may adopt adult sons if nature fails to provide a natural son, or
provides inadequate ones. Business families often select such sons from among their most
promising top managers (Chen 2004). The “new” son usually takes the family name in a legal
adoption process, swears allegiance to his new ancestors, and in most instances also marries a
daughter of the current patriarch – hence the family business adage above. Remarkably, Edo and
Osaka merchants traditionally celebrated a daughters’ birth with red rice to mark the creation of a
new space for an adopted son-in-law (Morikawa 1992).

1  Referenced, with minor differences in wording, by Esaka (2001, p. 263-269), Nomura (2006, p. 134), and
other major works on Japanese business families.
2  For a counter example to this generalization, see Sraer and Thesmar (2007), who find that between 1994
and 2000, family firms, including those run by descendents, outperform non-family firms listed on the Paris
bourse. They attribute the superior performance of family firms to lower labor costs, perhaps stemming from
a quid-pro-quo where family firms offer better job safety in return for lower wages.



                                                     2
         Adult adoptions are the predominant form of adoption in Japan, but are vanishingly rare
elsewhere in Asia and the West.3 This propensity to adopt highly successful adults, rather than
needy children, evokes stiff rebuke from foreign researchers and child advocates alike.4
         Adult adoption could invigorate Japanese family firms in several ways, which could explain
their persistence and prosperity. First, adult adoptions mitigate the suboptimal succession
problem: A family that draws an exceptionally untalented blood son can recover by adopting a
highly talented professional manager as a new son. This necessarily attenuates the lower talent tail
of observed heirs and broadens the upper tail. Second, unlike their peers in foreign family firms,
Japanese professional executives can aim for the top job of “son”, a prize not normally considered in
discussions of Western family firms. Finally, blood sons, knowing adopted adult sons can displace
them, dare not let their talents and energies be deadened. Just as the threat of a hostile takeover,
more than its actual occurrence spurs professional managers to efficiency; the threat of
displacement by a “better” son may well allay the Carnegie conjecture.
         We posit that these efficiency-enhancing effects explain the incidence and prosperity of
large old-money family firms in postwar Japan. More generally, these considerations raise the
possibility that arranged marriage norms might help professionalize family firms in other countries,
even absent adult adoptions. Consistent with this, Mehrotra et al. (2009) find sociological proxies
for the incidence of arranged marriage highly positively correlated with the prevalence of family
firms across countries. Finally, our findings linking firm performance to CEO characteristics
associated with talent complements work by Bertrand and Schoar (2003), Bennedsen et al. (2010),
and others linking management characteristics to firm policies and supports the basic theses that
CEO talent – variously associated with unique creativity (Schumpeter 1911), rationality (Knight
1921, c. 9), and foresight (Hayek (1941, 334) – is a scarce and valuable factor of production.
         The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2 describes Japanese
adoption practices and highlights their stark distinctions from those of other countries – Western
and Asian. Section 3 describes our data and variables; and section 4 contains our empirical test
results. Section 5 concludes.

2.      Family Firms and Japanese Traditions
Differences between Japan and other countries are easily exaggerated. However, Japan
unquestionably has a unique concept of adoption, and this provides a unique set of institutional
constraints around family firms.

2.1     Pitfalls of Dynastic Corporate Governance
Inherited corporate governance is subject to three fundamental problems: heirs who do not inherit
business acumen, truncated career incentives for non-family executives, and heirs whose
upbringing renders them unqualified.
         Leading a great business requires intelligence; though perhaps of a form different from the
general intelligence measured by IQ tests. Business acumen may depend on social or emotional
intelligence (Thorndike 1920; Payne 1983), and perhaps on other traits (Gardner 2007), any of

3  Adult adoptions were known in the ancient West. The “good emperors” – Nerva, Trajan, Hadrian, Antonius
Pius, and Marcus Aurelius – each an adopted son of his predecessor, ruled the Roman Empire from 96 to 180
A.D. – its longest span of good government (Gibbon, 1776, bk. 1 c. 1). The era ended when the stoic
philosopher, the Emperor Marcus Aurelius, could not bear disinheriting his biological son, the eponymous
Emperor Commodus, whose reign of terror ended with his assassination in 193 A.D.
4  See e.g. Hayes and Habu (2006), who describe the effect of adoptions on child welfare as “questionable” in
Japan.



                                                      3
which may complement general intelligence (Cote and Miners 2006). Business acumen, like other
human traits, is likely subject to “regression to the mean”. That is, outliers with extreme traits arise
occasionally, but each successive generation of the family’s progeny averages ever closer to the
global population mean (Galton, 1886). That is, general intelligence is, at most, only partially
inherited (Herrnstein and Murray 1994; Heckman 1995; Devlin et al. 1997), so it seems implausible
that business acumen would reliably run in families either.
         Another reason for positing a competitive disadvantage to hereditary corporate control
arises from work arguing that the CEO labor market is efficient in offering high compensation
premiums for slight edges in talent because this induces tournament competition for the top job
(Lazear and Rosen 1981; Demsetz 1996). This is relevant for two reasons. First, a small edge in CEO
talent, applied over the assets of a large firm, is plausibly an economically significant competitive
advantage for the firm (Frank and Cook 1996). Second, a tournament to become CEO elicits effort
from middle and lower-level executives who aspire to the top job. Restricting the pool of CEO
candidates to family should be costly on both counts: First, the most talented potential CEO in the
family is unlikely to be better than the most talented potential CEO in the population (consistent
with the model of family firms proposed by Burkart et al, 2003). Second, professional executives
working for the family firm are not eligible for the tournament, and their effort is correspondingly
lessened, or less aligned with the firm’s prosperity if ambitious executives must contemplate
moving to a non-family firm to have a shot at the top job.5
         A third reason for doubting the efficacy of dynastic corporate governance is the “Carnegie
conjecture.” Arguing that the wealthy should bequeath their fortunes to schools, libraries, parks,
music halls, and the like, the US steel tycoon Andrew Carnegie (1891) writes: “the parent who
leaves his son enormous wealth generally deadens the talents and energies of the son, and tempts
him to lead a less worthy and less useful life than he otherwise would.” Concluding that inherited
wealth is destructive to both the heir and society, Carnegie argues that those who accumulate great
fortunes have a duty to redistribute their wealth during their lifetimes to leave a legacy of elevated
social welfare.
         Empirical studies in developed economies generally find heir-controlled firms to
underperform significantly (Morck et al. 1988, 2000; Bertrand and Schoar 2006; Bennedsen et al.
2007; Villalonga and Amit 2006; Miller et al. 2007; and others). Studies to the contrary generally
use extremely broad definitions of “family firms” (Bertrand and Schoar 2006) – for example,
Anderson and Reeb (2003) number founder-controlled firms such as Berkshire Hathaway and
Microsoft among “family firms.” Inherited corporate control clearly “causes” depressed
performance because firms’ share prices drop immediately upon news of the CEO job passing to an
heir (Smith and Amoako-Adu 2005; Perez-Gonzalez 2006; and others). Holtz-Eakin et al. (1993)
find evidence supporting the “Carnegie conjecture” by inferring “deadening” from heirs’ US tax
returns before and after receiving legacies. Business historians Landes (1949) and Chandler (1977)
attribute some countries’ superior economic performance to their professionalized big business
sectors outpacing economies still relying on family firms.
         Family firms in developing economies, in contrast, often exhibit superior performance
(Khanna and Palepu 2000; Khanna and Rivkin 2001). This is attributed to a dearth of professional
managers, family connections substituting for dysfunctional markets, and the value of business
families’ reputational capital (Khanna and Yafeh 2007); or to leading business families’ political
connections (Morck et al. 2005). These findings, plus the more generally persistent dominance of
very large family firms in most economies, (La Porta et al. 1999; Landes 2006), suggest the


5  For example, Renault CEO Carlos Ghosn quit Michelin after it became clear a Michelin family member
would supersede him to head the firm’s North American operations. He was with the firm for 18 years (see
“Michelin Seeks Continuity after the Death of a Leader”, New York Times, May 29th, 2006.



                                                     4
existence of solutions to the pitfalls of inherited corporate governance enumerated above.
         The great Tokugawa era merchant families - the Mitsui and Sumitomo especially - found
workable solutions to these problems in adoptions, arranged marriages, and both (Morikawa
1992). Horie (1966) explains that “It was common practice in old Japan to adopt a son from other
families, without discrimination among relatives or non-relatives, and let him inherit the ie (house),
not only when the ie lacked lineal heirs, but even in case the heir lacked the capacity needed to
inherit the ie.” Kondo (1990) and Bhappu (2000) remark on the longevity of many Japanese family
firms, and link this to the practice of bringing adopted heirs into family successions. The practices
persist in our postwar sample: the following is but one of many examples.
         Kajima Construction, one of the largest construction businesses in the world, is a family firm
run by a succession of adopted heirs for three generations. Morinosuke Kajima, a son-in-law
adopted into the Kajima family, served as the first post-war CEO.6 He passed over his biological son
to name his two adopted sons CEO and Chairman. Both married Kajima’s biological daughters. Only
after the younger adopted son-in-law ascended from CEO to Chairman did Morinosuke’s biological
son of serve as CEO – and then more briefly than either adopted son.
         Adoption as a form of executive compensation is (as far as we know) a uniquely Japanese
practice and may differentiate its family businesses fundamentally from those in other countries.
Indeed, Chen (2004) argues that this point is “crucial to understanding the differences in
ownership, organization, and management” of business groups in Japan and Korea. Certainly, the
pay-for-performance dimension of becoming the next patriarch, and thus the steward of a vast
family fortune, is not usually included as executive compensation (Kubo 2005).
         However, arranged marriages feature in family businesses in many countries (James 2006;
Landes 2006). Becoming the patriarch’s son, and thus the next patriarch of a great family business,
is an immense reward for talent, but marrying into a powerful business family is a not
inconsequential reward as well. Arranged marriage might thus also help attenuate problems
associated with the uncertain inheritance of talent, blunted incentives for talented professional
managers, and even the Carnegie conjecture. Indeed, in many succession cases in Japan, a carefully
arranged marriage may beget a suitable son-in-law to assume the role of the head of the house in a
manner similar to an adopted son.7
         The general efficacy of arranged marriage in countering each of these problems is at present
unknown. Moreover, where the spread of Western cultural norms replaces the traditional arranged
marriage with “marriage for love”, family firms ought to be less viable. Consistent with this,
Mehrotra et al. (2009) find family businesses to be more import in countries with higher scores on
a set of sociological variables that they argue reflect the incidence of arranged marriages, and posit
that a secular decline in arranged marriage in many countries bodes ill for family firms as an
organizational form.

2.2 Japanese Adoption Practices
Adoption remains common in modern Japan. Paulson (1984) reports that 30% of her survey
respondents affirm that “an adoptee was among their relatives”. Comparative statistics are difficult
because many countries keep adoptions confidential, but Yamahata (1977) estimates adoption far
more popular in modern Japan than in any other country, with the possible exception of the United
States.
        Moreover, Japanese adoptions retain a distinctly mercantile ethos. While most U.S. adoptees

6   The Japanese term shacho is variously translated as president or CEO. We adopt the latter throughout.
7  Japanese adoption-cum-marriage is perhaps an extreme variant of matrilocal marriage, wherein married
couples reside with or near the wife’s family. Qing dynasty uxorilocal marriage let a son-in-law take the
family name of a sonless couple; but carried a severe social stigma (Lu 1998).



                                                       5
are children, Japanese adoptees are overwhelmingly adults. Based on the 2003 U.S. Census Bureau,
2.5% of all U.S. children in 2000 were adopted, possibly the highest rate in the world. In 2000 alone,
over 127,000 adoptions or 31.4 adoptions per 1000 births were recorded in the U.S. (Bernal et al.
2007; U.S. Census Bureau 2003). Excluding step-parent adoptions, Moriguchi (2010) estimates that
in 2000 there were 20.4 child adoptions per 1000 births in the U.S., compared to only 1.6 child
adoptions per 1000 births in Japan in the same year. Of the 80,790 adoptions reported in Japan in
2000, only 1,356 were of children; and of these 362 were by grandparents or step-parents. The
other 79,434 adoptions, 98% of the total, were of adults by adults.
         Since 1988, the law permits two forms of adoption (yôshi).8 One form, special adoption
(tokubetsu yôshi), resembles Western practices, and permanently transfers a child younger than six
(eight in certain foster care cases) to adoptive parents. This new, imported, and rarely used
procedure severs all legal links between the child and its biological parents, and is designed to
advance the welfare of a needy child (Hayes and Habu 2006). Japanese courts approve only a few
hundred each year: 521, 362, and 350 in 1995, 2000, and 2002, respectively.9
         The traditional form, now called ordinary adoption (yôshi engumi or fûtsu yôshi), remains far
more common. The adoptee is usually an adult male who, in return for an inheritance, agrees to
carry forward the adopting family’s name. Both parties to the adoption transaction must be over
fifteen, the age of consent, or court approval is required – except for adoptions of one’s
grandchildren or step-children (Civil Code §798). The adopted heir must also be at least a day
younger than the adoptive parent. Adoptees’ average age at adoption is over twenty, and the vast
majority of adoptions registered in Japan each year are between consenting adults (Bryant 1990, p.
300). Elsewhere, adult adoption is vanishingly rare (Kitsuse 1964).10 O'Halloran (2009) notes that
Japan’s “… continuing tradition of providing for the adoption of adults, is without any comparable
precedent among developed nations.”

                                              [Table 1 about here]

         Table 1 summarizes these patterns in adoptions through the postwar period. More recent
statistics show rising predominance of adult adoption than earlier in the postwar period, averaging
97 to 98% since 1990. Thus, of the 83,505 adoptions registered by Koseki offices in 2004, only
1,330 (1.6%) were of children.11 The higher rates of child adoption in the years immediately
following the war are perhaps due to war orphans.
         Ordinary adoption sanctifies the voluntary severing of most, but not all, ties to one’s birth
parents and their replacement with fealty to new parents. The adoptee may remain in contact with
his birth parents, and may even inherit from them. If the adoptive relationship is disrupted, the
adopted child may return to his biological parents.
         Calling ordinary adoption a transaction is appropriate, for Hayes and Habu (2006, pp. 2-3)

8    This discussion follows Hayes and Habu (2006, ch. 1).
9    Hayes and Habu (2006, Table 2, p 137).
10 The Common Law, from which most English speaking countries derive their legal systems, initially did not
sanction adoption. Although the practice occurred informally, adoptees could not inherit unless named as
heirs in a legal will. The U.S legalized adoption in the mid-19th century, and the UK followed in 1926 (Bryant,
1990, n. 6) Adult adoption, though legal in 47 U.S. states and the District of Columbia, remains rare and
controversial for subverting gay marriage restrictions. Thus Wadlington (1966, p. 409) thunders that "our
present system of adoption is designed to create through artificial means something resembling as closely as
possible a normal parent-child relationship and not a freak or totally new form of relation."
11 Koseki Offices, located in municipal offices, register all births, marriages, adoptions, address changes, and
deaths.



                                                        6
explain that “in Japanese society there continues to be a vein of unsentimental pragmatism towards
adoption arrangements. There is a fairly widespread view that it is ethically acceptable for parents
to become adopters for worldly objectives, even if they do not intend from the outset, to love the
child as their own.” Lebra (1989, p. 203) clarifies that “nurturance and intimacy were secondary or
irrelevant to the mandate of professional succession, and often were completely absent from the
adoptive relationship – even where the adoptee was destined to become the new head of the
household.”12
        Most ordinary adoptees are adult sons (Paulson 1984, p. 165, 289) because the practice is
designed to rescue biologically ill-fated families, not to provide for a needy child.13 Hayes and Habu
(2006, p. 1) elaborate: “Adoptions can be used to reconstruct patriarchal families. Families with
superfluous sons would pair them off in a combined marriage and adoption to families with
daughters.” Since the incest law only proscribes sex between biological siblings, a daughter and
adopted son may marry. That a term, muko yôshi, exists to describe a husband-who-is-also-an-
adopted-brother indicates this to be an accepted and relatively commonplace form of adoption; and
Paulson (1984) reports 55% of adoptions in 1981 to be of sons-in-law. Of course, if a desirable
potential son is already married, an adult married couple can also be adopted in a single
transaction.
        Parents who adopt adult sons either lack biological sons or desire better quality sons than
nature provided. Nakane (1967) argues that families seldom disinherit a biological son in favor of
an adopted son, but ethnographic work convincingly refutes this. Beardsley et al. (1959) report at
least one instance of adopted sons superseding biological sons in the histories of 25% to 33% of
rural families; Pelzel (1970) estimates its frequency at 25%, and Bachnik (1983) puts its incidence
at 34%. Pre-modern records indicate even higher frequencies (Bachnik 1983, p. 163).
        The patriarch of a family business can thus adopt a new son, say a star employee, should his
biological sons prove uninterested or incapable of honoring the family name. This occurs with some
regularity (Paulson 1984, 165-75; Kurosu 1998; Hayes and Habu 2006, p. 2). In this context,
translating yôshi as adoption might be confusing. Terms like protégé or successor might seem at
least as appropriate as adopted son. Similar relationships, but between family business patriarchs
and favored junior associates who become “like sons”, may well occur less visibly in other
countries. However, the Japanese adult adoptee does take his new family’s name and ancestors, and
enjoys inheritance status equal to that of biological offspring,14 so the common translation of yôshi
as adoption seems the most defensible.
        This echoes a linguistic ambiguity as to what constitutes a family versus a firm. A Japanese
family business is referred to as a house (ie or 家), as in the House of Mitsui; but ie also means family
or household.15 This conflation also occurs in West, as with the House of Windsor and J.P. Morgan’s
19th century bank, the House of Morgan . Repackaging a business as a family is readily dismissible as
“an ideological obfuscation created by those at the top of the economic hierarchy” (Hayes and Habu
2006, p. 12). But something more is clearly going on where an adopted top manager subsequently
becomes the head of both the adopting family and its business. Inheritance tax law pertaining to
succession in ie may have also played a role in fostering the adoption tradition in Japan. Edo period
law (pre-war) mandated that only the master of the ie could inherit the ie, who in turn must be a

12   Quoted in Hayes and Habu (2006, p. 11).
13The remainder include minors as well as adults of both genders, but the vast majority are presumably
males. A stigma attaches to adopting females because of past abuses.
14   See Rohl (2005) for a description of the development of civil law in Japan from 1868 to post-war.
15 The ie lost its legal status after World War II (Oppler, 1976, pp. 116-120); but Bachnik (1983) outlines its
continued informal usage and the difficulties this causes translators.



                                                        7
male with the same family name (see, among others, Rohl, 2005). Consequently, if the head of the
household passed away, the family had to find a new male head, lest the ie slip into the hands of the
state or next of kin. Adult adoptions provided a solution to this crisis.
         It is tempting to see adoption as a liberal adaptation allowing “competent individuals to
surmount rigid social barriers” in Japan’s hierarchical society (Burke 1962, pp. 108-9). Haynes and
Habu (2006, p. 12) more warily suggest that “the overlap between family and business concerns,
potentially at least, forms an integrated social ethos in which the aspirations of a powerless child
can find a place.” Although, they caution against pressing this too far, noting that many ordinary
adoptions are within extended families, Macfarlane (2002) notes that “those who were adopted
were not necessarily or even primarily blood relatives” and cites several studies that support the
view that “adoption became a mechanism for social mobility” in pre-modern Japan. In our sample,
adopted successors at Kajima Construction, Suzuki Motors, Taisho Pharmaceutical, and were
entirely biologically unrelated to the controlling family. Our data thus appear consistent with
Macfarlane’s assertion; however, a complete investigation of remote biological ties is too time-
consuming to be practicable, and thus lies beyond the scope of this study.
         The Japanese government restricts adult adoption for fiscal reasons. The 1988 revision to
the tax law prevents testators from evading inheritance taxes via multiple adoptions. Thenceforth,
an adopter with one or more biological children may bequeath to one adoptee only, and an adopter
lacking any biological children may bequeath to two adoptees (Nakagawa 1991, 89). A parent might
still adopt many sons in order to have a broader choice of successors, but since only one may
inherit, the supply of eager second, third, and fourth adoptees may be meager.
         Foreigners periodically sought to change Japanese adoption practices, which seemed
immoral to Chinese and Western sensibilities alike. Chinese legal imports, beginning with the Taiho
Code of 702 A.D., sought to impose Confucian morals restricting adoptions to blood relatives (Mass
1989, 9-11, 25, 72). In seeming deference to European sensibilities, Japan’s imported Civil Code
(§792-3) mandates that the adopted child be at least a day younger than the adopting parent
(Takenoshita 1997, p. 9).16 Both imports sought to fit Japanese pegs into foreign holes. The Taiho
Code was soon “improved”, and modern registries sometimes let a younger parent adopt an older
child “by mistake” (Nishioka 1991, pp. 232-4).
         Foreign criticisms of Japanese adult adoption practices are not entirely groundless. Before
the Great War, families adopted children as de facto slaves, sold by their biological parents; and
brothel owners adopted their prostitutes.17 Draft dodgers became “only sons” of childless families,
to escape conscription (Paulson 1984, 278-9). Adult adoptions are also used to hide affairs or to
circumvent money lending laws (Bryant 1990).
         But Japan’s adult adoptions perhaps evoke condemnation because they challenge the
conventions of other cultures. Elsewhere in East Asia, adoptions are a duty of blood relatives. In
contrast, “the more rigid forms of Confucianism have not constrained non-relative adoption in
Japan to nearly the same degree as elsewhere” (Kaji 1999; see also Bryant 1990, n. 32).18 This
shocked and appalled Confucian traditionalists, like Dazai Shundai (1680-1747), who deplores
Japan's “lawlessness”, singling out its “barbarous” and “promiscuous” adoptions as “a major
example of chaos” (Lebra 1989, p. 185; quoting Kirby 1908). In the same vein, the 19th century

16 Japan’s adopted Civil Code is frequently described as imposing primogeniture and other Western
inheritance concepts, and Western advisors at the time apparently genuinely believed this (see e.g. Morris,
1894). However, Bachnik (1983, esp. pp. 168-9) explains at length how the Japanese wording of the Meiji Civil
Code clearly permits the continuation of traditional adoption practices. See Wadlington (1966) on the
importance of age differences in U.S. adoption law.
17   Oppler (1976, 113 n 3; Paulson (1984, p. 271 & 275).
18   Quoted in Hayes and Habu (2006, p. 11).



                                                       8
historian Shigeno Aneki (1887) compares the “evils” of adoption to those of imperial abdication
(Lebra 1989, p. 186).

2.3    A Japanese Solution to the Pitfalls of Dynastic Governance
The above is a vast oversimplification, but conveys the gist of adoption practices as they affect
Japanese family businesses. We distill three potential economic implications:, which our empirical
analysis subsequently explores.
         First, a business family, confronted with an heir who is incapable or ill-disposed to take
over, can readily adopt a more able son. Adoption lets family firms expand their successor searches
beyond biological sons, and even beyond blood kin and current in-laws, to include virtually the
same applicant pool a widely held professionally managed firm might tap. This broader talent pool
could let Japanese family firms boost their odds of succession to a highly talented heir.
         Second, professional managers working for a Japanese family firm are not automatically
excluded from the top job of heir. Japanese family firms could thus, in theory at least, induce the
tournament competition that professionally-run firms use to elicit effort from rising executives and
put the most able manager in charge.
         Third, the threat of adoption could induce a greater work ethic in biological children, for
“the eldest son too was sometimes forced out into the world, if a more competent younger or
adopted son was appointed to succeed to the family property or rights” (Burke 1962, p. 109). Adult
adoptions might thus counter the famous Carnegie Conjecture that inherited fortunes so deaden
initiative and distort perspective as to virtually guarantee failure in running a great business.

2.4    An Example of the Succession Process
Suzuki Motor Corporation relies extensively on adoptees for the top job, which is currently held by
Osamu Suzuki. Born Osamu Matsuda, he graduated from Chuo University in 1953, and worked at a
bank until 1958 when, at age 28, he was adopted by the Suzuki patriarch, Shunzou Suzuki, married
a Suzuki daughter (Shoko), and took the Suzuki family name – all simultaneously. Osamu joined
Suzuki’s board in 1963, became President in 1978, and Chair in 2000. Figure 1 plots the career and
family ties of Mr. Osamu Suzuki as a function of his age, and exemplifies the successions we study.
        This succession continues a long Suzuki tradition of handing power down to adopted sons
qua sons-in-law. Osamu Suzuki is the fourth in a succession of adopted heirs to serve as CEO of
Suzuki Motors. Osamu, in turn, designated his son-in-law, Hirotaka Ono, as his heir, passing by his
biological son, then with General Motors who nonetheless eventually joined Suzuki’s board.
Explaining his choice, the elder Osamu opined: “In terms of age and experience, Ono is more capable
compared to (my) son.” In essence, skill and capability trumped blood ties for the top job. Mr. Ono’s
unfortunate premature death forced Osamu to return as Chair and CEO in 2007, a post he has
retained since.
        This case illustrates a typical Japanese family business adoptee. A university graduate in his
mid-to-late twenties, the adoptee is very likely to marry a daughter of the current patriarch. He
joins the family firm, and is promoted through the ranks and usually reaches the top job by age fifty.
This long tenure in the family firm provides sufficient time for the ruling patriarch to observe,
assess, and groom the adopted heir apparent.
        The sequence of events can vary somewhat. For example, the patriarch might choose a
capable current employee to marry his daughter first, and then formally adopt him later. For
example, Yasuda Zenjirō, patriarch of the prewar Yasuda financial group (zaibatsu) passed over his
three biological sons to groom his son-in-law, a 27-year-old employee and Tokyo University
graduate, as his heir. The new son not only changed his family name from Iomi to Yasuda, but also
changed his given name from Teichi to Zenjiro to affirm his status as heir apparent. The Yasuda
were not unique; recruiting heirs from among top managers was not unusual among pre-war


                                                  9
zaibatsu business families (Kerbo and McKinstry, 1995).
        The adoptee can, like a biological son, be disinherited if he does not meet expectations,
though this is extremely rare. The patriarch can designate a second adoptee his heir, or pass over
his adoptee and designate a biological son. For example, in 1920, 13 years after the adoption, the
Yasuda patriarch disinherited his adopted heir, who was then vice president. Legal dissolution of an
adult adoption is possible if the adoptee disappears, deserts his new family, or returns to his old
family. Dynastic families typically have a family council, at which the heads of different branches of
the family resolve issues that arise between them; and in prewar times, family councils (rarely)
successfully dissolved an adoption amid an unfolding succession (Rohl, 2005). Our postwar
population contains no instances of such dissolutions.

                                          [Figure 1 about here]

3.      Data Description
We begin with the population of all 1,433 non-financial firms that listed in all Japanese stock
exchanges (the Tokyo, Nagoya, Fukuoka and Osaka stock exchanges) from 1949 (when markets
reopened after the war to new listings, as well as previously listed prewar firms) through 1970. We
follow these firms from 1962, when standardized financial disclosure begins, until 2000 or a
delisting, whichever comes first.19 Our need for complete data on each firm’s ownership structure,
board, and financial variables during that period cuts the sample to 1,367 firms. Our sample thus
includes 95% of the population of listed firms during this window.

3.1     Data sources
Our ownership data are from the Development Bank of Japan database for 1981 through 2000, as
are our accounting data from 1962 through 2000. The Toyo Keizai database provides information
on stock prices and boards from 1989 through 2000. For prior years and years with missing data,
we hand-collect ownership, board, and financial data from hardcopy annual reports available at the
Institute of Innovation Research of Hitotsubashi University.
          Ownership data disclosed in annual reports include: (1) the stake of each of the top ten
shareholders, (2) the combined stake of all banks and other financial sector firms, and (3) the
combined stake of all other firms. Board data include detailed information on each director’s
education (alma mater, major, and graduation year), birth date, year initially hired, year appointed
to the board, years made CEO (shacho) and Chairman (kaicho), and prior work experience.
          We identify each firm’s founder by consulting the following sources: (1) commemorative
volumes (shashi) celebrating firms’ anniversaries, (2) Toyokeizai Shimposha (1995), (3) Nihon
Keizai Shimbun (2004), and (4) company websites. To identify relationships within the founding
family, we use various Japanese language sources: (1) Tokiwa Shoin (1977) provides the family
trees of 1002 business leaders, (2) a series of books published by Zaikai Kenkyusho (1979, 1981,
1982, 1983, 1985) provides the names of family members of the boards of listed firms, and (3) a set
of thirty-eight Nihon Keizai Shimbun (2004) volumes provides the biographies of 243 prominent
postwar business leaders. Additional information on family relationships is obtained from the
following sources: Japanese equivalents of Who’s Who published by Jinjikoshinjo, the Nikkei
Telecom 21 database of corporate news items published from 1975 on in the Nikkei newspapers
(Nihon Keizai Shimbun, the Nikkei Business Daily, the Nikkei Financial Daily and the Nikkei Marketing
Journal), company archives, Koyano (2007), and website searches.
          Using all this information, we annotate family trees with the names and business roles of

19 From 1970 to 1990, only 31 firms in our sample delist. A further 95 delist from 1991 through 2000. The
remarkable longevity of Japanese firms prior to the 1990s corroborates Fogel et al. (2008) on this point.



                                                    10
all biological and adopted members of each firm’s founding family. This information lets us identify
each firm’s founder(s) and ultimate owners, and ascertain each CEO/Chairman’s relationship, if any,
to the founding family by blood, marriage, or adoption.

3.2     Defining and classifying family firms
Previous family firm studies have been criticized for overly broad definitions of family firms
(Bertrand and Schoar 2006) that also include firms run by their founders. We therefore use an
alternative term, the Japanese word don (ドン, lit. boss), and designate firms run by their founder or
their founders’ heirs, biological or adopted, as don firms.20
        We consider the individual who establishes a business as its founder. For example, a
business established in the Edo period, restructured into a partnership during the early Meiji era,
incorporated in the early 20th century, taken public in the 1920s, and relisted in 1949, is founded by
the person who first established it in the Edo period.
        By “run” we mean that the founder or founding family retains either a substantial equity
stake or a substantial role in management. We thus define a don firm as one with a member of its
founding family (or family’s foundation) listed among its top ten shareholders or serving in a
leadership position: either as CEO (shacho) or chairman (daihyo torishimariyaku kaicho). If only one
founding family member fulfills these requirements, we call that person the firm’s don. If more than
one founding family member appears in these roles, we define don as the one serving as CEO or
chairman. If both positions are occupied by members of the founding family, we take the don as the
older. Thus, if a founder is a top ten shareholder, but does not serve as CEO or chairman, and an heir
serves in a leadership position, the heir is classified as don. This is clearly a judgment call, but we
presume that, in these firms, the heir is the actual decision-maker.
        We designate firms lacking dons as non-don firms. We thus employ the following indicator
functions δj,t(k) in our analyses:

                        1 if irm j has a don in year t
[1]          don
                                0 otherwise

                            0 if irm j has a don in year t
[2]             n-don
                                    1 otherwise

We also partition non-don firms into those that had a don at one time during our sample period,
denoted former-don firms; and firms that had a don at no time during our sample period, denoted
never-don firms.
          Villalonga and Amit (2006) argue that earlier U.S. family business studies misclassify firms
like Microsoft and Berkshire Hathaway, whose founders (Bill Gates and Warren Buffett) explicitly
bequeath their fortunes to charities, not their children. They therefore recommend a tighter
definition of family firms as those in which control has actually passed to the founder’s heirs. Our
don firms roughly correspond to the broader category they criticize, and likely also includes many
businesses that ought not to be considered family firms.
          We therefore denote true family firms as those whose current don is the previous don’s
heir. This narrower definition understates the incidence of family firms, for it excludes firms run by
founders who plan to pass control to their heirs. However, it has the virtue of including only firms
unambiguously identifiable as family firms. Other don firms – those still run by their founders – we
call founder-run firms. We formalize this with the indicator variables

20 For lack of a better term, we use this archaic title for a high-status male, now seldom found except in
formal business letters. The title derives from the Latin dominus, meaning lord, via the Portuguese dom.



                                                         11
                          1 if irm j 's don in year t is its founder
[3]         founder
                                         0 otherwise

                        1 if irm j 's don in year t is an heir
[4]         family
                                     0 otherwise

         Finally, we partition true family firms into subcategories according to the position of the
current don and his relationship to the previous one. A firm whose current don serves as CEO or
chairman and is the previous don’s biological son we call a blood heir firm. A firm whose current don
serves as CEO or chairman and is the previous don’s adopted son, adopted son-in-law, or son-in-law
we call a non-blood heir firm. Our data include no instances of daughters taking over. A third
category of true family firm arises where a biological heir ranks among the top ten shareholders, but
delegates both the CEO and Chairman positions to professional managers. These we denote
sarariman firms.21
         Our data contain no non-blood heirs adopted as children, consistent with the rarity of this
practice. All but two of the legally adopted heirs in our sample also marry a daughter of the
founding family.
        We designate all firms whose current dons are their previous dons’ adopted sons or sons-in-
law as a second category: non-blood heir firms. This is justifiable if the dons impose arranged
marriages on their daughters, but may be problematic if daughters chose their own mates. The
former assumption is reasonable because arranged marriages (omiai), in which dons select
husbands for their daughters on the basis of business advantage, persist in Japanese business
families (Hamabata, 1991; Kerbo and McKinstry, 1995). Nevertheless, we recognize that adopted
and un-adopted sons-in-law may be either selected differently by the founder, or may be subject to
different incentives since it is only the former who enjoy full inheritance rights under the post-war
legal code in Japan. We return to this issue in the robustness section, where we compare
performance under adopted and un-adopted sons-in-law and find no material difference between
the two, buttressing our contention that both sets of sons-in-law can be treated as one category.

                              1 if irm j 's don in year t is a blood heir
[5]
                                              0 otherwise

[6]         non-blood heir       1 if irm j 's don in year t is a adopted son or son-in-law
                                                         0 otherwise

                              1 if irm j is a don irm in year t, but run by a professional CEO
[7]
                                                        0 otherwise

         We have 62 cases of families succeeded by sarariman CEOs (founder to sarariman: 24 cases,
family to sarariman: 38 cases), who soon thereafter step aside for a family heir. News reports
clarify the temporary status of these interim CEOs: they are minding the firm while the designated
heir prepares to take charge. Thus Canon made Ryuzaburo Kaku, a professional manager, its CEO in
1977 amid declarations that the controlling family’s , fuzio Mitarai, aged 42, would soon take charge.
Takeda Pharmaceutical likewise appointed company manager Yoshimasa Umemoto (unrelated to
the family) CEO while the family’s designated heir, Kunio Takeda, aged 46, readied himself. Both
heirs ascended to their CEO job shortly after turning 50. Similarly brief interludes of professional

21 The Japanese term for a professional manager is sarariman, from the English “salary man”. The term
connotes an executive who works long hours, but does not control his destiny.



                                                     12
management also occurred at Pioneer, Toyota, and other family firms.22
         These are all clearly family firms, where interim CEOs serve as temporary place-holders, not
as masters. Their controlling families are clearly not permanently handing over power to
professionals. We therefore define sarariman firms as those whose controlling families delegate
management to a chain of sarariman CEOs. We exclude successions to sarariman who are, in turn,
replaced by family, blood or non-blood heirs. This is because our sample contains successions
where the old patriarch steps aside before the heir apparent is ready to take charge. In such cases, a
sarariman takes over as interim CEO amid a general understanding that the heir will soon take
charge. We revisit this issue in the robustness check section below to check if our results are
different when we include some or all such place-holders in the sarariman category.
         The partitioning of family firms in [5], [6], and [7] raises the issue of whether non-blood
heirs – adopted sons or sons-in-law – should be identified as an alternative to heirs or to sarariman
CEOs. In particular, the sarariman tradition is widely accepted in Western industrial democracies,
particularly the U.S. and the U.K. where CEOs as a rule tend to be unrelated to dominant
shareholders, and it is natural to ask the question whether sufficiently high powered compensation
packages may render a sarariman materially identical to an adopted son CEO. At issue is whether
sarariman and adopted sons are treated the same, or whether adopted sons are treated more like
blood sons, and sarariman more like the hired agents that they are.
         We explore this by comparing the tenures of the three categories of successor. Founders
unsurprisingly remain at the helm longest: serving for a mean of 30.23 years and a median of 30
years. Sarariman CEOs in family firms have the shortest tenures: averaging only 6.31 years with
half gone after 5 years. However, blood and non-blood heirs’ tenures are essentially identical: blood
heirs average 18.74 years and non-blood heirs average 18.4 years; half of blood heirs are gone after
16 years and half of non-blood heirs are gone after 17 years. We conclude that non-blood heirs’
control positions are as secure as those of blood heirs, and that both are far more secure than the
positions of sarariman CEOs.23
         Figure 2 shows the number of don firms by year. The initial 1962 cross-section of our panel
contains a total of 1,060 firms; and of these, 37% are don firms versus 63% non-don firms. Of the
don firms, 17% are founder-run and the remaining 20% are true family firms. Of the true family
firms, 41 are run by non-blood heirs – comprising almost a fifth of family firms and 4% of the full
sample.
         By the end of our analysis period, in 2000, don firms are 31% of the total, down 6% from
1962. Founder-run firms decline to less than 1% of the 2000 sample (as founders retire or pass
away). True family firms represent about 30% of our sample in 2000, having held roughly steady at
this fraction from 1980 onwards. Non-don firms represent almost 69% of all firms in 2000.
         The total fraction of don firms in Japan resembles that of family firms in U.S. Fortune 500
reported by Anderson and Reeb (2003), whose definition of family firm resembles ours for don
firms. Thus, while neither America nor Japan is an economy of family firms, founders and heirs
collectively appear more important than generally accredited in both countries.
         If family firms are defined as those controlled by second or later generation heirs, only 7%
of the Fortune 500 firms qualify (Villalonga and Amit 2006). This is substantially less than the 30%
of our sample characterized by inherited family control. While the two samples are not directly




22 The mean age of the ultimate biological heir is 40 in these cases, consistent with sarariman CEOs serving
as placeholders until the heir matures.
23 Studying S&P 500 firms from 1992 through 2004, Coates and Kraakman (2007) report the mean tenure of
hired CEOs to be 5.5 years and that of equity control blockholder CEOs to be 13.4 years.



                                                      13
comparable,24 our data reveal family control in postwar Japan to be undeniably economically
significant – a fact generally not acknowledged in discussions of Japanese corporate governance.

                                           [Figure 2 about here]

3.3     Variables
A multidimensional approach to measuring firm performance is needed because Japanese law does
not mandate that firms be run to maximize shareholder value, and because banks and employees
interests are often posited to trump those of shareholders (Porter et al. 2000). We describe each
performance measure in turn. Summary statistics are in Table 2. Robustness checks using
alternative definitions of the variable are deferred to section 4.4.

                                           [Table 2 about here]

Shareholder valuation
We gauge shareholder valuation by a firm’s Tobin’s average Q ratio (Q) - its market value divided by
its replacement cost: that is, its value to all its investors divided by the cost of replacing all of its
measurable assets. A higher Q means the firm’s value is augmented by greater net intangible assets
– presumed, partly at least, to reflect superior past and/or expected future management. Average Q
ratios, measured relative to industry benchmarks to exclude factors beyond managers’ control, are
therefore sensible measures of the quality of corporate governance (Morck et al. 1988; Gompers et
al. 2003; Bebchuk and Cohen 2005) when stock markets are passably efficient, and perhaps even
amid common bubbles (Samuelson 1998; Jung and Shiller 2005).
        We define market value as the price of the firm’s stock times the number of shares
outstanding plus the book value of its total liabilities. This values control blocks at public share
prices, consistent with the near-zero private benefits of control Dyck and Zingales (2004) and
Nenova (2003) report for Japan.
        We estimate replacement cost as the book value of total assets plus adjustments for equity
holdings and real estate. Almost ten percent of the assets of the typical firm in our sample are
shares in other firms, and this fraction is much higher in many firms. These shares are carried at
historical cost. We therefore multiply the book value of a firm’s equity holdings in a given year by
the cumulative return of the Nikkei Index from when the equity was acquired to the present. To
estimate the age of equity holdings, we look at all past acquisitions and disposals of equity, and
assume that the most recently acquired shares are the first to be disposed of. Real estate holdings,
also carried at book, are adjusted analogously using the Japanese Real Estate Index.

Current profitability
Our second performance measure is each firm’s return on assets (ROA), defined as operating income
divided by replacement cost, as estimated above. Operating income is earnings before interest costs,
tax, and depreciation and amortization. This figure captures a firm’s current profitability, a measure
of short-term financial performance.

Sales and employment growth
Japanese firms, at least for a large part of the postwar period, arguably sought non-financial goals,


24Our sample includes almost all Japanese firms that listed up to 1970, but no newer listings. Villalonga and
Amit’s sample of Fortune 500 contains only very large firms, whose control blocks are likely correspondingly
smaller, and includes newer firms, whose founders are more likely to survive.



                                                     14
such as market share or employment, rather than financial objectives, such as profits or
shareholder value (Aoki 1990; Porter 1990; Abegglen & Stalk 1985; Tsuru 1996; Geringer et al.
1999; Ahmadjian & Robbins 2005; Kubo 2005; and others); though others dissent (e.g. Kang and
Shivdasani 1995, 1997). Regardless of the social welfare implications of such alternative objective
functions, the degree to which different categories of our firms deviate from value maximization is
of interest.
        We therefore examine sales growth rates as one such non-financial performance measure.
We define sales growth as the logarithm of the firm’s current year sales less the logarithm of its
sales one year earlier. Nominal sales are used because inflation remained low throughout the
sample window. Our second non-financial performance measure is employment growth, defined as
the logarithm of the firm’s current year number of employees less the logarithm of the number of
its employees one years prior.

Control variables
The statistical tests in the next section require various controls. Industry fixed effects are defined
using the two-digit Development Bank of Japan industry codes. Leverage is long-term debt scaled by
estimated replacement cost. Capital expenditure for year t is the change in fixed assets from year t-1
to year t, plus depreciation in year t. It is scaled by total sales in year t. Firm age is measured from
the year of incorporation of the firm. Firm size is the logarithm of replacement cost.

4.      Findings
4.1     Subsample comparisons
Our first sets of statistical tests, shown in Table 3, contrast dimensions of firm performance across
differently controlled firms.25 Across the board, founder-run firms are the best performers, followed
by non-blood heir-run firms. Though non-don firms are the largest of all, non-blood heir-run firms
are substantially larger than all other don firms. However, they are not greatly different in terms of
leverage. Unsurprisingly founder-run firms are younger than all other categories, and also more
narrowly held, though non-blood heir-run firms are the second most narrowly held category.

                                            [Table 3 about here]

        Our sample is very nearly equal to the full population of listed Japanese firms, so the
numbers in Table 3 are essentially population means, and are thus economically meaningful even
without formal statistical tests. To compare performance across these categories formally, we
nonetheless perform t-tests across categories, controlling for year and industry fixed effects,
clustering residuals by firm to compensate for longitudinal persistence. To do this we run
regressions of the form


[8]       j,t  bk   j,t (k)  ct   t  di  i  e j,t
                 k                 t            i


where  j,t is firm j’s performance in year t (in terms of one of ROA, Q, sales growth or labor force
growth); the δj,t(k) are a proper subset of indicator variables [1] through [7], with k one of founder,
blood heir, non-blood heir, sarariman, or non-don. The δt are year fixed effects; the δi are industry


25       We winsorize the data at 1% to attenuate the effect of extreme observations. Later in the robustness
tests section, we repeat our main tests using un-winsorized data.



                                                      15
fixed effects; and the ej,t are residuals, clustered by firm. The t-tests are to reject the null hypothesis
that a coefficient bk is zero, and are displayed in Table 4.
        In terms of profitability and shareholder valuation, founder firms statistically significantly
outperform every other category of firm except non-blood heirs, whose firms perform statistically
indistinguishably from founder firms. Founder firms significantly outperform non-blood heir firms
only in sales and labor force growth rates. This is unsurprising, since Table 3 shows non-blood heir
firms to be substantially larger (¥164B versus ¥58.2B) and older (43 versus 29 years since
founded), and are thus plausibly less prone to very rapid growth.
        The panel using non-don firms as the benchmark shows family firms (don firms excluding
founder firm) outperforming non-don firms across the board. Notably, this performance premium
rests primarily upon blood heir-run firms and non-blood heir run firms, not on family firms run by
professional sarariman CEOs. The second panel, using firms run by their founders’ blood
descendents as the benchmark, confirms that founders outperform founders’ progeny across the
board; but that blood heirs outperform non-don firms. Non-blood heirs outperform or tie all
categories save founders; in particular, non-blood heirs outpace blood heirs, sarariman, and non-
don managers in profitability, and outpace sarariman and non-don managers in valuation. Finally,
sarariman firms outperform no other category at all, and lag all other classes of don firms.
Sarariman-run family firms’ performance is statistically indistinguishable from that of non-don
firms.

                                                [Table 4 about here]

4.2     Regressions controlling for firm characteristics
Table 5 expands upon the results in Table 4 by controlling for firm characteristics: size, leverage,
capital spending and age, in regressions of the form


[9]       j ,t   an  xn, j ,t  bk   j ,t (k )  ct   t   di   i  e j ,t
                  n                 k                   t             i



where πj,t is one of our firm performance measures, the δj,t(k) are some proper subset of the firm-
control indicator variables [1] through [7], the xj,t are control variable, the δt are year fixed effects,
the δi are industry fixed effects, and the ej,t are residuals, again clustered by firm.
         As in Tables 3 and 4, founder-run firms and family firms both significantly outperform non-
don firms in all dimensions. Larger firms and firms with more aggressive capital budgeting
generally outperform, while more leveraged firms and older firms generally underperform.

                                           [Tables 5 and 6 about here]

          After controlling for these firm-level characteristics, in addition to industry and year fixed
effects, and again clustering residuals by firm, Table 5 reconfirms the superior performance of
founder and family firms across all dimensions of firm performance.
          Table 6 replicates the regressions in Table 5, but using different firm categories as the
benchmark for statistical comparison. Only the coefficients for the control groups (δj,t(k)) are
presented to facilitate inter-group comparison. The pattern of signs and significance levels in Table
6 is little different from that in Table 4.
          In terms of profitability and shareholder valuation, founder firms statistically significantly
outperform every other category of firm except non-blood heirs, whose firms perform statistically
indistinguishably from founder firms in terms of accounting profits and shareholder valuations. As



                                                            16
in Table 4, founder firms significantly outperform non-blood heir firms in sales and labor force
growth rates. Since firm size and age are among the control variables in Tables 5 and 6, neither of
these factors can explain the high growth rates of founder firms. This suggests that the founders of
firms that list during their founders lifetimes are an unusual class of people, perhaps possessing a
scarce entrepreneurial talent (Knight 1921; Hayek 1945; Schumpeter 1950). Since we do not
observe founder-run firms that grow insufficiently to list within their founders’ lifetimes, a self-
selection problem may be present – we only observe the best founder-run firms. Comparing the
other categories to founder-run firms thus tests them against a perhaps overly high hurdle.
        The panel using non-don firms as the benchmark again shows non-founder family firms
outperform non-don firms across the board, save that non-blood heir firms no longer outgrow non-
don firms. The margin by which non-blood heir firms outperform non-don firms in terms of
accounting profits and shareholder valuations now exceeds that for blood heir firms; and this
difference is highly significant for accounting profits – though not for valuations. After controlling
for size, age, leverage, and capital spending, non-blood heirs match or surpass blood heirs.
Sarariman-run family firms’ performance again lags that of the other two types of family firm, with
performance statistically indistinguishable from that of non-don firms.
        The tables also tentatively suggest that blood heir firms might attend more to the arguably
uniquely important Japanese corporate goals of employment and sales growth, though. Non-don
firms and sarariman firms, the categories for which financial performance might arguably be the
least important, show no evidence of exceptional employment or sales growth performance.

4.3    Causality
The results above demonstrate a set of correlations between firm performance and control.
However, causation is unresolved. Non-blood heirs might replace biological sons in the negative tail
of the talent bell curve; and the threat of being replaced by a non-blood son might blunt the
deadening of talent Carnegie (1899) postulates afflicting heirs to great fortunes.
        But the converse is also possible. A current don might be more prone to pass control to a
beloved son if the firm is running more smoothly; and the son might covet control of a better
performing family firm more earnestly (Bennedsen et al. 2007). Smith and Amoako-Adu (2005) and
Perez-Gonzalez (2006) overcome this endogeneity problem with event studies that show stock
price declines upon the announcement that control is to pass to a son, rather than a professional
manager, in Canadian and US family firms, respectively. Bennedsen et al. (2007) overcome the
problem by noting that family succession is more likely, independently of firm performance, if the
old don’s firstborn child is male. This lets them identify inherited corporate control as causing poor
performance in Danish family firms.
        The grooming of a successor likely begins years before the actual succession event,
presumably at adoption where there is a formal adoption, and the succession probabilities
presumably resolve over time. This precludes precisely defined abnormal stock return event
studies of successions. We therefore develop a set of endogeneity tests similar in spirit to those of
Bennedsen et al. (2007), utilizing information we possess about controlling families, and employ a
less precise event study methodology than that of Smith and Amoako-Adu (2005) and Perez-
Gonzalez (2006), which works against finding significant effects. Since information about business
families’ succession plans may enter the public domain slowly, and well in advance of actual
successions, equity value changes upon successions are especially likely to be biased towards zero.
        We define a succession event as the transfer of control from a don to a successor, who may
be either part of the family (via blood or adoption), a sarariman amenable to the blockholder family,
or an outsider where the founder or his heirs sell out. We identify 915 such events; but drop 18
where control shifts from a founder to a co-founder, 124 that involve either an incoming or an
outgoing temporary sarariman, 117 where the succession event was within 7 years of a previous



                                                 17
succession event, and 231 for lack of complete family tree data. This leaves 425 econometrically
viable succession events, listed in the first two columns of Table 7.
        The most common succession event – 57% of the total – is to blood heirs, reinforcing the
importance of traditional family firms in Japan. However, almost one in ten family firms opts for
non-blood heirs; and almost one in five turns management over to a sarariman and becomes a
seemingly passive blockholder. In over 85% of successions, the family thus stays on – either in
direct charge or as a blockholder. The family cashes out in less than 15% of successions.

                                                   [Table 7 about here]

         Inspection of the succession events reveals a few regularities. First, non-blood successions
occur where the controlling family’s stake is larger. The mean family control block is 13.4% in
successions to blood heirs, but 18.6% in successions to non-blood heirs. The difference in medians
is even starker: 8.7% for blood versus 18.4% for non-blood heirs. Both differences are highly
significant (p = 0.02 and 0.01 for mean and median differences, respectively). Conceivably, families
more closely tied to their firms dare not risk an iffy blood heir. Alternatively, families’ larger blocks
might anticipate superior performance under non-blood heirs.
          Second, non-blood heirs’ personal equity blocks average 3.6% of their firms’ equity in the
three years after the succession (up from 3.4% the in three years prior).26 Since the heir becomes
head of the family, it may be more appropriate to consider the whole of the family’s stake as in his
charge –averaging roughly ¥8.74 billion in 2000 constant yen (approximately US$87 million). 27
That is, a star manager who becomes an adopted son and/or son-in-law wins stewardship of a
fortune averaging about $87 million, along with all the attendant power, influence, and status.28 The
typical Japanese CEO’s compensation – measured as salary plus bonus plus stock options - is
modest compared to a similarly situated US C.E.O. (Kato and Kubo 2006). However, if we include
the inheritance of a family fortune as compensation, the lifetime income of Japanese CEOs becomes
highly skewed. Conceivably, the chance of becoming heir to a family business might attract talent
and inspire effort in Japanese family firms, effects associated with tournament competition for high
paying CEO jobs in professionally managed U.S. firms (Lazear and Rosen 1981; Demsetz 1996;
Frank and Cook 1996).
          Our strategy is to look at performance changes around succession events, and regress
these cross-sectionally on indicator variables for the different types of succession shown in Table 7.
That is, we run regressions of the form


[10]       j   a n  x n , j   bk   j (k )   ct   t ( j )   d i   i ( j )  e j
                    n                 k                   t                 i



where the xj are control variable, the δt are succession year fixed effects, set to one if succession j
occurs in year t and to zero otherwise; the δi are industry fixed effects; and the ej are residuals. We
now use j to index successions, rather than firms; and the δj(k) are now defined in [11] through [14]
below. Some firms have more than one succession event, so all standard errors are computed by
clustering at the firm level.

26 In contrast, blood heirs stakes average 2.7% in the three years after succession, up from 2.6% in the three
years before. Both are significantly below the corresponding non-blood heir means.
27   All inheritance figures are converted to 2000 constant yen at the CPI.
28 Mean (median) family stakes in the panel are worth approximately ¥16.3 (¥0.69) billion under non-blood
heirs, and ¥7.8 (¥0.86) billion under blood heirs.



                                                                18
         The dependent variable, πj, is the change in one of firm j’s performance measures: ROA, Q,
sales growth, or labor growth. Differences are two-years following the event year minus two-year
means prior to the event year. The event year is excluded because we cannot date the succession
events precisely. We use two-year performance windows because Japanese boards typically vote on
renewing CEO s’ contracts biannually.
         The control variables, xj, include firm size, firm age, leverage, and capital expenditure. We
employ these because larger, older, less leveraged firms plausibly have more stable performance
over time, and because firms with larger capital budgets allow greater scope for unqualified CEOs to
cause damage.29 Succession year fixed effects should remove macroeconomic factors, and industry
fixed effects should remove industry related performance trends, also plausibly unrelated to the
effects of succession.
         We now use k to index the type of successor who replaces the departing don, encoded as
follows:

                              1 if irm j 's new don is a blood heir of the old don
[11]
                                                  0 otherwise

[12]        non-blood heir       1 if irm j 's new don is the old don's adopted son or son-in-law
                                                            0 otherwise

                             1 if irm j 's controlling family hires a professional CEO
[13]        sarariman
                                                     0 otherwise

                           1 if irm j 's controlling family liquidates its control block
[14]         ash out
                                                    0 otherwise

        Our regressions [10] are run on a sample of 425 successions, of which 242 are to blood heirs,
42 are to non-blood heirs, 81 leave sarariman CEOs running firms with family blockholders, and 60
see the family cashing out and departing completely from the scene. Table 8 summarizes the
coefficients of the succession type indicator variables; those of the controls and fixed effects are
suppressed for brevity. The table shows the largest relative performance increases when non-blood
heirs take over, and the largest relative performance declines when the family turns the firm over to
a sarariman, but remains a blockholder. Successions to blood heirs and cashing out are in between,
and statistically indistinguishable.
        As noted above, inferences from Table 8 are complicated by possible selection bias: perhaps
non-blood heirs are chosen more often by firms anticipating good times; perhaps family firms hire
sarariman CEOs when bad times lie ahead and family members dare not step in.

                                             [Table 8 about here]

        To explore these issues, we estimate two-stage least squares (2SLS) analogs to the
regressions in Table 8. Our first stage uses multinomial logit to estimate probabilities for different
types of succession event,30


29 With a mean age of 52, incoming family CEOs are younger than their non-family counterparts (mean age
61). The typical family firm is also younger: 46 years old at the succession vs. 50 for non-family firms. Blood
and non-blood heirs have statistically indistinguishable mean ages at their successions; as do their firms.
30 Sequential logit comparing two succession choices at a time are ill-suited for the first stage since we have
no strong priors regarding which two succession types ought to be considered first. By contrast, the
multinomial logit allows us to be more agnostic regarding the priority of succession types, giving the outgoing


                                                       19
[15]      j ( k )    n  x n , j    m z m , j    ct   t ( j )   d i   i ( j )  u j
                        n                 m                 t                 i



and the second stage uses cross sectional OLS to estimate the exogenous effects of these succession
events on firm performance, viz.


[16]      j   a n  x n , j   bk  ˆ j (k )   ct   t ( j )   d i   i ( j )  e j
                    n                 k                    t                  i



         To operationalize the strategy in [15] and [16], we require variables, denoted {zm,j} in [15]
that are plausibly exogenous for economic reasons, correlated strongly with the actual succession
choices, and uncorrelated with the true residuals in [16]. Below we describe the set of three
instruments used to derive predicted successor types in [15]. We note that the number of
instruments equals the number of successor choices in [16], making the model just identified.
         Obviously, if the departing don lacks male issue, the firm is less likely to pass to a blood heir.
Although women in Japan are making major strides towards career equality in other spheres,
female CEOs remain rare. Our first instrument is therefore an indicator variable set to one if we
document the existence of a male blood heir to the current don, and to zero otherwise. We construct
this variable by scanning through our family trees, constructed as described in section 3.1.
           Even if the current don has a biological son, the son may not be interested in the family
business. Likewise, the current don may not wish to found a business dynasty, and may keep his
relations away from his firm. Our second instrument therefore measures the don’s family’s
involvement in his firm. We gauge this with an indicator variable set to one if the don has any blood
relations (including siblings) on the board at the time of the firm’s IPO (sufficiently pre-dating the
succession event), and zero otherwise.
            Finally, a previous non-blood heir sets a family precedent, and may increase the odds of
another. Our third instrumental variable is therefore a measure of the departing don’s cultural
amenability to adult adoption. This indicator variable is set to one if the controlling family adopted
an adult son at any time in the past, including years prior to the IPO; and to zero otherwise.31
           Latent variables are always a concern in econometric frameworks of this sort, so we must
include appropriate control variables. Obviously, macroeconomic effects might both influence
successions and firm performance. We therefore include succession year fixed effects in both stages.
Many latent factors plausibly affect particular industries, so we include industry fixed effects in
both stages. Older, highly leveraged, or larger firms may be qualitatively different from younger,
less leveraged, or smaller ones, so we include logarithms of firm age and size, and book leverage,
defined as in [10], in the second stage regression. We include capital expenditure to control for the
effect of investment on performance changes.
           It is possible that a don is more likely to bequeath control to a blood heir who is more able
and smart. That is, a more demonstrably able biological son is presumably a stronger succession


don a full menu of successor types to pick from. That is, he can decide to pass on the firm’s rein to a blood son,
an adopted son, a sarariman, or to sell the firm to an outsider.
31 We note that to be considered valid, the instrument must affect the second stage dependent variable only
through the first stage choice. For example, it is possible that greater family involvement may directly affect
performance. However, it is very unlikely that family involvement prior to succession affects the change in
performance following the succession event, the dependent variable for the 2nd stage OLS regression.



                                                                  20
candidate, all else equal. We are able to gauge biological sons’ general intelligence by their
university degrees. This is because Japan has two clearly differentiated types of universities:
imperial universities, to which admission depends solely on entrance examination scores; and
other universities, to which admission is either less selective in general or possible by dint of
special quotas for graduates of expensive university-affiliated preparatory schools. The imperial
universities – Tokyo University, Kyoto University, Tohoku University, Osaka University, Kyushu
University, Hokkaido University, and Nagoya University, along with Hitotsubashi University – each
conduct their own rigorous entrance examinations, a process widely acknowledged to select solely
on merit (Takeuchi 1997).32 Consequently, a degree from one of these reliably implies a high level
of intelligence, and this presumably correlates with ability. Some other universities, notably elite
private universities such as Keio and Waseda, also boast very highly qualified academic faculty.
However, their alternate admissions paths – especially their university-run prep-school channels –
make their degrees less reliable certifications than those of the imperial universities – especially for
scions of wealthy families.33 Biological sons who attended imperial universities are thus almost
surely quite intelligent; but those who attended other universities might or might not be.
         Our control variable for blood heir ability is an indicator variable set to one if the biological
son to the current don graduated from an imperial university, and to zero otherwise. We construct
this variable by scanning through our director database for sons of dons, consulting firm and family
histories, and checking the Japanese equivalent of Who’s Who and other data sources described in
section 3.1 – these data precede the succession event. If the old don had more than one biological
son, we set the dummy variable to one if any of his sons attended an imperial university.
         The distribution of imperial university graduates across blood and non-blood heirs is
shown in the rightmost two columns of Table 7. Of the 242 biological sons who assume control of
firms in our sample, only 51, or 21%, attended an imperial university; while 17, or 41% of the 42
non-blood heirs did so. As a comparison, we note that non-blood heirs are almost twice as likely as
blood heirs to be imperial university alumni (t-test p = 0.0204).
          We also control for the outgoing don’s talent because a highly talented don may value a
highly talented successor more highly. We therefore construct an imperial university education
dummy for the outgoing don in a manner similar to that described above. Also, as the old don ages,
his abilities may wane and pressure to step aside may grow. The don cannot readily alter his
biological aging process, so we also include the logarithm of his age as a control variable. Ceteris
paribus, we expect that older dons are more likely to abdicate the top job.

                                                  [Table 9 about here]

          Our fist stage estimation reveals the three instrumental variables to be highly jointly
correlated with the actual succession outcomes, and possess the predicted signs. For e.g., the sign of
the first instrument variable, the presence of a blood son, is positive and significant in [15] for
blood heir, sarariman and sell-out choices (non-blood heir as the default benchmark category),
indicating that adopted heirs are less likely when the don has a blood son. Similarly, the second

32 Hitotsubashi, though not officially designated an imperial university, uses similar entrance tests, and is
widely regarded as an elite top-tier university; see e.g., Kerbo and McKinstry (1995, p. 140), who count
Hitotsubashi among the three most prestigious universities). We therefore include Hitotsubashi among
imperial universities.
33 For e.g., Waseda Junior–Senior High School’s website (www.waseda-h.ed.jp/Overview/index_e.html)
advertises that the “school is affiliated with Waseda University and about 50% of the graduates of high school
are recommended to Waseda University. Others take entrance examinations and are admitted to the
universities of their choice, such as the University of Tokyo, Kyoto University, Keio University, Tokyo Medical
University and so on.”



                                                       21
instrument, the presence of family on the board of the firm, also has a positive and significant
coefficient, consistent with the argument presented earlier, though it is only significant for the
blood heir choice. Finally, the third instrument, the cultural leanings of the old don vis-à-vis
adoptions, has a negative and significant coefficient for all three choices, again indicating that an
adopted heir choice is more likely when the firm has a culture of adoptions in its history. Overall the
1st stage model has a good fit, with an R-square of 0.5176. A Hausman test (Nakamura and
Nakamura 1981) rejects the instruments’ joint insignificance (  62 = 502.3, p < 0.0000) at a
confidence level well below the standard threshold for weak instruments tests (Stock et al. 2002).34
         The second stage results are presented Table 9, and for brevity, we have presented only the
coefficients on the successor types with different default benchmarks to facilitate pair-wise
comparisons across successor types. For e.g., the first panel compares non-blood heirs to the other
three successor types, and reiterates that non-blood heir successions induce significantly larger
ROA gains than do blood heirs or sarariman successions. The point estimates show cashing out to
be worse than a non-blood heir, but better than a blood heir or sarariman; however none are
statistically significant. A blood heir is marginally superior to sarariman (p = 0.06) in ROA gain.
         The Q ratios show no significant differences across succession types. This may reflect the
more forward-looking nature of valuation-based performance estimates. Once a family succession
is locked in, an efficient market should discount share prices to reflect the expected impact of the
likely succession event, and this tells against the power of average Q ratios in Table 9.
         Table 9 ties non-blood heir successions to both enhanced ROA and enhanced employment
growth – inconsistent with adopted heir successors trading-off financial performance for growth as
conflicting corporate objectives. Cash out successions, where the family exits the firm entirely,
presage higher sales growth than do blood-heir successions, though employment growth is a
statistical tie for the two groups. In the next section, we describe additional robustness checks to
establish the significance of results disused earlier.

4.4       Robustness checks
The results in the tables above survive a battery of robustness checks.35 In describing these, we say
the robustness check generates qualitatively similar results if the pattern of signs, significance levels,
and rough coefficient magnitudes is identical to that shown in the corresponding tables.
        Our original results, both panel and event tests, were based on data winsorized at 1%. We
repeat both tests using un-winsorized data, and find that qualitatively similar results ensue. In
particular, founders and non-blood heirs continue to out-perform blood heirs, sarariman, and non-
don firms, and transitions to non-blood heirs are followed by superior performance improvements
vis-à-vis other successor groups.
        Our standard errors adjust for heteroscedasticity and are clustered by firm to account for
the persistence of firms’ data within our panel, and for more than one succession event per firm in
our causality analysis. Using simple pooled OLS standard errors greatly magnifies our t-ratios, and
renders virtually all coefficients in all the tables statistically significant. Not clustering by firm also
magnifies t-ratios in our causality study, and some differences that are insignificant in Table 8 and
Table 9 attain statistical significance. In particular, sarariman successions induce lower
performance in terms of accounting profit than blood heirs. In fact, sarariman successions are
associated with the lowest performance among the four types of successors.
        We pool sons-in-law and adopted sons, who are also sons-in-law, together and call these

34  We do not tabulate the 1st stage coefficient estimates to conserve space, but will be happy to provide these
to the reader upon request. Second stage estimates are provided for the successor type in table 9 for different
control groups, though other control variables are suppressed.
35   The following robustness checks are not shown in tables, but are all available from the authors.



                                                        22
non-blood heirs. However, the two subgroups might have different performance effects. We
therefore rerun all our regressions treating these as separate classes of family firms. We find
formally adopted sons-in-law outperforming blood heirs in terms of accounting profit rates by
0.61% - a magnitude greater than that by which all non-blood heir firms outperform blood heir
firms; but the p-level (p = 0.11) now falls below standard thresholds of statistical significance.
Formally adopted sons’ firms outperform other sons’-in-laws’ firms by 0.125% in ROA, 0.038 in Qs,
and 0.31% in labor force growth, and lag behind by 0.048% in sales growth; but none of these
coefficients is statistically significant. Formally adopted sons-in-law and other sons-in-law have
similar median tenures as CEO – 19 and 17 years, respectively. Overall, the data suggest that
formally adopted sons-in-law and other sons-in-law are qualitatively similar – both to each other
and compared to other successor types. This supports treating them as one group.
        Our sample includes four female dons. Closer inspection reveals these to all be spouses of
previous dons. In the tables, we consider these to be dons in their own right. However, their mean
tenure is only six years, and two are explicitly minding the shop for husbands entering politics. Our
female dons might thus be serving as placeholder CEOs. We therefore drop these four cases and
rerun all our regressions. Qualitatively similar results ensue.
        We exclude successions to interim sarariman CEOs who are succeeded by a blood or
adopted heir. Rerunning our tests including these placeholders as bona fide sarariman successions
yields almost identical patterns of signs and significance levels to those shown in the table. The p-
level for the Q-ratio difference between blood sons and ALL sarariman deteriorates from 0.03 to
0.14, and that between non-blood heirs and sarariman deteriorates from 0.03 to 0.09. Other
significance levels are not materially changed.
        Repeating these tests with interim sarariman as a separate category materially alters
neither the key coefficients nor their significance levels in the panel and the event study tests. In
the panel tests, interim sarariman firms outperform non-don firms in Q-ratios (p-value=0.01) and
Labor Growth (p-value=0.05), whereas regular sarariman firmsare statistically indistinguishable
from non-don firms across all performance metrics. Adopted son firms continue to outperform
regular sarariman firms in ROA and Q, but are statistically indistinguishable from interim
sarariman firms across all performance measures. Blood heir firms outperform regular sarariman
firms in Q-ratios and labor growth, but are statistically indistinguishable from interims across all
performance measures. Finally, interims outperform regular sarariman firms in Q-ratios and labor
growth. These results are consistent with our thesis that interim sarariman CEOs are placeholders,
and deliver performance similar to that of heirs, from whom they may well take directions. Regular
sarariman firm’s performance again lags that of heir firms.
        Finally, we split the interim sarariman CEOs into two groups, those with job tenures longer
than the median (25th percentile), and those with shorter tenures. We do this because long-serving
interim sarariman may well become more similar to regular sarariman. Again, all results retain
signs and significances levels, except that the p-value for the Q-ratio difference between blood sons
and sarariman deteriorates from 0.02 to 0.12 (0.14).
        Throughout the tables, we define ROA as operating income divided by replacement cost, the
denominator from our average Q measure. If we instead define ROA as operating income over the
book value of assets, qualitatively similar results ensue throughout.
        We define sales growth as the logarithm of the firm’s current year nominal sales less the
logarithm of its sales one year earlier. Inflation was very low throughout our sample period, but we
nonetheless repeat our tests using real sales, deflated using the GDP deflator, and find qualitatively
similar results. We also repeat all our tests with 3 and 5-year sales growth rates, and again find
qualitatively similar results. Using the logarithm of current employees less the logarithm of
employees three and five years earlier to measure labor force growth likewise yields qualitatively
similar results to those in the tables.
        In the tables, leverage is long-term debt scaled by estimated replacement cost. As


                                                 23
robustness checks, we redefine leverage with total debt, rather than long term debt, in the
numerator; with unadjusted book value of assets in the denominator; and with both changes.
Qualitatively similar results ensue in all three cases.
         We also repeat our tests using alternative definitions of family control. If we redefine family
firms as only those whose founding family is the largest equity blockholder, founder and non-blood
heir firms again outperform non-don firms in ROA and valuation, and founder and blood-heir firms
again outdo non-don firms in sales and employee growth rates. If we redefine family firms as those
whose founding family owns at least a 10% equity block, qualitatively similar results ensue.
         Another possibility is that some founders may be disinclined to pass on the reins to family
firms. We therefore define Bill Gates founders as those whose founder’s relatives do not ascend to
the CEO job after the founder steps down. We find no statistically significant difference between
firms run by Bill Gates type founders and other founders. Both subsets of founder firms out-
perform firms run by blood-heirs and non-don firms; but neither significantly out-performs non-
blood heir firms - as in the tables. Thus, founders’ firms exhibit superior performance regardless of
their discernable succession preferences.
         We investigate whether our main panel results are driven by particular episodes in the
sampling period, such as the 1980s “bubble economy” or the 1990s “lost decade”. The superiority of
adopted heirs, biological heirs, and founders, persists in each decade of our sampling period (that is,
the 1970s, the 1980s, and the 1990s.) in both ROA and Q dimensions. However, ROA superiority
under blood heirs is driven mainly by the 1980s, and is statistically insignificant in other decades.
         We also perform a battery of robustness checks specifically on our causality analysis. First,
Table 9 uses the old don’s degree attainment from an imperial university as a proxy for his talent.
We sustitute an alternative proxy for the old don’s talent, the average annual ROA of the firm under
the don’s watch excluding the five years immediately prior to the succession event, as a control.
Performance thus defined is arguably sufficiently far removed from the succession event to avoid
any immediate influence on the succession process, and in any case ought not to directly affect the
change in performance following the succession event. Re-estimating the two stage procedure in
Table 9 with this alternative proxy for the old don’s talent yields results qualitatively similar to
those presented in the table. Using both measures of the old don’s talent in concert also yields
qualitatively similar results.
         Our instrument for the don’s family ties is the presence of blood relations on the firm’s
board at the time of the IPO. While this is reasonable in light of the 25 year mean gap (median=26
years) between the IPO and the succession event, we re-estimate Table 9 dropping the 14
succession that follow the IPO by five years or less. Again, qualitatively similar results ensue.
         Tables 8 and 9 measure performance gains by average performance in the two years after
the succession less average performance in the two years before the succession. If we use three
years averages after and before, significance levels weaken somewhat, but the patterns of
coefficient magnitudes and signs remain unchanged. The ROA differences between blood heirs and
non-blood heirs remain significant, as do those between non-blood heirs and sarariman; and the p-
level for the employee growth rate difference between blood heirs and non-blood heirs rises to 0.08,
Overall, differences in three-year average pre and post-succession performance measures tell very
similar stories to those in the tables.
         We also consider the possibility that adopted heirs gain higher performance by taking more
risk. We examine this possibility by comparing the standard deviation of each of the four
performance measures (ROA, Q, Sales growth and Employment growth) using the current year and
the prospective four years of performance under the watch of adopted heirs with each of the other
control groups. We find that – with one exception – none of the realized performance measures
display a higher standard deviation under the watch of adopted heirs vis-à-vis any of the other
control groups. The exception is the higher standard deviation of Q-ratios under the watch of
adopted heirs relative to non-family firms as a group (p-value of difference=0.006). Indeed, other


                                                  24
groups actually have a higher point estimate of realized risk measures, with the difference in
standard deviation of ROA and Sales Growth under sarariman vs. adopted heirs being significant (p-
values=0.000 and 0.003 respectively), and the difference in the standard deviation of Sales Growth,
Employment Growth and Q-ratios between Founders and Adopted Heirs being significant (p-
values=0.025, 0.004, and 0.002 respectively).
        We also compare the change in the variance of performance measures for adopted sons
following succession events. First we measure the change in the variance of performance measures
from before (based on years –5 through –1) to after (based on years +1 through +5) the succession
event anointing the adopted heir as CEO. We then estimate the same change for successors from
other control groups. Finally, we compare the change in the variance of performance measures for
adopted-heir successors with other successors. We find that when adopted sons succeed as CEOs,
the change in the variance of ROA is significantly higher than that of blood-heir successors (p-
value<0.05). Variance changes following succession events for the other three performance
measure – Q-ratios, sales growth, and employment growth – are not significantly different for
adopted-heir successors vs. blood-heir successors. Similarly, comparing adopted-heir successors to
sarariman successors, and to selling out, we do not find that performance changes display a
significantly higher variance for any of the four performance measures. Overall we interpret these
results as being inconsistent with the hypothesis that adopted heirs might achieve better
performance by taking more risk than other sorts of CEOs do.

5.      Conclusions
Inherited family firms are a more important part of the postwar Japanese economy than is generally
realized. In 2000, roughly a third of our sample (firms that listed in years up to 1970) were run by
their founders’ heirs or had his heirs as major equity blockholders. We also find that family firms
tend to stay in the family – over 85% of intergenerational transitions preserve family control.
        This is puzzling, for Burkart et al. (2003) model inherited family control prevailing where
private benefits of control exceed the benefits of diversification. Even if the families’ private benefits
of control are primarily non-pecuniary (Demsetz and Lehn 1985), block and voting premiums
should reveal the value families implicitly ascribe to these benefits. Yet international comparisons
using block and voting premiums to infer the sum of pecuniary and nonpecuniary private benefits
of control show these to be meager in Japan (Dyck and Zingales 2004; Nenova 2003).
        Without private benefits, family control should be unsustainable in a competitive economy
for three fundamental reasons. First, intelligence is at most only partially and undependably
inherited (Herrnstein and Murray 1994; Heckman 1995; Devlin et al. 1997), and business talent is
plausibly a dimension of intelligence (Thorndike 1920; Payne 1983; Gardner 2007), perhaps
complementing general intelligence (Cote and Miners 2006). Second, the Carnegie (1899)
conjecture that immense inherited wealth deadens talent finds empirical support (Holtz-Eakin et al.
1993). Third, reserving the top job for family precludes open CEO tournaments, which Lazear and
Rosen (1981), Demsetz (1996), Frank and Cook (1996), and others show highly effective at
wringing effort from executives throughout the firm.
        This threefold competitive disadvantage readily explains the subpar performance of
inherited family firms in the U.S. (Morck et al. 1988; Perez-Gonzalez 2006; Villalonga and Amit
2006; Miller et al. 2007), Canada (Morck et al. 2000), Denmark (Bennedsen et al. 2007), and other
countries (Bertrand and Schoar 2006); and the rapid diminution of family equity blocks observed in
the United Kingdom (Franks et al. 2004).
        Yet we find Japanese family firms puzzlingly competitive. They outperform professionally
managed firms in both profitability and in market valuation (as measured by Tobin’s Q). Most
importantly, all these results exclude firms run by their founders from the family firm category.
Family firms also display higher growth in sales and employees, suggesting they are not maximizing



                                                   25
profits at the expense of non-financial objectives, such as market share or employment, which Aoki
(1990), Porter (1990), and others argue to be more important in Japan than elsewhere. However,
analogous results for sales growth changes do not emerge from the succession event studies. We
thus have scant evidence that non-financial objective differ in importance across firm types.
         Japan thus appears to resemble developing economies, where Khanna and Rivkin (2001)
report old-moneyed family firms to be stars across many performance dimensions. They link this to
the importance of business families’ reputations and connections in countries where corruption is
prevalent and formal institutions are weak (Faccio 2006; Morck and Yeung 2003; Fogel 2007),
arguing that family control confers genuine economic efficiency benefits in these environments. Yet
Japan scores very low on international surveys on corruption and its institutions are strong (La
Porta et al. 1997). Corruption scandals and institutional flaws appear from time to time in Japan,
but not clearly more often than in the United States or United Kingdom. Moreover, professional
networking is intense in Japan (Gerlach 1997), so family ties should be correspondingly devalued.
Thus, although we cannot categorically rule out “connections” as underlying Japanese family firms’
admirable performance, we concede that this is implausible.
         We trace the relative success of family firms in Japan to a unique custom of incorporating
fresh blood into the family via adult adoptions, many of which also entail an arranged marriage into
the controlling family. Adopting highly qualified adults to head family businesses has the triple
effect of displacing untalented blood heirs, eliciting effort from professional managers who might be
“promoted” to adopted son, and eliciting effort from blood heirs who live under an ever present
threat of being replaced by a “better” adopted son. Consistent with this logic, we find a broad body
of evidence showing family firms run by adopted heirs outperforming family firms run by blood
heirs, and further showing adopted and blood heir managed firms both outperforming both family
firms run by professional sarariman CEOs and non-family firms.
         As in other corporate governance settings, such as hostile takeovers, the threat matters
more than the caning. During the height of the US hostile takeover wave in the 1980s, only one in
ten takeovers was manifestly hostile, with the target board advising shareholders not to tender
(Morck, Shleifer and Vishny 1988a). Yet the threat of a hostile takeover was thought to elicit
economically significant greater effort from CEOs across the board (Shleifer and Vishny 1997). Only
one in ten successions in our sample are to non-blood heirs. Perhaps, as in Voltaire's (1759) Candide,
where "'it is good, from time to time, to kill an admiral, to encourage the others,” a low probability
threat can be effective if the penalty is sufficiently large.36
         Our findings suggest that the unexpectedly high incidence and prosperity of old-moneyed
family firms in Japan need not disturb the generality of a key premise of the business history
literature: that professionalization raises firm efficiency (Landes 1949; Chandler 1977). While Japan
is much less unique than often portrayed (Beason and Patterson 2006), the practice of adult
adoptions into business families seems genuinely exceptional. This practice, and the incentives it
creates for both professional managers and potential heirs, plausibly renders Japanese family firms
more professionally managed than their peers elsewhere, in that star professionals occupy the top
job, and thus perhaps also arguably render them not genuine family firms. Even without adult
adoptions, carefully selected sons-in-law might have similar effects. This suggests that family firms
might better prosper where arranged marriages are more socially acceptable, consistent with
evidence presented by Mehrotra et al. (2009).
         Finally, superior performance in firms run by non-blood heirs, likely selected for talent,
argues that “CEOs matter” (Bertrand & Schoar 2003); Bennedsen et al. 2010); that successful CEOs
possess valuable talent – e.g. creativity (Schumpeter 1911), rationality (Knight 1921, c. 9), or
foresight (Hayek (1941, 334); and the general existence of “leader effects” (Jones and Olken 2005).


36   “il est bon de tuer de temps en temps un amiral pour encourager les autres”, Voltaire (1759)



                                                        26
References
Abegglen, J.C. & G. Stalk, Jr. 1985. Kaisha: the Japanese corporation. Basic Books, New York.
Ahmadjian, Christina & Gregory Robbins. 2005. A Clash of Capitalisms: Foreign Shareholders and
        Corporate Restructuring in 1990s Japan. American Sociological Review 70(3), 451-471.
Anderson, Ronald & David Reeb. 2003. Founding Family Ownership and Firm performance:
        Evidence from the S&P 500. Journal of Finance 58, 1301–1329.
Aoki, Masahiko. 1990. Toward an Economic Model of the Japanese Firm, Journal of Economic
        Literature 27 (1), 1-27.
Aronoff, Craig & John L. Ward. 2000. More than Family: Non-family Executives in the Family
        business. Business Owner Resources.
Bachnik, Jane M. 1983. Recruitment Strategies for Household Succession: Rethinking Japanese
        Household Organization. Man, New Series 18(1), 160-182.
Beardsley, Richard K., John W. Hall & Robert E. Ward. 1959. Village Japan. Chicago: Chicago
        University Press.
Beason, Dick & Dennis Patrick Patterson. 2006. The Japan That Never Was: Explaining the Rise and
        Decline of a Misunderstood Country. Albany NY: State University of New York Press.
Bebchuk, Lucian & Alma Cohen. 2005. The Costs of Entrenched Boards. The Journal of Financial
        Economics 78, 409-433.
Bennedsen, Morten, Francisco Perez-Gonzalez and Daniel Wolfenzon. 2010. Do CEOs Matter?
        INSEAD working paper.
Bennedsen, Morten, Kasper Meisner Nielsen, Francisco Pérez-González & Daniel Wolfenzon. 2007.
        Inside the Family Firm: The Role of Families in Succession Decisions and Performance.
        Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(2), 647-691.
Bernal, Raquel, Luojia Hu, Chiaki Moriguchi and Eva Nagypal, 2007. Child Adoption in the U.S.:
        Historial Trends and the Determinants of Adoption Supply and Demand, 1951-2002.
        Working paper, Universidad de los Andes, Northwestern University and Chicago Federal
        Reserve Bank.
Berrtrand, Marianne & Antoinette Schoar. 2003. Managing with Style: The Effect of Managers on
        Firm Policies. Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(4)1169-1208.
Bertrand, Marianne & Antoinette Schoar. 2006. The Role of Family in Family Firms. Journal of
        Economic Perspectives 20(2), 73–96.
Bhappu, A. D. 2000. The Japanese Family: An Institutional Logic for Japanese Corporate Networks
        and Japanese Management. Academy of Management Review 25(2), 409–415.
Bryant, Taimie. 1990. Sons and Lovers: Adoption in Japan. American Journal of Comparative Law
        38(2), 299-336.
Burkart, Mike, Fausto Panunzi & Andrei Shleifer. 2003. Family firms. Journal of Finance 58, 2167-
        2202.
Burke, William. 1962. Creative Response and Adaptive Response in Japanese Society. American
        Journal of Economics and Sociology 21(1), 103-12.
Carnegie, Andrew. 1899. Wealth. North American Review 148(391), 653-65.
Chandler, Alfred D., Jr. 1977. The Visible Hand. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Chen, Min. 2004. Asian Management Systems. 2nd Edition, London: Thomson Learning.
Coates, John C. & Reinier Kraakman. 2007. CEO Tenure, Performance and Turnover in S&P 500
        Companies, ECGI-Finance Working Paper No. 191/2007.
Cote, S. & C.T.H. Miners. 2006. Emotional Intelligence, Cognitive Intelligence and Job performance.
        Administrative Science Quarterly 51(1), 1-28.
Demsetz, Harold, & Kenneth Lehn. 1985. The Structure of Corporate Ownership: Causes and
        Consequences. Journal of Political Economy 93, 1155-77.
Demsetz, Harold. 1996. The Economics of the Business Firm: Seven Critical Commentaries.


                                                27
         Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Devlin B., M. Daniels & K. Roeder. 1997. The heritability of IQ. Nature 388(6641), 417-8.
Dyck, Alexander & Luigi Zingales. 2004. Private Benefits of Control: An International Comparison.
         Journal of Finance 59(2), 537-600.
Esaka, Akira, 2001. Jigyô keiei-hen, in Sesshû nitsuite. (Business Management, in Family Succession).
         Tokyo: Nihon Jitsugyo Shuppansha.
Faccio, Mara. 2006. Politically Connected Firms. American Economic Review 96, 369-386.
Fogel, Kathy, Randall Morck and Bernard Yeung, 2008. Big Business Stability and Economic Growth:
         Is What's Good for General Motors Good for America? Journal of Financial Economics 89, 83-
         108.
Fogel, Kathy. 2007. Oligarchic Family Control, Social Economic Outcomes, and the Quality of
         Government. Journal of International Business Studies 37(5), 603-22.
Frank, Robert & Philip Cook. 1996. The Winner-Take-All Society. New York: Penguin.
Franks, Julian, Colin Mayer & Stefano Rossi. 2004. Spending Less Time with the Family: The Decline
         of Family Ownership in the UK. NBER program on the History of Corporate Ownership: The
         Rise and Fall of Great Business Families.
Galton, Francis. 1886. Regression Towards Mediocrity in Hereditary Stature. Nature 15, 246–263.
Gardner, Howard. 2007. Five Minds for the Future. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Geringer, J. Michael, Colette A. Frayne & David Olsen. 1999. Rewarding Growth or Profit? Top
         Management Team Compensation and Governance in Japanese MNEs. Journal of
         International Management 4, 289–309.
Gerlach, Michael. 1997. Alliance Capitalism: the Social Organization of Japanese Business. Berkeley:
         University of California Press.
Gibbon, Edward. 1776. The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire. London: Strahan &
         Cadell.
Gompers, Paul A., Joy L. Ishii & Andrew Metrick. 2003. Corporate Governance and Equity Prices.
         Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 107-155.
Hamabata, Matthews Masayuki. 1991. Crested Kimono: Power and Love in the Japanese Business
         Family. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Hayek, F. 1945. The Use of Knowledge in Society. American Economic Review 35(4), 519-30.
Hayek, Friedrich. 1941. Pure Theory of Capital. New York: Macmillan.
Hayes, P. & T. Habu. 2006. Adoption in Japan: Comparing Policies for Children in Need. Abingdon:
         Routledge.
Heckman, James. 1995. Lessons from the Bell Curve, Journal of Political Economy 103(5), 1091-
         1120.
Herrnstein, Richard J. & Charles Murray. 1994. The Bell Curve. New York: Free Press.
Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, David Joulfaian & Harvey Rosen. 1993. The Carnegie Conjecture: Some
         Empirical Evidence. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, 413-35.
Horie, Yasuzo, 1966. The Role of ie (House) in the Economic Modernization of Japan, The Kyoto
         University Economic Review 80: 1-16.
James, Harold. 2006. Family Capitalism: Wendels, Haniels, Falcks, and the Continental European
         Model. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Jones, Benjamin & Benjamin A. Olken. 2005. Do Leaders Matter? National Leadership and Growth
         Since World War II. Quarterly Journal of Economics 120(3), 835-864.
Jung, Jeeman and Robert Shiller. 2005. Samuelson's Dictum and the Stock Market. Economic Inquiry
         43(2), 221-9.
Kaji, N. 1999. Presentation in the minutes of the 8th specialist committee on medical technology to
         assist reproduction. Organized by the Children and Families Bureau, Ministry of Health and
         Welfare. (Dai 8 kai seishokuhojyo iryogiyutu nikansuru senmoniinkai gijiroku; Koseisho
         Jidokateikyuko Boshihokenka)


                                                 28
Kang, Jun-Koo & Anil Shivdasani.1995. Firm Performance, Corporate Governance, and Top
        Executive Turnover in Japan. Journal of Financial Economics 38(1), 29-58.
Kang, Jun-Koo & Anil Shivdasani.1997. Corporate Restructuring during Performance Declines in
        Japan Journal of Financial Economics 46(1),29-65.
Kato, Takao & Katsuyuki Kobo. 2006. CEO compensation and firm performance in Japan: Evidence
        from new panel data on individual CEO pay. Journal of the Japanese and International
        Economies 26, 1-19.
Kerbo, Harold R. & John A. McKinstry. 1995. Who Rules Japan?: The Inner Circles of Economic and
        Political Power. Santa Barbara: Greenwood/Praeger.
Khanna, Tarun & Jan Rivkin, 2001. Estimating the performance effects of business groups in
        emerging markets. Strategic Management Journal 22, 45–74.
Khanna, Tarun & Krishna Palepu, 2000. Is Group Membership Profitable in Emerging Markets? An
        Analysis of Diversified Indian Business Groups. Journal of Finance 55, 867-891.
Khanna, Tarun & Yishay Yafeh. 2007. Business Groups in Emerging Markets: Paragons or Parasites?
        Journal of Economic Literature 45, 331-372.
Kirby, R.J. 1908. An Essay by Dasai Jun. (Translated by R. J. Kirby) Transactions of the Asiatic
        Society of Japan 36(1), 96-135.
Kitsuse, John. 1964. Untitled Review of Japanese Culture: Its Development and Characteristics.
        American Sociological Review 29(2), 309-310.
Knight, F.H. 1921. Risk, Uncertainty, and Profit. Boston, Massachusetts: Houghton Mifflin.
Knight, Frank. 1921. Risk, Uncertainty & Profit. New York: Harper.
Kondo, D. K. 1990. Crafting Selves: Power, Gender, and Discourses of Identity in a Japanese
        Workplace. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Koshin Data, various issues, Jinji kôshin roku (Who is who), Tokyo: Koshin Data.
Koyano, Atsushi. 2007. Nihon no yûmei ichizoku- kindai esutaburisshumento no keizushû (A
        collection of Family trees of Famous families in Japan), Tokyo: Gentôsha.
Kubo, Katsuyuki. 2005. Executive Compensation Policy and Company Performance in Japan.
        Corporate Governance: An International Review 13(3)429-36.
Kurosu, S. 1998. Long Way to Headship, Short Way to Retirement: Adopted Sons in a Northeastern
        Village in pre-Industrial Japan. History of the Family 3, 393-410.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes & Andrei Shleifer. 1999. Corporate Ownership around
        the World. Journal of Finance 54, 471-517.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer & Robert Vishny. 1997. Trust in Large
        Organizations. American Economic Review 87(2), 333-38.
Landes, David S. 1949. French Entrepreneurship and Industrial Growth in the Nineteenth Century.
        Journal of Economic History 9, 45-61.
Landes, David S. 2006. Dynasties: Fortunes and Misfortunes of the World’s Greatest Business Families.
        New York: Viking.
Lazear, Edward & Sherwin Rosen. 1981. Rank and Order Tournament: An Optimal Labor Contract.
        Journal of Political Economy 89, 841-864.
Lebra, Takie Sugiyama. 1989. Adoption among the Hereditary Elite of Japan: Status Preservation
        through Mobility. Ethnology 28(3), 185-218.
Lu, Weijing. 1998. Uxorilocal Marriage among Qing Literati. Late Imperial China 19(2), 64-110.
Macfarlane, Alan, 2002. The Savage Wars of Peace: England, Japan and the Malthusian Trap. London:
        Palgrave.
Mass, J.P. 1989. Lordship and Inheritance in Early Medieval Japan: A Study of the Kamakura Story
        System. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Mehrotra, Vikas, Randall Morck, Jung Wook Shim & Yupana Wiwattanakantang. 2010. Must Love
        Kill the Family Firm? NBER working paper 16340.
Miller, Danny, Isabelle Le Breton-Miller, Richard Lester & Albert Cannella, Jr. 2007. Are Family


                                                 29
         Firms Really Superior Performers? Journal of Corporate Finance 13, 829-858.
Morck, Randall & Bernard Yeung. 2003. Family Firms and the Rent Seeking Society.
         Entrepreneurship, Theory and Practice 28(4), 391-409.
Morck, Randall and Masao Nakamura, 2005. A Frog in a Well Knows Nothing of the Ocean: A History
         of Corporate Ownership in Japan. NBER Chapters, in: A History of Corporate Governance
         around the World: Family Business Groups to Professional Managers, pages 367-466.
Morck, Randall, Andrei Shleifer & Robert Vishny, 1988a. The Differences Between Hostile &
         Friendly Takeovers. In Corporate Takeovers: Causes & Consequences, Allan Auerbach (ed.)
         National Bureau of Economic Research Conference Volume, Chicago: University of Chicago
         Press.
Morck, Randall, Andrei Shleifer & Robert Vishny. 1988. Management Ownership and Market
         Valuation: An Empirical Analysis. Journal of Financial Economics 20, 293–315.
Morck, Randall, Daniel Wolfenzon & Bernard Yeung. 2005. Corporate Governance, Economic
         Entrenchment and Growth, Journal of Economics Literature 43(3), 655-720.
Morck, Randall, David Stangeland & Bernard Yeung, 2000. Inherited wealth, corporate control, and
         economic growth. In Concentrated Corporate Ownership, Randall, Morck (ed.). Chicago:
         University of Chicago Press.
Moriguchi, Chiaki. 2010. Child Adoption in Japan, 1948-2008: A Comparative Historical Analysis.
         Forthcoming Economic Review 61.
Morikawa, Hidemas, 1992. Zaibatsu: The Rise and Fall of Family Enterprise Groups in Japan. Tokyo:
         University of Tokyo Press.
Morris, Robert. 1894. Adoption in Japan. Yale Law Journal 4(4), 143-49.
Nakagawa, T. 1991. Yôshi no sozokuken (The Rights of Adopted Children). Hanrei Taimuzu 688, 27.
Nakamura, Alice & Masao Nakamura. 1981. On the Relationship among Several Specification Error
         Tests presented by Durbin, Wu, and Hausman. Econometrica 49, 1583-8.
Nakane, Chie 1967. Kinship and Economic Organization in Rural Japan. London: Athlone Press.
Nenova, Tatiana. 2003. The Value of Corporate Voting Rights and Control: A Cross-Country Analysis.
         Journal of Financial Economics 68(3), 325-351.
Nihon Keizai Shimbun. 2004. Watashino rirekisho — keizaijin zen 38 kan (My Life: Businessmen, 38
         volumes). Nihon Keizai Shimbun, Tokyo.
Nishioka, Y. 1991. Yôshiga yô’oya yori nenchoto naru yôshi engumino kôyoku (The Legality of
         Adoption when the Adopted Child is Older than the Adopting Parents) Hanrei Taimuzu 747,
         232-4.
Nomura, Susumu, 2006. Shinise kigyo taikoku, in Sen-nen hataraite kimashita. (Japan: the land of
         old-firms, in Have been working for 1000 years). Tokyo: Kadokawa Group Publishing.
O’Halloran, Kerry, 2009. The Politics of Adoption – International Perspectives on Law, Policy &
         Practice. Springer Netherlands 403-432.
Oppler, Alfred. 1976. Legal Reform in Occupied Japan. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Paulson, Joy Larsen. 1984. Family Law Reform in Postwar Japan: Succession and Adoption. Ph.D.
         dissertation (Department of History, University of Colorado).
Payne, W.L. 1983. A study of emotion. Doctoral thesis (University microfilms No. AAC 8605928)
Pelzel, John C. 1970. Japanese Kinship: A Comparison. In Maurice Freedman, ed. Family and kinship
         in Chinese society. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Perez-Gonzalez, Francisco, 2006. Inherited Control and Firm Performance, American Economic
         Review 96, 1559-1588.
Porter, Michael, Hirotaka Takeuchi & Mariko Sakakibara, 2000. Can Japan Compete? Cambridge, MA:
         Basic Books and Perseus Publishing.
Porter, Michael. 1990. The Competitive Advantage of Nations. Free Press, New York.
Rohl, William, 2005. History of Law in Japan since 1868, Part 5, Volume 12, Boston: Brill Publishing.
Samuelson, Paul. 1998. Summing upon Business Cycles: Opening Address. In Jeffrey Fuhrer and


                                                 30
        Scott Schuh, eds. Beyond Shocks: What Causes Business Cycles. Federal Reserve Bank of
        Boston.
Schumpeter, Joseph. 1911. Theorie der wirtschaftlichen Entwicklung. Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot.
Schumpeter, Joseph. 1950. Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy, 3rd ed., New York: Harper and
        Row.
Shigeno, Aneki. 1887. The Evils of Abdication, Heirship, and Adoption. Transactions of the Asiatic
        Society of Japan 15, 72-82.
Shleifer, Andrei & Robert Vishny. 1997. A Survey of Corporate Governance. Journal of Finance 52(2),
        737–83.
Smith, Brian F. & Ben Amoako-Adu. 2005. Management Succession and Financial Performance of
        Family Controlled Firms. In Robert Watson, ed. Governance and Ownership. 314-341. Elgar:
        Cheltenham.
Sraer, David, & David Thesmar. 2007. Performance and Behavior of Family Firms: Evidence from
        the French Stock Market, Journal of the European Economic Association 5, 709–751.
Stock, James, Jonathan Wright & Motohiro Yogo. 2002. A Survey of Weak Instruments and Weak
        Identification in Generalized Method of Moments. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics
        20(4), 518-529.
Takenoshita. Yoshihiro. 1997. Yôshi tokubetsu yôshi kokusai yôshi (Adoptions, Special Adoptions,
        and International Adoptions). Tokyo: Chuo Keizaisha.
Takeuchi, Yo. 1997. The Self-Activating Entrance Examination System: Its Hidden Agenda and Its
        Correspondence with the Japanese "Salary Man". Higher Education 34(2), 183-198.
Thorndike, Edward L. 1920. Intelligence and its use. Harper's magazine 140, 227–235.
Tokiwa Shoin. 1977. Zaikai kakeifu daikan (Family Trees of Big Business). Tokyo: Tokiwa Shoin.
Toyô Keizai, 1995, Nihon kaishashi sôran (The Company History in Japan). Tokyo: Toyô Keizai
        Shimpôsha,.
Tsuru, K. 1996. The Japanese market economy system: its strengths and weaknesses. LTCB
        International Library Foundation, Tokyo.
U.S. Census Bureau, 2003. Adopted Children and Step-children: 2000. Special tabulations.
Villalonga, Belen & Raphael Amit. 2006. How do Family Ownership, Management and Control affect
        Firm Value? Journal of Financial Economics 80, 385–417.
Voltaire, François Marie Arouet. 1759. Candide, or Optimism: A Philosophical Tale.
Wadlington, Walter. 1966. Minimum Age Difference as a Requisite for Adoption. Duke Law Journal
        392 409.
Yamahata, Masao. 1977. Yôshi. (Adopted sons). Juristo Sogotokushu 6, 259.
Zaikai Kenkyûjo. 1979, 1981, 1982, 1983, 1985. Kaisha yakuin roku (The Board of Directors).
        Tokyo:ZaikaiKenkyûjo.




                                                31
Table 1: Adoption Statistics
Special adoptions, explicitly modelled on the foreign practice of finding homes for orphans and
mistreated or unwanted children, are a recent innovation. Ordinary adoptions, in contrast, are a
deeply rooted Japanese tradition, in which parents needing an heir adopt a child or adult.

                                                                    Ordinary adoptions of       Total adoptions of
                     All Adoptions          Special adoptions                                                          Total adoptions of adults
                                                                          minors                     minors

                     yôshi engumi            tokubetsu yôshi            miseinen yôshi

    1955                101,963                      0                      26,983                    26,983                    74,980

    1965                82,176                       0                      15,018                    15,018                    67,158

    1975                86,844                       0                       6,771                     6,771                    80,073

    1985                91,186                       0                       2,804                     2,804                    88,382

    1990                82,007                      738                      1,502                     2,240                    79,767

    1995                79,381                      521                      1,111                     1,632                    77,749

    2000                80,790                      362                       994                      1,356                    79,434

    2002                85,674                      350                       960                      1,310                    84,364

    2004                83,505                      332                       998                      1,330                    82,175

Sources: Tokubetsu yôshi and Child Adoptions Approved by the Court: Supreme Court of Japan. shihôtô keinenpô Kajihen are from issues of the
Annual Report of Judicial Statistics (Table 3 of Volume 3, Family Cases). Adoptions registered by Koseki offices are from issues of the Ministry
of Justice Annual report (Hômu nenkan).




                                                                      32
Table 2: Summary Statistics for Main Variables
ROA is the ratio of operating income to adjusted total assets. Q-ratios is market value over
replacement cost, with market value defined as replacement cost less book value of equity plus
market value of equity; and replacement cost defined as assets adjusted by marking real estate and
equity cross holdings to market. Sales and employee growth statistics are based on year to year
percentage growth. Industry-adjustment is based on subtracting the median value for the matching
two-digit Japanese exchange industry code firms, excluding the sample firm. Total assets are in
billions of yen; leverage is long-term debt over replacement cost; capital expenditure is year-on-
year change in fixed assets plus depreciation over lagged sales; and firm age is years since founding.
Total sample size is 49,638 firm-year observations, containing firms listed on Japanese stock
exchanges between 1949 and 1970. The data cover fiscal years spanning 1962 trough 2000.

                                                                                           Standard
                                    Mean         Median       Maximum       Minimum
                                                                                           deviation

Performance

ROA                                 4.60%        3.92%         30.36%        -18.97%        4.50%

Industry-adjusted ROA               -0.65%       -0.94%        25.99%        -22.83%        3.89%

Q                                    1.40         1.28          5.79           0.29          0.42

Industry-adjusted Q                 -6.13%       -10.31%       381.28%       -197.74%       36.81%

Sales growth                        8.02%        6.15%         114.77%       -70.28%        16.02%

Industry-adjusted sales growth      -0.73%       -1.26%        116.82%       -87.61%        13.10%

Employee growth                     -0.34%       -0.48%        58.98%        -65.44%        8.12%

Industry-adjusted employee growth   -0.61%       -0.49%        111.17%       -90.16%        9.03%

Other Firm Characteristics

Total assets (billion ￥)            189.00        32.40       16100.00         0.17         668.00

Leverage                            11.86%       9.54%         67.02%         0.00%         10.60%

Capital expenditure                 3.41%        1.60%         124.15%       -116.91%       9.51%

Firm age                             44.9         44.0          110.0          4.0           18.3




                                                 33
Table 3: Firm performance and characteristics
Don firms’ founders’ families are either a top 10 equity blockholder, or serve as President or
Chairman. Founder firms are don firms by dint of their founders’ equity block or top management
position. Heir-managed firms are family firms by dint of the equity block or management position of
a member of their founding family other than the founder. In blood heir firms, this is a biological
descendent of the founder; in non-blood heir firms, this is an adopted son or son-in-law. Other
variables are as defined in Table 2.

                                                                  Don firms

                                                                            Family firms
                                                                                                                 Non-don firms
                                    Founder firms    All          Blood heirs      Non-blood heirs   Sarariman

Performance

ROA                                    7.12%        4.64%           4.57%                  5.79%       3.75%         4.24%

Industry-adjusted ROA                  0.69%        -0.46%          -0.49%                 0.19%      -1.03%        -0.91%

Q                                       1.46         1.43            1.43                  1.46        1.40          1.37

Industry-adjusted Q                    4.35%        -3.25%          -2.79%                 1.24%      -10.29%       -8.93%

Sales growth                           14.72%       7.62%           7.61%                  9.63%       5.55%         7.28%

Industry-adjusted sales growth         1.82%        -0.75%          -0.69%             -0.33%         -1.48%        -1.06%

Employee growth                        2.42%        -0.23%          -0.13%                 0.31%      -1.31%        -0.75%

Industry-adjusted employee growth      1.06%        -0.60%          -0.48%             -0.45%         -1.35%        -0.84%

Other Firm Characteristics

Total assets (billion ￥)                58.2         120             114                    164         106           237

Leverage                               10.40%       9.47%           9.44%                  9.49%       9.60%        13.11%

Firm age                                29.2         45.5            46.1                  43.4        45.2          46.7

Family ownership, %                     16.3         12.6            13.1                  15.7         7.4           0.0

Firm-year observations                  4,272       13,882          9,730                  2,125       2,027        31,484




                                                             34
Table 4: Relative performance by control classification, ANOVA results
Variables are as defined in Tables 2 and 3. T-tests adjust for industry and year fixed effects, and for
firm-level clustering of residuals. Numbers in parentheses are p-levels for rejecting the null
hypothesis of identical means. Boldface denotes significance at 5% or better.
    Benchmark        Premium for      ROA, %             Q           S ales growth,%   Labour growth, %
Non-don firms     Don firms            0.729            0.077             0.929             0.656
                                       (0.00)           (0.00)           (0.00)             (0.00)
Non-don firms     Founders             1.465            0.127             2.826             1.761
                                       (0.00)           (0.00)           (0.00)             (0.00)
                  Blood heirs          0.478            0.067             0.463             0.474
                                       (0.00)           (0.00)           (0.01)             (0.00)
                  Non-blood heirs      1.066            0.095             0.504             0.284
                                       (0.00)           (0.00)           (0.11)             (0.27)
                  Sarariman            0.109            0.004            -0.210             -0.313
                                       (0.64)           (0.87)           (0.54)             (0.21)
Blood heirs       Founders             0.987            0.060             2.363             1.287
                                       (0.00)           (0.00)           (0.00)             (0.00)
                  Non-blood heirs      0.588            0.028             0.041             -0.190
                                       (0.03)           (0.38)           (0.91)             (0.49)
                  Sarariman            -0.369           -0.063           -0.673             -0.788
                                       (0.14)           (0.02)           (0.07)             (0.00)
Non-blood heirs   Founders             0.398            0.032             2.322             1.477
                                       (0.21)           (0.33)           (0.00)             (0.00)
                  Sarariman            -0.958           -0.090           -0.715             -0.597
                                       (0.00)           (0.02)           (0.12)             (0.09)
Sarariman         Founders             1.356            0.122             3.037             2.075
                                       (0.00)           (0.00)           (0.00)             (0.00)




                                                  35
Table 5: Performance regressions, founder, family, and other firms
Variables are defined in Tables 2 and 3. Regressions are on firm-level panel data from 1962 through
2000. Total observations equal 47,102 for Q-regressions and 49,638 firm-years for all others.

                              ROA, %             Q           S ales growth,%   Labour growth, %

Founder firms                  1.130            0.108             2.422             1.441

                               (0.00)           (0.00)           (0.00)             (0.00)

Family firms                   0.375            0.050             0.357             0.304

                               (0.00)           (0.00)           (0.02)             (0.01)

Firm size                      0.120            0.005             0.325             0.258

                               (0.00)           (0.24)           (0.00)             (0.00)

Leverage                       -0.095           -0.009           -0.072             -0.068

                               (0.00)           (0.00)           (0.00)             (0.00)

Capital expenditure            0.032            0.005             0.168             0.155

                               (0.00)           (0.00)           (0.00)             (0.00)

Firm age                       -0.016           -0.000           -0.036             -0.025

                               (0.00)           (0.87)           (0.00)             (0.00)

Constant                       7.360            1.878             5.087             1.771

                               (0.00)           (0.00)           (0.00)             (0.01)

Adj. R squre                   0.33             0.35              0.31              0.17

Number of firm clusters        1,367            1,289             1,367             1,367

Year fixed effects              Yes              Yes              Yes                Yes

Industry fixed effects          Yes              Yes              Yes                Yes




                                                36
Table 6: Performance and family control, regressions summary
Variables are defined in Tables 2 and 3. Regressions are on firm-level panel data from 1962 through
2000, and include the control variables listed in Table 5. Total observations equal 47,102 for Q-
regressions and 49,638 firm-years for all others.
    Benchmark         Premium for     ROA, %            Q           S ales growth,%   Labour growth, %
Non-don firms     Don firms            0.540           0.062             0.809             0.552
                                       (0.00)          (0.00)           (0.00)             (0.00)
Non-don firms     Founders             1.133           0.108             2.420             1.438
                                       (0.00)          (0.00)           (0.00)             (0.00)
                  Blood heirs          0.329           0.054             0.446             0.442
                                       (0.02)          (0.00)           (0.01)             (0.00)
                  Non-blood heirs      0.881           0.078             0.384             0.157
                                       (0.00)          (0.01)           (0.21)             (0.51)
                  Sarariman            0.051           -0.000           -0.111             -0.224
                                       (0.83)          (0.99)           (0.74)             (0.34)
Blood heirs       Founders             0.804           0.055             1.974             0.996
                                       (0.00)          (0.00)           (0.00)             (0.00)
                  Non-blood heirs      0.551           0.024            -0.062             -0.284
                                       (0.03)          (0.43)           (0.85)             (0.27)
                  Sarariman            -0.278          -0.054           -0.557             -0.665
                                       (0.25)          (0.03)           (0.12)             (0.01)
Non-blood heirs   Founders             0.253           0.031             2.036             1.280
                                       (0.41)          (0.33)           (0.00)             (0.00)
                  Sarariman            -0.829          -0.078           -0.495             -0.381
                                       (0.01)          (0.03)           (0.25)             (0.24)
Sarariman         Founders             1.082           0.109             2.531             1.661
                                       (0.00)          (0.00)           (0.00)             (0.00)




                                                37
Table 7: Succession Events
Sample is all changes in control from 1962 to 2000 in all Japanese firms initially listed between
1949 and 1970. This includes prewar firms that relisted when stock markets reopened in 1949. The
imperial universities – Tokyo University, Kyoto University, and several others – and Hitotsubashi
University admit solely on academic merit. Entrance to other universities is possible by attending
expensive affiliated preparatory schools.

     Successor type          Events                             Successor sub-type                      Events   Imperial

                               242    blood heir is a merit university graduate                           51       51
Blood heir
                                      blood heir is not a merit university graduate                      191       191

                                42    non-blood heir is legally adopted son and son-in-law                20       17
Non-blood heir
                                      non-blood heir is son-in-law, but not legally adopted son           22       25

Sarariman                       81    family retains top ten equity stake (sarariman-run family firm)     81

Subtotal of family firm successions                                                                      365


Cash out                        60    family not listed among top ten shareholders (non-don firm)

Grand total                    425                                                                       425




                                                                 38
Table 8: Performance changes around succession events
Variables are defined in Tables 2 and 3. Cross-section regressions are on event-level data. Events
are all 425 old don departures from 1962 through 2000 for which control variables data are
complete, and are subdivided according to whether the successor is the old don’s blood heir, non-
blood heir, a professional manager (sarariman) running a firm in which the old don’s family
remains a top ten blockholder, or a professional manager running a firm in which the family is no
longer a top ten blockholder (cash out). Regressions control for firm age, firm size, leverage, capital
spending, and succession year and industry fixed effects. Some firms have more than one succession
event, so standard errors are clustered by firm.

       Benchmark       Premium for      ΔROA             ΔQ         ΔS ales growth   ΔLabor growth
     Non-blood heir   Blood heir        -0.0235         0.0333         -0.0784          -0.0228
                                         (0.00)         (0.47)          (0.00)           (0.10)
                      Sarariman         -0.0340        -0.0333         -0.0623          -0.0110
                                         (0.00)         (0.52)          (0.02)           (0.55)
                      Cash out          -0.0182         0.0624         -0.0568          -0.0174
                                         (0.02)         (0.41)          (0.04)           (0.30)
     Blood heir       Sarariman         -0.0105        -0.0666          0.0162          0.0118
                                         (0.03)         (0.10)          (0.41)           (0.39)
                      Cash out          0.0053          0.0291          0.0217          0.0054
                                         (0.33)         (0.65)          (0.25)           (0.64)
     Sarariman        Cash out          0.0158          0.0957          0.0055          -0.0064
                                         (0.01)         (0.15)          (0.82)           (0.68)




                                                  39
Table 9: Exogenous performance changes around succession events
Variables are defined in Tables 2 and 3. First stage regressions are multinomial logits of succession choices
and are described in [15]. Second stage cross-section regressions are on event-level data and are described
in [16]. Events are all 425 old don departures from 1962 through 2000 for which control variables data are
complete, and are subdivided according to whether the successor is the old don’s blood heir, non-blood heir,
a professional manager (sarariman) running a firm in which the old don’s family remains a top ten
blockholder, or a professional manager running a firm in which the family is no longer a top ten
blockholder (cash out). Second stage regressions control for firm age, firm size, leverage, capital spending,
and succession year and industry fixed effects. Some firms have more than one succession event, so
standard errors are clustered by firm.



       Benchmark       Premium for        ΔROA               ΔQ         ΔS ales growth   ΔLabor growth

    Non-blood heir   Blood heir           -0.0256          -0.0779         -0.1220          -0.0546

                                           (0.00)           (0.29)          (0.00)           (0.03)

                     Sarariman            -0.0434          -0.1219         -0.1417          -0.0861

                                           (0.00)           (0.26)          (0.01)           (0.02)

                     Cash out             -0.0107          0.0087          -0.0040          -0.0297

                                           (0.47)           (0.95)          (0.94)           (0.37)

    Blood heir       Sarariman            -0.0178          -0.0440         -0.0197          -0.0315

                                           (0.06)           (0.57)          (0.55)           (0.13)

                     Cash out              0.0149          0.0867           0.1179          0.0248

                                           (0.19)           (0.43)          (0.00)           (0.25)

    Sarariman        Cash out              0.0327          0.1306           0.1376          0.0564

                                           (0.03)           (0.36)          (0.01)           (0.07)




                                                     40
Figure 1

The career of Osamu Matsuda from his graduation at Chuo University in 1953 through his adoption by
Suzuki patriarch, Shunzou Suzuki, and simultaneous marriage to Shunzou’s eldest daughter in 1958 to his
current position as CEO and Chairman of Suzuki and the patriarch of the Suzuki family.

                                     Arranged
                                     Marriage to
                                     1st daughter of
                                     Shunzou Suzuki;
       Mr. Osamu Matsuda             Joins
       Graduates from                Suzuki Motors;
       Chuo University;              Adopted into            Joins Board of        Promoted to
       Joins Chuo Sogo Bank          Suzuki Family           Suzuki Motors         President
       Age: 23                       Age: 28                 Age: 33               Age: 48


       1953                          1958                    1963                  1978

                                     Son-in-law              Osamu
       Osamu                         Ono Hirotaka            assumes both CEO
       Assumes role                  joins Board of Suzuki   and Chairman roles
       Of Chairman                   As Heir Apparent        upon Ono’s premature death
       Age: 70                       Age: 71                 Age: 77


       2000                          2001                    2007




                                                    41
Figure 2: Prevalence of Founder and Family Controlled Firms: 1962 to 2000
The graph includes all firms trading on Japanese stock exchanges between 1949 and 1970, for which accounting and governance data are
available from 1962 through 2000 (or delisting). Family firms count a founding family member among their top 10 shareholders, directors
empowered to sign for the firm, or as CEO. All other firms are non-don firms. Founder-run firms are family firms whose founder fills one or
more of these criteria. All other family firms are heir-run. Among these, blood heir firms have a biological descendent of the founder and
non-blood heir firms an adopted son or son-in-law filling one of these roles. A sarariman firm’s founding families remains a top 10
shareholder, but provides neither a CEO nor a signing director, instead entrusting these positions to professional managers. Formerdon
firms are one-time family firms that became. The maximum and minimum cross-sections are 1,319 and 1,060 firms, respectively.



    1400



    1200



    1000



     800

                                                                                                                           Non-don
     600
                                                                                                                           Former-don


     400                                                                                                                   Sarariman

                                                                                                                           Non-blood
     200
                                                                                                                           Blood


       0                                                                                                                   Founder
           1962 1964 1966 1968 1970 1972 1974 1976 1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000




                                                                    42
