                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    WHAT MAKES AN EFFECTIVE TEACHER? QUASI-EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE

                                               Victor Lavy

                                         Working Paper 16885
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16885


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2011




I thank Michael Beenstock, Brian Jacob, Daniel Paserman, Steve Pischke, Jonah Rockoff, Yona Rubinstein,
Analia Schlosser and seminar participants at LSE, Hebrew University, Paris School of Economics,
Tel Aviv University, University of London, CEP 2010 Annual Conference, Israeli Economic Association
2011 Meeting and the NBER 2011 Summer Institute Education Conference for most useful discussions
and suggestions. Special thanks go to Daniel Schuchalter and Agnia Galesnik for their excellent research
assistance.h The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Victor Lavy. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
What Makes an Effective Teacher? Quasi-Experimental Evidence
Victor Lavy
NBER Working Paper No. 16885
March 2011, Revised September 2011
JEL No. I21,J24

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper measures empirically the relationship between classroom teaching practices and student
achievements. Based on primary- and middle-school data from Israel, I find very strong evidence that
two important elements of teaching practices cause student achievements to improve. In particular,
classroom teaching that emphasizes the instilment of knowledge and comprehension, often termed
"traditional"-style teaching, has a very strong and positive effect on test scores, particularly among
girls and pupils of low socioeconomic background. Second, the use of classroom techniques that endow
pupils with analytical and critical skills ("modern" teaching) has a very large positive payoff, evidenced
in improvement of test scores across subgroups differentiated by gender and socioeconomic background.
However, a second element of modern teaching, instilment of the capacity for individual study, has
no effect while transparency, fairness, and proper feedback in teachers' conduct with their students
improve marginally academic performance, especially among boys. Apart from identifying "what
works" in the classroom, these findings yield two insights for the debate about the merit of "traditional"
versus "modern" approaches to teaching, which are often discussed as rival classroom pedagogical
approaches. First, both may coexist in the classroom production function of knowledge. Second, it
is best to target the two teaching practices differentially to students of different genders and abilities.
The effect of the effective teaching practices estimated is very large, especially in comparison with
that of other potential interventions such as reducing class size or increasing school hours of instruction.


Victor Lavy
Department of Economics
Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Mount Scopus
Jerusalem 91905
ISRAEL
and The University of Warwick, England
and also NBER
msvictor@mscc.huji.ac.il
1.      Introduction

While teacher quality may be important, it is driven by characteristics that are difficult or impossible to

measure. This is often the conclusion of many past and recent studies that failed to produce consistent

evidence linking pupils‘ achievement to observable teacher characteristics (Hanushek, 1986). As an

alternative, researchers have tried recently to separate student achievements into a series of ―
                                                                                               fixed

effects,‖ assigning importance to teachers, schools, pupils, and so on. For example, Rockoff (2004),

Rivkin et al. (2005), Kane et al. (2008b), and Aaronson et al. (2007) demonstrate substantial and

persistent variations in achievement growth among students assigned to different teachers. An even more

recent strand of research tries anew to identify specific characteristics of teachers that affect pupils‘

achievements. In contrast to older studies that examined mostly the effect of teachers‘ demographic and

educational characteristics , these new studies (e.g., Kane, Rockoff and Staiger, 2008b, Rockoff et al.,

forthcoming, Rockoff and Staiger, forthcoming) focus on characteristics such as cognitive ability,

content knowledge, personality traits, and personal beliefs regarding self-efficacy.

     In this paper, I shift the attention from teachers‘ personal characteristics and attributes to what they

do in the classroom in an attempt to identify the most effective teaching practices. In particular, I

measure teaching practices on the basis of data obtained from surveys among primary- and middle-

school students in Israel in 2002–2005. Students are asked about the intensity that their teachers engage

in specific activities. The idea that students can characterize what their teachers are doing in the

classroom raises a number of measurement and interpretation issues which I discuss in the data and

methodology sections. However, other researchers and organizations recently endorsed and implemented

this approach in other settings. For example, The Bill &Melinda Gates Foundation project ―
                                                                                         Measures of

Effective Teaching,‖ launched in fall 2009 also uses a survey among students to measure perceptions of

the classroom instructional environment (Bill and Melinda Gates Report, 2010) and their effect on

students‘ value added. Their Tripod survey, like the Israeli surveys, asks students if they agree or

disagree with a variety of statements about their teachers‘ classroom practices. Many of its questions

resemble those in the Israeli survey.

                                                     1
     I use the conceptual categorization of teachers‘ pedagogical practices as developed in the

educational-psychology literature (Bloom, 1956) to summarize information based on 29 dimensions of

pedagogy in five aggregated measures of teaching practices. These measures are (1) instilment of

knowledge and enhancing comprehension; (2) instilment of applicative, analytical, and critical skills;

(3) instilment of the capacity for individual study; (4) transparency, fairness, and feedback, and

(5) individual treatment of students.1 I use three different ways of aggregating the students‘ responses and

then I examine which of these characteristics cause students‘ test-score outcomes to improve. Even

though individually only a few of the 29 teaching characteristics have statistically significant effects on

student outcomes, the first two factors of these teaching practices clearly have a large and statistically

significant effect on students‘ test scores. I also find significant effects for some of the other factors by

allowing for heterogeneity in treatment by students‘ gender and socioeconomic status.

     This paper makes its main contribution by identifying multiple ways of measuring effective

teaching for pupils‘ learning. The evidence that I present here, however, also provides insights of

relevance for the ongoing policy debate about the relative merit of ―
                                                                    traditional‖ versus ―
                                                                                        modern‖

methods of classroom teaching. In some countries, recent policy action has replaced traditional teaching

methods with modern ones or vice versa. In the U.S., for example, the National Standards recommend

modern teaching practices that engage students in self- and group-learning activities (National Council of

Teachers of Mathematics, 1991, National Research Council, 1996).2 In England, conversely, Michael



1
   The Tripod questions in The Bill &Melinda Gates Foundation project are summarized in eight principal
components. One of them, ―C     onsolidate,‖ strongly resembles Bloom‘s definition of ―   instilment of knowledge and
enhancement of comprehension.‖ A second component, ―            Challenge,‖ largely overlaps Bloom‘s ―     instilment of
applicative, analytical and critical skills.‖ The other three principal components that I use do not overlap perfectly
with the other components in the Gates Foundation report although, as I noted above, many other similar individual
items appear in both. See Bill and Melinda Gates Report (2010) for further detail.
2
  Zemelman, Daniels, and Hyde (1993 and 2005) provide a normative typology of teaching practices for schools in
the U.S. Traditional practices that should be decreased, they say, include rote practice, rote memorization of rules
and formulas, single answers and single methods of finding answers, the use of drill worksheets, repetitive written
practice, teaching by telling, teaching computation out of context, stressing memorization, testing for grades only,
and being the dispenser of knowledge. Modern teaching practices that should be put to greater use are manipulative
materials, cooperative group work, discussion of mathematics, questioning and making conjectures, justification of
thinking, writing about mathematics, a problem-solving approach to instruction, content integration, use of
calculators and computers, facilitating learning, and assessing learning as an integral part of instruction.

                                                           2
Gove, the Secretary of Education, announced shortly after taking up his post in the summer of 2010 a

reform that would reintroduce traditional teaching and learning in schools.3 In the summer of 2008, the

Israel Ministry of Education unveiled an opposite reform.4 The empirical evidence that I present in this

paper addresses these policy initiatives directly, since ―
                                                         instilment of knowledge and enhancement of

comprehension‖ includes a variety of classroom practices that are viewed as the core of traditional

teaching, requiring students to acquire knowledge through drill, practice, and memorization (Salomon,

Perkins, and Theroux, 2001). The ―
                                 instilment of applicative, analytical, and critical skills‖ measure

captures the main elements of modern teaching style, focusing on the instilment of learning skills and

creative thinking (Resnick, 1987).

     I use in the empirical analysis panel data on pupils in Israel who are in fifth grade in 2002 (primary

school) and in eighth grade (middle school) in 2005. These students were tested in four subjects (English,

Hebrew, mathematics, and science) in both grades as part of a national testing program. I base the

identification on within-pupil analysis (using pupil fixed effects) together with primary- and middle-

school fixed effects that net out any confounding factors among schools or individuals. Therefore,

variations in teaching practices within schools/grades and across classes are natural variations in teaching

styles of teachers. I use this heterogeneity to estimate the effect of interest and demonstrate below that it

does not correlate with any of the pupil or class characteristics that may affect potential outcomes. In

practice, the within school estimation eliminates most of the selection of pupils into primary and middle



3
   For details of the recent reform, see, for example, the Daily Mail of November 25, 2010. Michael Gove‘s
prescription for the improvement of state schools (expressed while he was still the shadow Secretary of Education)
focuses on return to learning based on memorization and comprehension, e.g., reciting multiplication tables,
learning to conjugate verbs, and memorizing important dates and figures in national history. Gove also claimed, ‖It
is often the poorest children who suffer most from trendy teaching. When synthetic phonics was abandoned as the
way of teaching children to read because it was too authoritarian, children from book-rich backgrounds survived
but those who were already book poor fell behind.‖ (See the Daily Telegraph, October 20, 2007, Rachel Sylvester
and Alice Thomson interview with England‘s shadow Education Secretary, and, more recently, Michael Gove
article in the Times, March 17, 2010.)
4
  ‗Pedagogical Horizon,‘ a 2008 circular from the Ministry Director General, advised that as of September 1, 2008,
teaching at the post-primary level would change from being based on memorization, repetition, and practice to
emphasis on development of deep understanding and acquisition of learning and thinking skills. The facilitation of
pedagogical reform entailed other changes, including in curriculum and standards, teacher training, and student
evaluation.

                                                        3
schools but the estimates change further when students‘ fixed effects are added to the estimated

equations. Additional evidence that supports the causal interpretation of the findings presented in this

paper is the institutional rules that forbid school choice and tracking by ability in primary and middle

public schools in Israel and that classes are actually formed randomly. The findings about heterogeneity

of the effect of treatment, by type of teaching practices and by types of students, specifically by gender

and ability, support the claim about the causal nature of our finding because boys and girls, for example,

are sorted similarly across schools and among classes within schools. If the results are produced by

sorting, they should be similar for males and females, but they are not. This heterogeneity in treatment

effects constitute also an evidence against the possibility that it is overall teacher effectiveness and not

specific teaching practices that is causing students‘ value added.

     As mentioned, the evidence presented in this paper suggests considerable pupil heterogeneity by

gender and socioeconomic background in the effect of both teaching practices. Thus, while instilment of

knowledge and enhancing comprehension has a generally positive effect, it is much larger for girls and

for pupils from less-educated families; conversely, the effect of the instilment of applicative, analytical,

and critical skills is positive for both genders and both levels (low and high) of student socioeconomic

status. The coexistence of positive and heterogeneous effects of these seemingly contradictory teaching

practices has important policy implications for the potential improvement of pupils‘ knowledge by the

targeting of teaching methods. Another interesting outcome of the study is that the three other teaching

practices studied have no systematic relation with the improvement of pupils‘ test scores.

     The effect size of the two statistically significant teaching practices is very large relative to other

educational interventions such as reducing class size or improving teacher training. For example, if the

proportion of classroom teachers that practice ―
                                               traditional teaching‖ increases from the mean to the

maximum observed in the sample, the average test score in each subject increases by 0.27 standard

deviation of the test-score distribution. As similar change for ―
                                                                modern teaching‖ practice increase test

scores by 0.25 standard deviation. These large effect sizes of teaching practices and the consistency of

the findings reported in this paper are important as many countries search for ways to promote ―
                                                                                               teacher

                                                     4
quality‖ or ―
            teacher effectiveness.‖ This ardent interest, partly occasioned by anxiety in some countries

about students‘ poor performance in international tests and comparisons such as TIMMS, PISA and

PIRLS, is not being addressed by much reliable evidence. The findings reported in this paper are a step

toward meeting this demand.

     The paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 presents brief review of the most relevant literature,

Section 3 describes the data, and Section 4 explains the empirical methodology. The results, robustness

checks, and heterogeneity in the treatment effects of teaching practices are presented and discussed in

Section 5. The last section concludes and suggests policy implications.


2.      Related Literature

A yhtg nel list of studies represents the efforts of researchers to use non-experimental data to estimate

teacher effects on pupils‘ learning outcomes (e.g., Hanushek, 1971; Murnane and Phillips, 1981;

Rockoff, 2004; Hanushek, Rivkin, and Kain, 2004; Jacob and Lefgren, 2005; Aaronson, Barrow, and

Sander, 2007; Kane, Rockoff, and Staiger, forthcoming; Gordon, Kane, and Staiger, 2006, Cantrell et al

2008). Several additional studies used random assignment to estimate the variation in teacher effects. In

this kind of analysis, Nye, Konstantopoulous, and Hedges (2004) revisited the results of the STAR

experiment in Tennessee. After accounting for the effect of different classroom-size groupings, their

estimate of the variance in teacher effects was well within the range typically reported in the non-

experimental literature. Chetty et al. (2010), based on the STAR experiment data as well, followed the

project participants to adulthood and have shown that students who had a more experienced teacher in

kindergarten have higher earnings.

     Some researchers (e.g., Clotfelter et al., 2006, 2007) found that teachers with stronger academic

backgrounds produce larger performance gains for their pupils; others did not find this relationship (e.g.,

Harris and Sass, 2006, on graduate coursework and Kane et al., 2008a, on college selectivity). A small

number of studies (e.g., Clotfelter et al., 2006, 2007; and Goldhaber, 2007) found a link between




                                                    5
teachers‘ scores on certification examinations and their effectiveness; Harris and Sass (2006) found no

such relation.

     Researchers acknowledge the possibility that non-random assignment of students to teachers may

distort measures of teacher effectiveness. Some teachers are given better students who would achieve

well in many different classrooms. Some researchers question whether a teacher‘s specific contribution

can be accurately estimated at all, given the possibility that students are assigned to teachers on the basis

of unmeasured characteristics not captured by test scores and demographics (Rothstein, 2010). Other

researchers, while recognizing the potential of bias, are more optimistic (Koedel and Betts (2007). One

recent study (Kane, Rockoff and Staiger, 2008b) compared experimental (i.e., classes randomly assigned

to teachers) and non-experimental estimates of teachers‘ effects on student achievement growth for a

small sample of teachers in Los Angeles. In that sample, the non-experimental or observational measures

predicted the experimental measures with little bias—as long as the observational models controlled for

each student‘s prior achievements.

     In several studies, the effect of teachers in one grade fades out as students progress to higher grades

(McCaffrey et al, , 2004; Kane, Rockoff and Staiger, 2008a; Jacob, Lefgren, and Sims, 2008; Rothstein,

2010). Hypotheses for the fadeout range from artifacts of empirical strategy to the heterogeneity of

teacher quality within schools to the relevance of skills gained in one year for skills tested the next year

(Kane, Rockoff and Staiger, 2008b).

     A few recent studies found a relationship between a teacher‘s measured effect on student

achievements and overall subjective administrator ratings (Jacob and Lefgren, 2005; Rockoff and

Speroni, 2010; Rockoff, Jacob, Kane and Staiger, forthcoming). These studies, however, do not identify

the criteria or behaviors that the school principals use to make their judgments. Two papers that are close

in motivation and measurement of treatment to this study is Tyler et al., (2010) and Kane et al., (2011).

The first paper describes the early and the second the final results from the same study where teachers‘

evaluation and their teaching practices are related to student achievement. The study finds that measures




                                                     6
of teaching effectiveness are substantively related to student achievement growth and that some observed

teaching practices predict achievement more than other practices.

     The Learning about Teaching (Bill and Melinda Gates foundation, December 2010) report about

initial findings from Measures of Effective Teaching Project suggests that a teacher‘s past track record of

value-added is among the strongest predictors of their students‘ achievement gains in other classes and

academic years. The teachers who lead students to achievement gains on one year or in one class tend to

do so in other years and other classes. The report also suggests that student perceptions of a given

teacher‘s strengths and weaknesses are consistent across the different groups of students they teach and

that student perceptions in one class are related to the achievement gains in other classes taught by the

same teacher.


3.      Data

The empirical analysis uses two samples, one of fifth-grade primary-school students and one of eighth-

grade middle-school students. Both samples were culled from Jewish secular schools to the exclusion of

others, because this part of the Israeli school system places Grades 5 and 8 in different schools—primary

and middle, respectively. The distinction is important because it requires students to change schools in

the middle and because the secular school system does not allow school choice at either the primary or

the middle level, except in a few cities where charter schools that allow opting out of neighborhood

schools. I address this issue again in the Methodology section below.

     I drew the two samples from the Growth and Effectiveness Measures for Schools (GEMS)—Meizav

in Hebrew—datasets for 2002 and 2005. GEMS, composed of a series of tests and questionnaires

administered by the Evaluation and Measurement Division of the Ministry of Education,5 is administered

at the midterm of each school year to a representative 1-in-2 sample of all primary and middle schools in

Israel, so that each school participates in GEMS once every two years.


5
  The GEMS assessments are not administered for school accountability purposes; only aggregate results at the
district level are published. For more information on GEMS, see the Evaluation and Measurement Division website
(in Hebrew): http://cms.education.gov.il/educationcms/units/rama/odotrama/odot.htm.

                                                       7
     The GEMS student data include test scores of fifth- and eighth-graders in mathematics, science,

Hebrew, and English, as well as the responses of fifth- through ninth-grade students to questionnaires. In

principle, all students except those in special-education classes are tested and required to complete the

questionnaire. The proportion of students tested is above 90% and the rate of questionnaire completion is

roughly 91%. The raw test scores use a 1–100 scale that we transform into z-scores to facilitate

interpretation of the results. The tests in all four subjects measure facts, analytical skills and also critical

thinking, both at low and high level. These properties of the achievement tests are important because we

may expect traditional teaching to matter more for learning about facts while we would expect modern

practices to be more important for critical thinking.

     The GEMS student questionnaire addresses various aspects of the school and learning environment.

The section I used, focusing on teaching style and practices, includes 29 items that are listed in the

Appendix. These items ask students to rate on a six-point scale to what proportion of their teachers the

statement is appropriate. A score of 1 indicates ‗none of the teachers‘, 2 indicates ‗very few teachers‘, 3

indicates ‗few teachers‘, 4 indicates ‗part of the teachers‘, 5 indicates ‗large part of the teachers‘, and 6

indicates ‗almost all teachers‘. The items refer to the current year‘s teachers so it is not a retrospective

report but on the other hand it has the limitation of ignoring a student‘s history of teachers. Perhaps we

can view this limitation as an advantage here because students, particularly those in primary grades, are

less likely to be particularly retrospective. Another point to emphasize is that these survey questions

provide information about the average teaching practices of all teachers that teach a particular class and

not about a particular teacher. We should note this distinction when interpreting the evidence presented

later sections. Although we probably care also about the practices of the teacher in the subject of interest,

rather than the proportion of a student‘s teachers who exhibit a certain practice, the latter measure is

much less likely to be endogenous. The average teaching styles of teachers of a given classroom is less

likely to be a function of student abilities, class size and so on. Nevertheless, I describe in the next

section the identification strategy where I control for student‘s ability by a pupil‘s fixed effect and I

provide evidence that classes are formed randomly out of the students in a given grade. Both of these

                                                        8
elements limit very much the possibility that the variation in teaching practices that I use for estimation

reflects some endogenous placement of certain teaching practices.

       I group the items under five categories that describe teachers‘ pedagogical practices in the

classroom: (1) instilment of knowledge and enhancement of comprehension (seven items); (2) instilment

of applicative, analytical and critical skills (nine items); (3) instilment of capacity for individual study

(three items); (4) transparency, fairness, and feedback (three items); and (5) individual treatment of

students (seven items). These categories of teachers‘ pedagogical practices correspond to common and

accepted terminology in the educational-psychology literature, dating back to Bloom (1956), on major

categories in the taxonomy of educational objectives (―
                                                      Categories in the Cognitive Domain‖). Each

category comes with detailed list of outcomes and a list of outcome-illustrating verbs. Knowledge, for

example, is defined as the remembering (recalling) of appropriate previously learned information; the

associated verbs include define, describe, enumerate, and others that are listed in Appendix B.6 Bloom

(1956) defines comprehension as grasping (understanding) the meaning of informational materials; some

of the associated verbs in this category are classify, convert, describe, discuss, and explain. Bloom uses

both concepts, ―
               knowledge‖ and ―
                              comprehension,‖ to define his first teaching practice, ―
                                                                                     instilment of

knowledge and enhancement of comprehension.‖ In relying on Bloom‘s logic and categorization, I avoid

some arbitrariness in grouping the items in different categories even though some people could disagree

with Bloom as to the appropriate placement of certain items. However, it is important to note here that

the results reported in this paper are stable with respect moving items that may seem to some as less

definitive in terms of the category to which they ‗belong‘. For example, it can be argued that item 3 in T1

("The teachers commend students who know the material well") or item 7 in T1 ("I understand the

teachers' scholastic requirements well") could legitimately be placed in the transparency, fairness and

feedback domain. Changing the locations of these items does not affect the basic results reported below.




6
    Retrieved from (http://faculty.washington.edu/krumme/guides/bloom.html).

                                                         9
Such robustness of the estimated effect of the various categories is also an indication that the number of

items included in each category is not affecting the reliability of the composite.

     In this paper, I focus on the first four teaching-practice measures and do not report evidence on the

fifth measure (―
               individual treatment of students‖) because it reflects the level of the students in class and

its estimated effect is prone to reverse causality. I do, however, include this measure in all the estimated

regressions that I report in the paper even though the estimated effect of the other four teaching-practice

measures does not change when the fifth measure is omitted from the estimated equations—partly

because the estimates of this measure are almost always small and not significantly different from zero.

     I aggregate the student‘s responses to a class level measure in three different ways. First, I treat the

teaching practices variables as cardinal treatment by assigning a proportional value to each categorical

response as follows: ‗none of the teachers‘ = 0, ‗very few teachers‘ = 0.2, ‗few teachers‘ = 0.4, ‗part of

the teachers‘ = 0.6, ‗large part of the teachers‘ = 0.8 and ‗almost all teachers‘ = 1.0. It is important to

note here that here is an obvious justification for treating the numerical values assigned to the categorical

responses as meaningful because students are asked about the proportion of their classroom teachers that

use certain teaching practices. I then simply average the students‘ responses to each question given the

above proportional values and then use the mean of all questions that form each of the teaching practices

as the treatment variables. However, as an alternative treatment measure I use the proportion of students

that give a given or higher categorical response in each of the items that form a teaching practice. I use

three thresholds for computing this measure: 4 (‗part of the teachers‘ or more), 5 (‗large part of the

teachers‘ or more), and 6 (‗almost all teachers‘). This is an ordinal measure and it will be useful to

compare the results obtained when using it to those I obtain when using the first cardinal measure. A

third measure that I use is to simply average the categorical values (1 to 6) without translating them to

their proportion counterpart. It is important to note that all these three alternative methods of measuring

classroom level teaching practices yield identical evidence about their effect on test score outcomes.

However, I find the first method most appealing because it is intuitive and the estimates it yields are




                                                     10
meaningfully interpretable as the treatment is measured as the proportion of classroom teachers that use a

given teaching method.

        I linked the student questionnaire data and the 2002 and 2005 test scores data to student

administrative records collected by the Israel Ministry of Education, which include student demographic

background characteristics. Using the linked datasets, I built one data set for primary schools and another

for middle schools. The primary-school file for 2002 includes data from 415 primary schools with test

scores and student questionnaires. The means of students‘ characteristics in this sample are presented in

column 1 of Table 1. The panel sample includes students from 359 primary schools and their mean

characteristics are presented in column 2 of Table 1. Restricting the panel sample to primary schools with

at least five students leaves 122 such schools and their students' mean characteristics are presented in

column 3 of Table 1. The mean characteristics of pupils included in the panel dataset (in column 2 or 3)

are not very different from those of the full sample though some of these differences are significant. But

note that the differences in father and mother year of schooling as well as the gender composition are

very small and they are not statistically different from zero. Therefore, we can conclude that the panel

sample is representative of the full sample in terms of the background characteristics that are most

important as determinants of cognitive outcomes.

        The middle school file for 2005 includes data from 176 schools with eighth grade students‘

questionnaires and test scores. The panel sample with at least five students in each school includes 192

schools, 122 primary schools and 70 middle schools.


4.         Empirical Strategy

The structure of GEMS makes it possible to track a sample of students from primary schools (fifth grade

in 2002) to middle schools (eighth grade in 2005).7 I used this feature to construct a longitudinal dataset

at the student level to examine how changes in teaching practices (styles and methods) induce changes in

pupils‘ test scores. We know from prior work (e.g., Rivkin et al., 2005) that there exists dramatic cross-


7
    I did not link datasets from consecutive years because almost all localities were sampled once every two years.

                                                           11
grade variation in measures of teacher quality and I use in this paper such variation for estimating the

effect of teaching practices. However, it is important to note that that this change is due to the

compulsory transition of students from primary to middle school. Also important is the fact that Israel

does not allow school choice at the primary and middle levels; pupils are assigned to their neighborhood

primary school and middle school, the latter often having a catchment area that includes several primary

schools.

     Since the estimated regression includes a student fixed effect and a school fixed effect, the

identification is based on contrasting the change in exposure to the various teaching practices during

grades five and eight among students who followed the same transition path from primary to middle

school. More formally, I assume that the cognitive achievements of pupils in grades five and eight are

determined by the following equation:

           (1)    yics  i s  Scs' 2    (TeachingPractice) sc   ics  cs

where i denotes individuals, c denotes class (within a grade), and s denotes schools. Since the school

indicator is perfectly correlated with the grade indicator (fifth or eighth grade), there is no need to add a

grade effect in Equation (1). yics is an achievement measure for student i in class c and school s;  i is a

pupil effect,  s is a school effect, Scs is a vector of characteristics of class c in school s; it includes a set
                                       '



of variables for average characteristics of students in the class (mother‘s and father‘s years of schooling,

number of siblings, immigration status, and five groups of ethnic origin), characteristics of class learning

environment and climate (such as levels of classroom noise, violence, lack of discipline and class size).

(TeachingPractice) sc is a vector of four teaching practices (  1...4) in class c and school. These are

measured by the proportion of the classroom teachers who use each practice. The error term in the

equations is composed of a school-specific random element cs that allows for any type of correlation

within observations of the same school across classes and an individual random element  ics . The

coefficient of interest is θ, which captures the effects of the different teaching practices. For the purpose



                                                       12
of comparison, I will also present OLS estimate of regressions that do not include pupil‘s fixed effects

but include instead individual characteristic as controls:

         (2)      yics   s  xics
                                  '
                                      1  Scs' 2    (TeachingPractice) sc   ics  cs

       '
Where xics is a vector of student‘s covariates that includes mother‘s and father‘s years of schooling,

number of siblings, immigration status, and ethnic origin, and indicators for missing values in these

covariates.

     To estimate Equations (1) and (2), I need to observe students while they are in fifth and eighth

grade. For the estimates in Equation (1) to have a causal interpretation, however, the unobserved

determinant of achievement must be uncorrelated with the treatment variable. The inclusion of school

fixed effects and pupil fixed effects controls for the most obvious potential confounding factor—the

endogenous sorting of students across schools. However, there may be unobserved within-school and

across-class factors that also correlate with changes in teachers‘ teaching practices. If some classroom

characteristics are not controlled, the estimated effects of interest will be biased. Random assignment of

students and teachers to classrooms solves this problem by breaking the link between teaching practices

and extraneous effects on the class such as unobserved peer quality. True random-assignment variation

is rare in an education context and unavailable in many countries. However, students in Israel‘s primary

and middle schools are rarely grouped into classes on the basis of ability or family background; in fact,

such practices are forbidden by law. Therefore, classes in primary schools with multiple classrooms at

the same grade level are typically formed on a more-or-less random basis; classes in middle schools are

formed in a way that creates social integration by mixing students from different socioeconomic

backgrounds.8 Since all classes within a grade are of equal average ability, teachers are assigned to

classes more-or-less randomly and the possibility of better teachers avoiding assignment to lower-



8
  A 1968 education reform established a three-tier structure of schooling in Israel: primary (grades 1–6), middle (7–
9), and high (10–12). The reform established neighborhood school zoning as the basis of primary enrollment and
integration, sometimes with busing, of students out of their neighborhoods in middle school. Tracking and sorting
of students in primary- and middle-school classes were outlawed and the law is strictly enforced.

                                                         13
performing classes is irrelevant, as is the possibility for ―
                                                            teacher-shopping‖ by parents. I note here also

that the lack of tracking in primary and middle schools in Israel rule out as well the possibility that class

composition changes across subjects. Therefore, the students in a given class rank the same teachers.

     The foregoing implies that (TeachingPractice) sc will be uncorrelated with class-level shocks cs

conditional on a set of school fixed effects, pupil fixed effects, and class-mean characteristics. Thus, the

basic identifying assumption in this study is that the systematic components of teaching practices in

school arise only at the school level and not at the class level. A necessary condition for the within-

school estimation to work is, of course, that there is sufficient variance in teaching practices within a

school, as is the case in our data.

     The identification strategy I use in this paper is most closely related to that of Ammermueller and

Pischke (2009), who use a school-fixed-effects framework to estimate peer effect based on within-school

and across-class variation in peer ability. They demonstrate that conditioned on a school fixed effect,

class composition within a grade is random. However, I also include a pupil fixed effect in the

regressions, which accounts for any selection based on pupil specific attributes. This addition is very

important in the context of this paper because it is possible that the teaching practices vary based on

students‘ ability. The student fixed effects that I include in the regression are therefore appropriate

controls that rule out a bias due to potential endogeneity of teaching practices. Including also in the

                                                '
regressions the class level characteristics ( Scs ) is also useful in this regard.


Evidence of the Validity of the Identification Strategy

The key identifying assumption I make in this paper postulates that, conditional on pupil fixed effects,

changes in teaching practices within a school are uncorrelated with changes in unobserved factors that

may affect students‘ outcomes. I assess here, from different angles, the plausibility of this assumption. I

first discuss the assignment of students both between and within schools and present evidence that sheds

light on the question of whether classes are formed (more-or-less) randomly and whether different

classrooms systematically get different resources. Even if the variation in teaching practices within a

                                                        14
school resembles a random process, however, these variations may be correlated with additional class-to-

class changes that may affect student outcomes. To assess this possibility, we check whether changes in

teaching practices within a school are associated with changes in student background characteristics such

as parental education, family size, ethnicity, and student's immigration status.

     Students in Israel attend primary school from initial enrollment to grade 6 and middle school from

grades 7 to 9. Generally speaking, primary-school assignment depends on place of residence. Each

middle-school catchment area includes several primary schools in order to achieve social integration by

blending pupils from different socioeconomic backgrounds. Parents can affect choice of school in certain

ways, e.g., by choosing to live near the school of their choice. The school administration is responsible

for assigning students to classes within schools. Extra resources are allocated to schools that have a high

share of disadvantaged or recent-immigrant students but class size cannot exceed 40 students in all

schools. An important regulation from the Ministry of Education forbids grouping of students by ability

in primary and middle school.9 Even when parents fund additional weekly instruction hours, these

resources cannot be used for the formation of study groups by ability (tracking) or any other criterion.10

A similar regulation from the Ministry applies to middle schools and requires heterogeneous classes. For

example, a circular from the Director General outlining the responsibilities of a middle-school principal

relative to the responsibilities and authority of a secondary-school principal states explicitly that it is the

responsibility of the former to create heteroegenous classes and that ability tracking is allowed only after

ninth grade.11 These institutional rules are supported by evidence from PIRLS 2003, based on the item in

the school questionnaire that asks whether the school forms classes on the basis of ability. The fraction of

students in schools that report some ability grouping at the class level is close to zero and it does not vary

by gender. I obtained similar evidence from TIMSS 1999 and PIRLS 2003, which included a similar

question about the extent to which classes are formed based on students‘ ability. Jakubowski (2009),


9
  Ministry of Education, Circular from the Director General, March 2000:
http://cms.education.gov.il/EducationCMS/applications/mankal/arc//s7bk3_1_8.htm.
10
   See http://cms.education.gov.il/EducationCMS/applications/mankal/arc//sc3ak3_11_9.htm.
11
   See http://cms.education.gov.il/EducationCMS/Units/Sherut/Takanon/Perek7/Chativa/.

                                                      15
using PIRLS 2003 data to study the effect of tracking, included Israel among countries that do not track

students by ability in their primary- and middle-school systems.

     Having obtained this institutional evidence of random formation of classes within schools, I used

the sample of all primary and middle schools to test whether the data I use in this study also support this

claim. In particular, I checked class assignment to see whether it correlates systematically with students‘

characteristics. For this purpose, I performed a series of Pearson Chi-Square (  ) tests for eight
                                                                                 2



characteristics: gender, father‘s years of schooling, mother‘s years of schooling, number of siblings, and

three ethnic origin indicators. If a school forms its classes randomly, any particular characteristic of a

student should be statistically independent of his or her class assignment. In father‘s schooling, for

example, the Pearson  test asks whether there are more pupils with high father‘s schooling in a
                      2



particular class than is consistent with independence, given the size of the school‘s enrollment.

Ammermuler and Piscke (2009) describe and apply this test in their study of peer effects. Formally, I

performed the Pearson test for each school and, under the assumption that schools in Israel are

independent, I also added up the test statistics for all schools to obtain an aggregate test statistic such as

that described by DeGroot (1984). Obviously, I performed this test only on the basis of the subsample of

schools (482 out of 605) that had two or more classes within the relevant grade. Of the 1928 p values for

primary schools, 83—only 4% of the sample—were lower than 5%. Furthermore, only two schools had

two or more of characteristics with p-values equal to or lower than 5%. The aggregate p-values for each

of the four characteristics far surpassed 20 %. The middle-school data yielded similar results: of 230

middle schools with two or more classes, 82 were equal or lower than 5% out of 920 p-values. Therefore,

in 9% of the cases I cannot reject that there is non-random assignments. However, only in 13 of the 230

schools (exactly 5% of all schools) two or more p-values are equal or lower than 5%. Overall, I conclude

that there is no evidence of systematic formation of classrooms with respect to the four measures of

student family background measures.




                                                     16
     The second question I investigate in this section is whether classrooms that differ in teaching

practices differ in pupils‘ characteristics as well. To test whether classroom teaching practices are

statistically independent of each of the student characteristics, I ran balancing tests as are run in

randomized trials, using the following OLS regression model:

     (3a)      xics     (TeachingPractice) sc  vics

and the following school fixed effect model:

     (3b)       xics    S   (TeachingPractice) sc  vics

where  S are the school fixed effects. Tables 2 and 3 present estimates from regressions where the

dependent variable is a student characteristic and the explanatory variable is one of the four teaching-

practice measures. Table 2 presents the results for the fifth-grade sample and Table 3 does the same for

the eighth-grade sample. Each table presents the results from two specifications: an OLS regression

without any additional control variables and another that includes school fixed effects. I could not add

individual fixed effects because the nature of the pupil-background characteristics (father‘s years of

schooling, mother‘s years of schooling, number of siblings, an indicator of recent immigration, a gender

indicator, an indicator of whether a pupil‘s parents are native Israeli and four other indicators of ethnic

origin) generally rules out changes in characteristics between grades 5 and 8. I also ran these balancing

tests for class size in search of evidence of selection in allocating school resources to classes.

     Tables 2 and 3 offer little evidence for the proposition that students of different family backgrounds

are more likely to be in classes that invoke certain teaching practices, conditional on the school they

attend. Only eleven of the 72 balancing coefficient estimates presented in Table 2 and Table 3 are

significantly different from zero at the 10 percent level of statistical significance when school fixed

effects are included in the regressions. Four of these imbalance characteristics are with respect to the

teaching practices ‗transparency, fairness and feedback‘ and five of them relate to the gender variable.

This pattern stands in sharp contrast to the balancing estimates obtained from the OLS equations (without

school fixed effects), which yielded 32 estimates that were significantly different from zero. It useful to


                                                      17
demonstrate this lack of signs of selection based on the parental human capital variables. The pattern of

selection between primary schools with respect to parental schooling is negative, meaning that primary

schools with large enrollments of pupils whose fathers or mothers have many years of schooling have

lower intensities of all four teaching practices; All eight of the OLS estimates were significantly different

from zero. However, after I added the school fixed effects to the regressions, three estimates changed

signs to positive and no one of these 8 estimates is significantly different from zero. The respective

pattern of selection with respect to parental school is different in middle schools as only two of the eight

OLS estimates and two of the school fixed effects estimates are significantly different from zero, all

related to the forth teaching practice (transparency, …). The between- and within-school selection pattern

with respect to number of siblings are inconsistent as well, as two of the eight OLS estimates and three of

the eight school-fixed-effect estimates were positive. Further, only 2 of the OLS estimates and one of the

school fixed effect estimates were significant. Similarly inconsistent is the positive selection pattern in

the distribution of teaching practices between schools based on the balancing-test estimates (some

positive, some negative) of the proportion of immigrant pupils. I view these inconsistencies in the

selection patterns across the various socio-economic proxies as suggestive evidence that even across

schools the variation in teaching practices is not an indication of clear meaningful selection that can

confound the effect of teaching practices on pupils‘ academic outcomes in a certain direction. I should

emphasize again, however, that once I added school fixed effects to the regressions, all evidence or signs

of potential selection disappeared.

     This evidence largely confirms that classes in the sample schools are formed randomly within the

schools. There is little evidence that students of different family backgrounds are more likely to be

grouped in certain classes depending on the school they attend. However, even if classes are formed

randomly, they may receive other school resources differentially. For example, if a class ends up with

more children from less advantaged family backgrounds purely by chance, the school may assign this

class a smaller class size. To shed light on this question, I ran a set of regressions of the teaching-practice

variables described in the previous section on class size and its square. The estimates presented in

                                                      18
columns 17-18 in Table 2 and Table 3 show that there are no meaningful within schools correlations

between class size and any of the four teaching-practice variables. All eight estimates are not

significantly different from zero and two are even positive.


5.      Results

I now analyze the effects of the various measures of teachers‘ teaching practices on students‘ test scores.

Table 4 presents descriptive statistics for the four teaching-practice measures. In the Appendix, I present

the items that I averaged into each of these indices. Even though each of the items ranges from 0 to 1, the

range is narrowed when aggregated into the four teaching-practice measures, from about 0.2 to about 1.

There are no significant differences between the descriptive statistics of the panel and the full samples

and the means of T1-T4 are marginally lower in grade 8. Based on the means from the full sample

(presented in panel B of Table 4) we see that a higher proportion of classroom teachers practice T1 than

T2-T4. In primary school, the mean of T1 is 0.76 and in middle-school it is 0.65. The respective means

of T2 are 0.57 and 0.47. The respective means of T3 they are 0.58 and 0.42. The similarity between the

mean proportion of teachers using T2 and T3 is a result of these two practices being different dimensions

of modern teaching.

     Table 5 reports estimates based on pooling of all four subjects together and each specification in the

table includes subject fixed-effect indicators. I report the effect of each category of teaching practice.

Although estimates for all individual items that I used to construct the aggregate teaching-practice

measure are not reported here, I should note that most of these estimates are not precisely measured and

some have negative values, partly because of the high correlation among the various items. Therefore, it

is appropriate and necessary to aggregate the items in several principal components as I do in this paper.

Having no prior information with which to justify a particular weighting, I assign equal weight to all

items grouped in a given teaching-style characteristic in order to provide a more transparent

interpretation. I computed the class-level mean of these teaching-practice characteristics for each student

while excluding the student‘s own answer. When I used measures based on means that included also


                                                    19
students‘ own answers, I obtained the same results exactly. I also tried averaging the z scores of each

item instead of the absolute value of the students' response to each of the questions and I obtained again

the same results. I tried as well an alternative measure of the teaching practices, using (0/1) dummy

variables that divide the sample to two groups based on alternative thresholds values of the proportion of

teachers that use each of the teaching practices. The results from these alternative measures are fully

consistent with the continuous measures and I will provide more details on this issue later in this section.

     The first and second columns in Table 5 report OLS estimates from an equation that included the

following control variables: pupil‘s background characteristics (gender, father‘s and mother‘s years of

schooling, number of siblings, an indicator of immigration status, and five indicators of ethnic origin—

Europe/America, Asia/NorthAfrica, Soviet Union, Ethiopia, and Israel). I also included in the regression

as controls the class-level means of all these indicators, an indicator for each of the four subjects, and

measures of class climate and learning environment such as level of noise, disturbances, violence, and

lack of discipline. In Column 1, the estimates are from separate regressions in which each teaching

practice enters as a single treatment variable. In Column 2, the estimates come from one regression that

includes all the teaching practice measures as multiple treatments. In Columns 3 and 4, I add primary-

and middle-school fixed effects to the specification of columns 1-2. In the specification presented in

Columns 5 and 6, I replace all the student‘s control variables with students‘ fixed effects. In Panel A, the

results are based on a sample of schools that have at least five pupils in the panel data (the Five plus

sample); in Panel B, the sample is further restricted to include schools that have at least ten pupils in the

panel data (the Ten plus sample). The estimates in Panel B provide a robustness check to the sensitivity

of the estimates to the precision of the school-fixed-effect estimates.

     Focusing first on the OLS estimates of the effects of teachers‘ pedagogical methods in panel A, we

see that all eight estimates are positive but only two (the estimated coefficients of T1) are significantly

different from zero. This suggests that there is no obvious selection-bias pattern for three of the treatment

measures even if based on the OLS estimates. It is also noticeable that the Column 1 and Column 2

estimates show no clear differences in sign and precision. However, adding the primary and middle

                                                     20
school fixed effect to the equation induces a major change in the size and sign of the estimates of the

teaching-practice measures. Focusing on the specification that includes all treatment measures in the

regression, we observe the following: the estimate of T1 (Instilment of Knowledge and Enhancement of

Comprehension) drops marginally to 1.010 (se=0.268) and the estimate of T2 (Instilment of Analytical

and Critical Skills) climbs to 0.810 (se=0.265) relative to its respective OLS estimate. The estimate of T3

is almost unchanged but become more precise and the estimate of T4 (Transparency, Fairness, and

Feedback) is reversed in sign and becomes significant. Adding the pupil‘s fixed effects to the regression

leads to an equal proportional decline in the point estimates of T1, to 0.792 (se=0.292), and of T2, to

0.520 (se=0.281). The other two estimates (of teaching practices T3 and T4) are reversed in sign, become

very small and not statistically different from zero.

     The estimates reported in Columns 5–6 have two remarkable features. The first is the similarity

between the estimates when only one of the teaching-practice measures is used as a treatment measure

and when all four are used jointly. The estimates of T1 and T2 are only 20-30 percent lower when all

teaching practices enter jointly as treatments in the regression. This pattern suggests that there is very

little omitted variable bias when three of the four teaching-practice measures are left out of the equation

once we include pupil and school fixed effects. Apparently, even though T1 and T2 are highly correlated,

the conditional (on schools and students fixed effects) partial correlation between these two variables is

much smaller which allows measuring precisely their independent effect on test scores. The second is the

difference in the estimates of the two measures that capture two distinct elements of modern teaching. T2

has positive and significant estimated effect while the estimated effect of T3 is practically zero (small,

negative and insignificant). By implication, if it is selection that generates the positive effect of T2, it

must be very different for each of these two measures, which is very unlikely. Another noteworthy

feature of the estimates in Column 5-6 is the relative similar sensitivity of the estimates of T1 and T2 to

the addition of pupils‘ fixed effects to the regressions, as T1 falls by about 60 percent and T2 by about 40

percent. I should also note that the estimates of the other two teaching practice measures (T3 and T4)




                                                        21
also change when pupil‘s fixed effects are added, from large and significantly different from zero to

much smaller and imprecise.

     Panel B of Table 5 presents estimates based on a sample restricted to schools that had at least ten

pupils in the panel data. The estimated effects do not change at all in comparison to those presented in

Panel A. This restriction allows greater precision in estimating school fixed effects and it is important

that the estimated effects of T1 and of T3–T4 are not sensitive to this sample restriction.

     Before discussing the effect size of the various estimates, it is important to rule out the possibility

that if there is a correlation between specific teaching practices and overall teacher effectiveness, our

findings then simply reflect the underlying teacher effectiveness and not the effect of the practice itself.

For example, if a teacher with strong thinking skills is more effective than one with weak thinking skills,

using either ―
             modern‖ or ―
                        traditional‖ practices, we would expected to see the patterns reported above.

However, this does not seem to be driving our results as demonstrated by the very different estimated

effects of T2 and T3. Even though these two teaching practice are highly correlated (estimated

correlation coefficient of 0.873, see Table A1) and both are integral elements of modern teaching, T2 has

a significant effect on test score while T3 has a zero effect. If it is overall teachers effectiveness and not a

specific teacher practice that improve student outcomes, we should have observed T3 being equally

effective as T2. I will return to this issue in the next section when presenting evidence about the

heterogeneity of the effect of T1 and T2 across sub-groups of students, by gender and by ability. We

would not expect such treatment heterogeneity if it is the overall teacher‘s effectiveness that is causing

students‘ value added instead of some specific teaching practices.

     Overall, the evidence in Table 5 strongly suggests that two of the four teaching styles and methods

have positive and meaningful effects on pupils‘ learning. The more important of them in terms of effect

size is the indicator of the extent to which teachers make sure that their students know and understand the

material by using examples, memorization techniques, homework, classwork, and so on. When the mean

(65 percent of the classroom teachers) of this teaching-practice measure rises to the maximum (99

percent of the classroom teachers) observed in the data (in the full sample), the test score changes by an

                                                      22
average of 0.27 (=0.34 * 0.792) standard deviation of the test-score distribution. The effect of elevating

teachers‘ instilment of analytical and critical skills in the classroom from the mean (0.47) to the

maximum (0.95) observed in the data (full sample) is only marginally smaller at 0.25 (=0.48 * 0.52)

standard deviation. A simultaneous change in these two teaching practices, which is not unreasonable

because there are many classes with large proportion of teachers using both practices, leads to a again of

over half a standard deviation of the test score distribution. A more drastic policy change is to improve

the use of T1 or T2 from the lowest to the highest proportion observed in the data. The gain for such a

change in T1 is 0.53 (0.67*0.792) and for a respective change in T2 it is 0.39 (0.75*0.52). These results

suggest that the gains associated with changes in these two effective teaching practices are much bigger

than the effect of most other effective interventions, such as reducing class size, increasing schooling

time, or providing teachers and students with conditional financial incentives. It is also probably less

expensive to train teachers in the appropriate use of these two effective teaching practices than to

implement these alternative interventions. Before further discussing the policy implications of the

findings, however—I do this in the Conclusions section—I present additional evidence about the

heterogeneity of the effect of T1 and T2.


Results Based on Ordinal Measures of Teaching Practices

        I have treated so far the teaching practices variables as cardinal treatment measuring the

proportion of classroom teachers that use a given teaching practice. To assess how sensitive are the

results to this particular way of measurement of teaching practices, I also estimated models with the two

alternative measures of the treatment variables. I first used the simple mean of the categorical ranking of

students without converting them to proportional terms. The results based on these cardinal measures are

identical completely to the results presented in Table 5 and are available from the author. Second, in

Table 6, I present treatment estimates where I measure the intensity of each teaching practice by the

proportions of answers above a certain level (4, 5 or 6) in all the questions that the teaching practice

consist of. Column 1 presents estimates where the proportion count includes all answers from 4 and up


                                                    23
(students who said that part or large part or almost all of the teachers apply the relevant teaching

practice). The proportion of students for this level of treatment of T1 is 0.816 and for T2 it is 56.1 The

effect of T1 and T2 are positive and significantly different from zero and the former is larger. The effect

of T3 and T4 are practically zero. The evidence presented in columns 2 and 3 depicts the same pattern.

Comparing the estimates in the three columns suggests that T1 has a large effect already when 40 percent

of the classroom teachers are practicing T1 and any increment in T1 has declining marginal effect. On

the other hand, the effect of T2 is largest when all teachers practice it in class.

        Overall, the results using the two alternative measures of the teaching practices are consistent

with the evidence presented in the last column of Table 5 and therefore I will continue using in the rest of

the paper the measures used in Table 5.


Estimated Effects by Subject

     The results reported so far assume that the effect of each of the teaching practices is the same in all

subjects. To test this assumption, columns 1–2 in Table 7 present evidence based on the pooling of math

and science test scores and columns 3–4 on the basis of pooling Hebrew and English test scores. All

estimates in columns 1–4 of Table 7 are based on regression specifications that include pupil and

primary- and middle-school fixed effects. I view these groupings as less restrictive than the pooling of all

four subjects together because pedagogy and teaching style may well be more similar in the first two

subjects, which are intensive in math and rigorous analysis, and in the two language subjects.

Comparison of the estimates in Columns 2 and 4 reveals a surprisingly close similarity in the respective

estimates of the effect of all four teaching practices. Based on the estimates in Panel A, the effect of

instilment of knowledge/comprehension measure (T1) is 0.788 for math and science and 0.804 for

Hebrew and English. The estimate of enhancement of analytical and critical skills (T2) is 0.406 for math

and science and 0.553 for Hebrew and English. The estimates for the other two teaching style measures

are small, practically zero, and insignificant for both sets of subjects. Note also the consistency in sign of

these two measures in both sets of subjects: T3 is negative in math and science and in Hebrew and


                                                       24
English, and T4 is positive in both. The results presented in Panel B strengthen these conclusions. In fact,

in the 10+ sample the effect of T2 in math and science is even more similar to that in Hebrew and

English (0.089 and 0.118, respectively). This suggests that pooling all four subjects in estimation is not

overly restrictive and offers the advantage of estimating the parameter of interest more precisely.

     In Table A2, I present evidence based on a separate regression for each subject. The four estimates

of T1 are again similar, highest for English (1.030) and lowest for Hebrew (0.550). However, running

separate regressions for each subject comes at the expense of precision of estimates because of the

smaller sample size used in each regression. The estimates of T2 are not very different for English,

Hebrew and science but it is much lower in math. I therefore present in Table A3 column 1 results based

on pooling all subjects except math. The estimates in this column are very similar to those presented in

Table 5 with the exemption that the estimated effect of T2 is now 25 percent higher and all estimates

have lower standard errors.


Heterogeneous Treatment Effects

To gain further insights on the extent of effects of teaching styles and methods on students‘ test scores, I

explore heterogeneous effects across different dimensions. Table 8 reports heterogeneous treatment

effects of the teaching-style measures by gender and by father‘s years of schooling (above or equal

to/below the median, i.e., 13 years).12 I prefer to stratify the sample by these subgroups instead of using

interaction terms for these subgroups with the treatment effects because in the latter approach the

treatment-interaction terms may pick up variations by gender or parental schooling in the effects of other

covariates included in the regressions. The stratifying approach comes at the price of estimating the

heterogeneous treatment effects on the basis of a smaller sample. Since the sample-size issue is

especially troubling in estimating fixed-effects models, Panel A of Table 8 shows the results from

samples that are restricted in each subgroup to the inclusion of at least five pupils per school.

12
   Students with missing values in parental education (4% of the total sample) are excluded from this analysis. The
results are not sensitive to the inclusion of these students in the low or high education group. Estimating
heterogeneous treatment effects by mother‘s schooling, the results obtained are very similar to those based on
father‘s schooling.

                                                       25
     In Columns 1 and 2 of Table 8, I report the effect of each of the four teaching-practice measures on

boys and girls, respectively. The estimates of T1 (―
                                                   traditional‖ teaching) presented in the first row reveal

a striking difference in the effect of this teaching practice on boys and on girls. The effect on boys is not

statistically different from zero (0.213, se= 0.439) while the estimated effect for girls is very large, 0.997

(se=0.426). The estimated standard errors of these parameters clearly does not allow us to accept the

hypothesis that the practice is more effective for girls than for boys but nevertheless this gender gap is

quite obvious. The effect of T2 (―
                                 modern‖ teaching), on the other hand, has a much smaller gender gap,

though here in favor of boys. The estimate for boys 0.742 (se=0.437) and for girls it is 0.303 (se=0.400).

Clearly the confidence intervals of these two estimates overlap greatly because the two estimates are

imprecisely measured. Another apparent gender difference is in the estimates of the transparency,

fairness, and feedback practice (T4), which are positive and significant for boys and small, negative, and

not different from zero for girls. These gender differences are evident as well when math test scores are

not included in the sample. These results are presented in columns 2-3 of Table A3.

     The implications of this result—that solving problems and exercises routinely in class and teaching

based on repetition of material until most students attain knowledge and comprehension affect girls in the

main, as opposed to boys—are important and interesting. First, they are consistent with several studies,

which show that other schooling interventions either affect only girls (e.g.., pupil monetary incentives) or

affect both genders equally (e.g., teacher financial incentives or class-size reduction). Second, this

heterogeneity in treatment effect is evidence that the effect of T1 and T2 are not simply capturing the

overall teacher‘s effectiveness because in that case we would expect to observe each teaching practice to

affect similarly boys and girls. Note that boys and girls are studying in the same classes within schools

and there is no within school systematic differences between the measures of teaching practices based on

boys and girls assessment of the (same) classroom teachers.

     Next, I stratified the sample by high or low father‘s years of schooling. Since the father‘s schooling

variable has fewer missing values, I used it to define this indicator even though the evidence based on

mother‘s years of schooling is very similar. Overall, there is large heterogeneity between the groups in

                                                     26
the effect of T1 but not in the effect of T2. The effect of T1 on pupils of low socioeconomic status (SES),

0.940 (se=0.412), is larger and marginally statistically different from the effect on high-SES pupils,

0.119 (se=0.503).13 Yet the economically meaningful much higher effect of T1 on low-SES pupils is

intuitive since this teaching style, which emphasizes practice and rote learning in the classroom, most

likely replaces relatively scarce home and parental guidance in the production of knowledge among low-

SES families. However, the similarity in the effect of the modern style of teaching on the two groups

may be unexpected but is encouraging because it provides an important indication that pupils from low

SES-backgrounds can be equally motivated and challenged by a teaching style that emphasizes the

instilment of learning skills and creative thinking. It would be useful to stratify the samples of low and

high SES by gender as well in order to gain more insights about the heterogeneity of these two very

quantitatively important teaching practices in the classroom, but it is not possible in this study due to

sample-size limitations.

     Table 9 presents evidence about the heterogeneous effect of T1 and T2 on students‘ ability as

measured by their ranking in the test-score distribution. I defined a new outcome measure as a product of

the z score and the 1/0 indicator based on the percentile ranking of the pupil‘s test score in a given

subject. The table offers estimates for five regressions: the 25th, 50th, 75th, 80th and 90th percentiles. The

pattern of the results based on these percentiles is a good representation of the evidence obtained for

other percentiles. Clearly, instilment of knowledge and enhancement of comprehension is very effective

in the classroom for pupils below median ability; its effect drops sharply after this threshold is surpassed.

In contrast, the effect of instilment of analytical and critical skills is not very effective at very low ability

(below the 25th percentile) but its effect picks up and remains high until the very high level of ability,

although it is highest at around the 75th percentile and then declines gradually. However, the differences

in the effect across the distribution of ability levels above the first quartile are not large and sharp enough



13
  These differences by family SES background are evident as well when math test scores are not included in the
sample. These results are presented in columns 4-5 of Table A3.



                                                       27
to draw firm conclusions about such heterogeneity. The results in Table 9 are consistent with the

evidence presented in Columns 3–4 of Table 8 due to the positive and large correlation that exists

between ability (ranked by test scores) and socioeconomic background.

     The evidence about the heterogeneous treatment effects of T1 and T2 is important because it adds

credibility to the causal interpretation of the estimates. I showed in Section 4 that classes within schools

are formed randomly with respect to parental schooling and student‘s gender; therefore, any

unaccounted-for sorting or selection of teaching-practice measures across classes within schools should

not be different by gender or by parental schooling. The evidence of differential gender and parental-

schooling effects is an indication that potential omitted selection or sorting factors, as well as the

possibility of endogeneity of the teaching practices, cannot account for the results I present in this paper.

The heterogeneity in treatment effects is also an indication that the estimates do not trace to a pattern in

which students prefer the teaching practices that their favorite teachers use. This conclusion is enhanced

by the way I computed the measures of teaching practices—averages based on the assessment of all

students in the class—and by the insensitivity of the results to excluding or including own assessment in

computing the class average. Finally, the heterogeneity in treatment effects is also an indication that the

estimates do not reflect overall teacher effectiveness. If it is the latter, we would have expected to see

similar effects for boys and girls, and also for high and low ability students.


6.      Conclusions

In this paper, I measured empirically the relationship between classroom teaching practices and student

achievements. I found very strong evidence that two important teaching practices cause student

achievement growth. In particular, classroom teaching that emphasizes ―
                                                                      instilment of knowledge and

comprehension" has a very strong and positive effect on test scores, especially of girls and of pupils from

low socioeconomic backgrounds. Second, the use of classroom techniques that endow pupils with

―
analytical and critical skills‖ has a very high payoff, especially among pupils from educated families.

Transparency in the evaluation of pupils, proper and timely feedback to students, and fairness in


                                                     28
assessing pupils also lead to cognitive achievement gains, especially among boys. However, ―
                                                                                           instilment

of the capacity for individual study‖ does not cause any gain in value added of students learning. These

results are robust to the three different methods I use to aggregate the students‘ responses about their

teachers‘ teaching practices to class level means.

     Beyond estimating models with school and student fixed effects that control for all sorts of selection

and sorting of students into schools, this paper provides several additional reasons to believe that

selection and sorting are not responsible for the results summarized above. I show, for example, that boys

and girls were sorted similarly across schools; thus, if the results trace to sorting, they should have been

similar, rather than very different, for males and females. In addition, there does not appear to be any

sorting within the sample by parental schooling yet the effects of treatment are again heterogeneous.

Similarly, if the effect of teaching practices is simply capturing overall teacher effectiveness, we would

not expect to see heterogeneity in effect by teaching practices and by gender ability groups of students,

but we do. All this evidence supports a causal interpretation of the estimated effects summarized above.

     The evidence I presented in this paper provides important insights about what does and does not

work in the classroom; the set of results is one of the first that clearly identifies actions of teachers that

―
pay off‖ versus others that do not. This study has additional policy relevance because its evidence sheds

light on the merits of traditional versus modern approaches to teaching, a contrast that has featured in

recent policy debates and educational reforms in several countries. This study may be the first to

demonstrate that one approach need not crowd out the other and that the two can coexist. The estimated

heterogeneity in treatment effects of the two styles and the essence of teaching that I estimated in this

paper implies that it is best to target certain teaching practices to relevant customers and also to mix the

two in the classroom. However, a limitation of this study that perhaps can be addressed in the future is

that teaching practices are measured as a class average and not for individual teachers.

     The effect sizes estimated for some of teaching practices are truly impressive, especially relative to

the effect sizes of other potential interventions such as reducing class size, increasing school hours of

instruction, and providing more teacher training. These three alternative interventions and other possible

                                                     29
educational programs are much more expensive or difficult to implement than the installation of

appropriate teaching practices in the classroom. Although this change would entail some teacher training,

it should not be too costly since teachers in most education systems around the world routinely engage in

on-the-job training. Therefore, re-directing the syllabus relating to enhancement of teachers‘ human

capital toward training in adequate use of ―
                                           instilment of knowledge and enhancement of comprehension‖

and ―
    instilment of analytical and critical skills‖ should be neither too difficult nor too costly. The

potential gains seem enormous and worth the effort to sway away teachers from teaching practices that

suit their comparative advantages but may not be effective.




7.      References
Ammermueller, Andreas and Jorn-Steffen Pischke, (2009). ―     Peer Effects in European Primary Schools:
     Evidence from PIRLS,‖ Journal of Labor Economics, vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 315–348.
Aaronson, Daniel, Lisa Barrow and William Sander (2007). ―       Teachers and Student Achievement in
     Chicago Public High Schools,‖ Journal of Labor Economics Vol. 24, No. 1, pp. 95–135.
Bill and Melinda Gates foundation. 2010. ― Learning about Teaching: Initial Findings from the Measures
     of Effective Teaching Project‖ MET project, Research Paper, December.
Bloom, Benjamin S. (ed.), 1956, Taxonomy of Educational Objectives, Handbook 1: Cognitive Domain,
     New York, N.Y: Longmans, Green and co.
Cantrell Steven, Kane, J. Thomas, Jon Fullerton, and Douglas Staiger. ― National Board Certification and
     Teacher Effectiveness: Evidence from a Random Assignment Experiment,‖ NBER Working Paper
     #14608, December 2008.
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Nathaniel Hilger, Emmanuel Saez, Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach, AND
     Danny Yagan, ―   How Does Your Kindergarten Classroom Affect Your Earnings? Evidence From
     Project Star‖, 2010, forthcoming, Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Clotfelter, C.T., Ladd, H.F., Vigdor, J.L. ―Teacher-Student Matching and the Assessment of Teacher
     Effectiveness‖ Journal of Human Resources 41(4):778–820 (2006).
Clotfelter, C.T., Ladd, H.F., Vigdor, J.L. (2007). ― How and Why Do Teacher Credentials Matter for
     Student Achievement?‖ NBER Working Paper 12828.
DeGroot, Morris. 1984. Probability and statistics. 2nd ed. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Goldhaber, Dan. 2007. ―   Everyone's Doing It, but What Does Teacher Testing Tell Us about Teacher
     Effectiveness?‖ Journal of Human Resources 42(4): 765–94.
Gordon, Robert, Thomas J. Kane and Douglas O. Staiger, (2006). ―    Identifying Effective Teachers Using
     Performance on the Job‖ Hamilton Project Discussion Paper, Published by the Brookings
     Institution.
Hanushek, Eric A. (1971). ―    Teacher Characteristics and Gains in Student Achievement; Estimation
        Using Micro Data‖. American Economic Review, 61, 280-288.
Hanushek, Eric A., John F. Kain, Steven G. Rivkin, ―    Why Public Schools Lose Teachers‖, Journal of
        Human Resources 39(2), Spring 2004b.
Hanushek, Eric A. ―  The Economics of Schooling: Production and Efficiency in Public Schools.‖ Journal
     of Economic Literature, September 1986, 24(3), pp. 1141–1117.


                                                   30
Harris, Douglas, and Tim R. Sass. 2006. ―      Value-Added Models and the Measurement of Teacher
    Quality.‖ Florida State University. Unpublished.
Jacob, Brian and Lars Lefgren (2005). ―    Principals as Agents: Student Performance Measurement in
    Education‖ NBER Working Paper No. 11463.
Jacob, B.A., L. Lefgren, and D. Sims, ―   The Persistence of Teacher-Induced Learning Gains,‖ NBER
    working paper #14065, June 2008.
Jakubowski Maciej, ―   Early tracking and achievement growth‖ Directorate for Education, OECD,
    December 2009.
Kane, Thomas J., Jonah E. Rockoff, and Douglas O. Staiger (2008a). ―    What Does Certification Tell Us
    about Teacher Effectiveness? Evidence from New York City.‖ Economics of Education Review,
    27(6): 615–631.
Kane, Thomas J., Jonah E. Rockoff and Douglas Staiger, (2008b). ―        Estimating Teacher Impacts on
    Student Achievement: An Experimental Evaluation‖ NBER Working Paper #14607, December.
Kane Thomas J., Eric S. Taylor, John H. Tyler and Amy L. Wooten, ―    Identifying Effective Classroom
    Practices Using Student Achievement Data‖, Journal of Human Resources, 2011, 587-613.
Koedel Cory and Julian Betts, 2007. "Re-Examining the Role of Teacher Quality In the Educational
    Production Function," Working Papers 0708, Department of Economics, University of Missouri.
Konstantopoulos, S. ―How Long Do Teacher Effects Persist?‖ IZA Discussion Paper 2893, 2007.
McCaffrey, D. F., Lockwood, J. R., Koretz, D., Louis, T. A., and Hamilton, L. (2004). Models for value-
    added modeling of teacher effects. Journal of Educational and Behavioral Statistics, 29(1), 67-101.
    (2004).
Murnane, R. J. & Phillips, B. R. (1981). ― What Do Effective Teachers of Inner-City Children Have in
    Common?‖ Social Science Research, 10, 83–100.
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics, (9119) ―           Professional Standards for Teaching
    Mathematics‖, Published by the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
National Research Council, 1996, ―  National Science Education Standards‖, National Academy Press
    Washington, D.C.
Nye Barbara, Spyros Konstantopoulos and Larry V. Hedges ―           How Large Are Teacher Effects?‖,
    Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis Fall 2004, Vol. 26, No. 3, pp. 237-257.
Resnick, L. (1987). Education and Learning to Think, Washington D.C.: NationalAcademy Press.
Rivkin, S., Hanushek, E. A. and Kain, J. (2005). ―    Teachers, Schools, and Academic Achievement,‖
    Econometrica, 73(2): 417–458.
Rockoff, J. E. (2004). ― The Impact of Individual Teachers on Student Achievement: Evidence from
    Panel Data,‖ American Economic Review, 94(2): 247–252.
Rockoff, Jonah E., Brian Jacob, Thomas J. Kane, and Douglas O. Staiger. ―        Can You Recognize an
    Effective Teacher When You Recruit One?‖ Education Finance and Policy, 2011, 6(1): 43-74.
Rockoff, Jonah E., and Cecilia Speroni (2010). ―     Subjective and Objective Evaluations of Teacher
    Effectiveness.‖ American Economic Review, 100(2): 261–66.
Rockoff, E. Jonah and Douglas Staiger. ―  Searching for Effective Teachers with Imperfect Information,‖
    forthcoming, Journal of Economic Perspectives.
Rothstein, Jesse (2010). ―  Teacher Quality in Educational Production: Tracking, Decay, and Student
    Achievement.‖ Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(1): 175–214.
Salomon, G. Perkins, D. Theroux, P. (2001). Comparing Traditional Teaching and Student Centered,
    Collaborative           Learning          [Online,         retrieved          14/6/02]          URL:
    http://shaw.ca/priscillatheroux/collaborative.html.
Tyler, John H., Eric S. Taylor, Thomas J. Kane, and Amy L. Wooten. (2010) "Using Student
    Performance Data to Identify Effective Teachers and Teaching Practices." American Economic
    Review 100(2):256-260.
Zemelman Steven, Harvey Daniels, and Arthur Hyde, Best Practice, Today's Standards for Teaching and
    Learning in America's Schools, 1993 and 2005, Heinemann, Reed Elsevier Incorporation.


                                                  31
Appendix A: Questionnaire Items
Instilment of knowledge and enhancement of comprehension
    1. The teachers give exercises and assignments that help memorize the material.
    2. The teachers ask many questions in class that check whether we know the material well.
    3. The teachers commend students who know the material well.
    4. The teachers provide many examples that help understand the material.
    5. The teachers hold discussions in class that help understand the material.
    6. During lessons, the teachers ask many questions that check whether we understand the material
        well.
    7. I understand the teachers' scholastic requirements well.

Instilment of analytical and critical skills
    1. The teachers give exercises and assignments whose answers have not been studied in class and
        are not in the textbooks.
    2. The teachers require that we use what we have studied to explain various phenomena.
    3. The teachers ask that we find new examples by ourselves for the material we have studied.
    4. The teachers ask that we try to find several ways to solve a certain problem.
    5. The teachers teach us to find a single common explanation for different phenomena.
    6. The teachers give assignments where it is required to analyze material and to relate it to other
        things we have studied.
    7. When there are several ways to solve a problem, the teachers require that we check them all and
        find the best one.
    8. The teachers expect us to ask ourselves whether what we have learned is correct.
    9. The teachers teach us how to know whether information we have found is important, relevant,
        and usable.

Instilment of capacity for individual study
    1. The teachers teach us how to learn new topics by ourselves.
    2. The teachers require students to utilize many and varied sources of information (newspapers,
        books, databases etc.).
    3. The teachers teach us to observe our environment and to follow phenomena that occur in it.

Transparency, fairness and feedback
   1. The teachers explain to me exactly what I have to do to improve my studies.
   2. The teachers explain according to what they determine the grades / assessments.
   3. The teachers often tell me what my situation is regarding schoolwork.

Individual treatment of students
    1. The teachers know what the educational difficulties of each student are.
    2. When a student has difficulty with a certain topic, the teachers give him more time to study it.
    3. The teachers give homework to every student according to his place in the material.
    4. The teachers help every student to learn topics interest him.
    5. The teachers give me a feeling that if I make an effort I will succeed more at studies.
    6. When a student fails, the teachers encourage him to try again.
    7. The teachers always assist me when I need help with studies.




                                                    32
Appendix B: Major Categories in the Taxonomy of Educational Objectives
(Bloom, 1956) (http://faculty.washington.edu/krumme/guides/bloom.html)

Categories in the Cognitive Domain: (with Outcome-Illustrating Verbs)
1. Knowledge of terminology; specific facts; ways and means of dealing with specifics (conventions,
trends and sequences, classifications and categories, criteria, methodology); universals and abstractions
in a field (principles and generalizations, theories and structures): Knowledge is (here) defined as the
remembering (recalling) of appropriate, previously learned information.
         ● defines; describes; enumerates; identifies; labels; lists; matches; names; reads; records;
         reproduces; selects; states; views.
2. Comprehension: grasping (understanding) the meaning of informational materials.
         ● classifies; cites; converts; describes; discusses; estimates; explains; generalizes; gives
         examples; makes sense out of; paraphrases; restates (in own words); summarizes; traces;
         understands.
3. Application: the use of previously learned information in new and concrete situations to solve
problems that have single or best answers.
         ● acts; administers; articulates; assesses; charts; collects; computes; constructs; contributes;
         controls; determines; develops; discovers; establishes; extends; implements; includes; informs;
         instructs; operationalizes; participates; predicts; prepares; preserves; produces; projects;
         provides; relates; reports; shows; solves; teaches; transfers; uses; utilizes.
4. Analysis: the breaking down of informational materials into their component parts, examining (and
trying to understand the organizational structure of) such information to develop divergent conclusions
by identifying motives or causes, making inferences, and/or finding evidence to support generalizations.
         ● breaks down; correlates; diagrams; differentiates; discriminates; distinguishes; focuses;
         illustrates; infers; limits; outlines; points out; prioritizes; recognizes; separates; subdivides.
5. Synthesis: Creatively or divergently applying prior knowledge and skills to produce a new or original
whole.
         ● adapts; anticipates; categorizes; collaborates; combines; communicates; compares; compiles;
         composes; contrasts; creates; designs; devises; expresses; facilitates; formulates; generates;
         incorporates; individualizes; initiates; integrates; intervenes; models; modifies; negotiates; plans;
         progresses; rearranges; reconstructs; reinforces; reorganizes; revises; structures; substitutes;
         validates.
Evaluation: Judging the value of material based on personal values/opinions, resulting in an end
product, with a given purpose, without real right or wrong answers.
         ● appraises; compares and contrasts; concludes; criticizes; critiques; decides; defends; interprets;
         judges; justifies; reframes; supports.




                                                     33
        Table 1: Descriptive Statistics and Mean Differences Between the Panel and the Full Sample

                                 Means,            Means, panel       Means, panel       T-test,            T-test,
                                 sample of all     sample of 5th      sample of 5
                                                                                  th     differences        differences
                                  th                                                     between            between
                                 5 grade           grade students     grade students
                                 students in        in 2002             in 2002:         means in           means in
                                 2002                                 schools with       column 1 and       column 1 and
                                                                      at least 5         column 2           column 3
                                                                      students in
                                                                      final sample


                                       (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)

Characteristics

Father's years of                     12.586            12.735             12.783              0.173              0.223
schooling                                                                                     (0.136)            (0.160)

Mother's years of                     12.924            13.089             13.076              0.193              0.173
schooling                                                                                     (0.124)            (0.147)

Number of siblings                    2.125              2.004              2.021             -0.141             -0.119
                                                                                              (0.053)            (0.064)

Gender (female=1)                     0.498              0.503              0.504              0.006              0.006
                                                                                              (0.008)            (0.009)

Immigration status                    0.136              0.199              0.186              0.073             0.056
(immigrant=1)                                                                                 (0.018)            (0.022)

Parents born in Israel                0.525              0.445              0.446             -0.092             -0.089
                                                                                              (0.021)            (0.025)


Schools and pupils

Number of schools                      415                359                122


Number of pupils                      26964              3824               3117



Notes: Each parameter estimate presented in columns 4 and 5 is obtained from a separate regression. Standard deviations
are presented in parenthesis in columns 1-3. Standard errors, clustered by school, are presented in parenthesis in columns 4-
5.
                                   Table 2: Balancing Tests, Fifth Grade
                                       OLS     School FE        OLS       School FE         OLS      School FE
                                      Father's years of         Mother's years of          Number of siblings
                                         schooling                 schooling
                                        (1)        (2)            (3)          (4)           (5)         (6)

T1: Instilment of knowledge and      -6.791      -2.759        -6.329      -2.358          -2.670     -0.551
enhancement of comprehension         (2.686)      1.918        (2.069)     (2.114)         (1.128)    (0.947)

T2: Instilment of analytical and     -9.155      -1.946        -7.207       0.479          -1.314     -1.361
critical skills                      (2.377)     (2.001)       (2.058)     (1.857)         (0.947)    (0.690)

T3: Instilment of capacity for       -5.291      -1.008        -4.544      -0.208          -1.451     -0.650
individual study                     (1.996)     (1.744)       (1.551)     (1.483)         (0.819)    (0.616)

T4: Transparency, fairness and       -6.717       1.370        -6.362       0.271          -0.892     -0.347
feedback                             (1.560)     (1.345)       (1.194)     (1.116)         (0.575)    (0.432)

                                     Recent immigration                  Boy              Parents born in Israel

                                        (7)        (8)            (9)          (10)         (11)        (12)


T1: Instilment of knowledge and       1.319      -0.103        -0.010      -0.476          -0.997      0.101
enhancement of comprehension         (0.323)     (0.258)       (0.187)     (0.349)         (0.394)    (0.356)

T2: Instilment of analytical and      1.726       0.341         0.042       0.160          -1.387     -0.391
critical skills                      (0.303)     (0.189)       (0.173)     (0.300)         (0.329)    (0.298)

T3: Instilment of capacity for        1.044       0.179        -0.048      -0.138          -0.927     -0.187
individual study                     (0.263)     (0.139)       (0.135)     (0.281)         (0.289)    (0.250)

T4: Transparency, fairness and        0.794      -0.131         0.045      -0.471          -0.905     -0.287
feedback                             (0.219)     (0.141)       (0.111)     (0.203)         (0.239)    (0.193)

                                     Parents born in Asia        Parents born in               Class size
                                          or Africa               Europe or US
                                       (13)       (14)           (15)          (16)         (17)        (18)


T1: Instilment of knowledge and      -0.155      -0.209        -0.177       0.335          -3.515      4.391
enhancement of comprehension         (0.231)     (0.281)       (0.211)     (0.275)        (12.601)    (7.762)

T2: Instilment of analytical and     -0.047      -0.131        -0.371       0.217          -9.495      3.495
critical skills                      (0.193)     (0.205)       (0.158)     (0.285)         (8.922)    (3.791)

T3: Instilment of capacity for       -0.069      -0.248        -0.098       0.279          -14.399     5.383
individual study                     (0.154)     (0.181)       (0.121)     (0.209)         (6.041)    (4.087)

T4: Transparency, fairness and        0.136       0.119        -0.067       0.350          -8.607     -0.838
feedback                             (0.143)     (0.142)       (0.127)     (0.157)         (6.879)    (3.942)

Notes: The table reports OLS and school fixed effects estimates from separate regressions of the relevant
dependent variable on each of the four teaching practices. Robust standard errors clustered at the school level
are reported in parentheses. The sample includes 5th grade pupils in 2002, from secular schools with 5 or more
pupils in the panel data set.
                                   Table 3: Balancing Tests, Eighth Grade
                                       OLS      School FE       OLS        School FE        OLS      School FE
                                       Father's years of        Mother's years of          Number of siblings
                                          schooling                schooling
                                        (1)        (2)            (3)           (4)          (5)         (6)

T1: Instilment of knowledge and       -1.875       1.202        -0.272       1.524         -0.414      -0.221
enhancement of comprehension          (1.774)     (1.316)       (1.804)     (1.411)        (0.464)     (0.673)

T2: Instilment of analytical and      -3.400      -1.827        -1.974      -1.715          0.709       0.594
critical skills                       (2.469)     (1.420)       (2.041)     (1.245)        (0.575)     (0.810)

T3: Instilment of capacity for        -0.456      -0.298         0.457      -0.134          0.299       0.164
individual study                      (1.633)     (0.748)       (1.357)     (0.714)        (0.369)     (0.498)

T4: Transparency, fairness and        -4.966      -1.504        -4.212      -2.202         -0.106       0.322
feedback                              (1.507)     (0.919)       (1.422)     (1.090)        (0.387)     (0.465)



                                      Recent immigration                  Boy             Parents born in Israel

                                        (7)        (8)            (9)           (10)        (11)        (12)


T1: Instilment of knowledge and        0.849       0.237        -0.136      -0.425         -0.719       0.120
enhancement of comprehension          (0.300)     (0.141)       (0.144)     (0.214)        (0.288)     (0.185)

T2: Instilment of analytical and       0.875       0.336        -0.310      -0.497         -0.465      -0.231
critical skills                       (0.394)     (0.248)       (0.183)     (0.252)        (0.393)     (0.211)

T3: Instilment of capacity for         0.368      -0.012        -0.165      -0.348         -0.115       0.074
individual study                      (0.274)     (0.143)       (0.135)     (0.191)        (0.295)     (0.128)

T4: Transparency, fairness and         0.703       0.178        -0.361      -0.687         -0.841      -0.111
feedback                              (0.230)     (0.146)       (0.118)     (0.198)        (0.166)     (0.124)

                                     Parents born in Asia        Parents born in               Class size
                                          or Africa               Europe or US
                                       (13)        (14)          (15)           (16)        (17)        (18)


T1: Instilment of knowledge and       -0.239      -0.284         0.125      -0.050          -2.950      0.879
enhancement of comprehension          (0.202)     (0.115)       (0.112)     (0.145)        (4.789)     (5.271)
                                          .           .             .          .               .          .
T2: Instilment of analytical and      -0.377      -0.024        -0.038      -0.091         -12.694      7.089
critical skills                       (0.160)     (0.196)       (0.167)     (0.166)        (6.487)     (8.395)

T3: Instilment of capacity for        -0.187      -0.009        -0.055      -0.063         -11.097     -2.631
individual study                      (0.140)     (0.103)       (0.098)     (0.106)        (4.980)     (5.205)

T4: Transparency, fairness and         0.164       0.049        -0.053      -0.133          6.511       3.766
feedback                              (0.162)     (0.119)       (0.107)     (0.132)        (4.214)     (4.462)

Notes: The table reports OLS and school fixed effects estimates from separate regressions of the relevant
dependent variable on each of the four teaching practices. Robust standard errors clustered at the school level
are reported in parentheses. The sample includes 8th grade pupils in 2005, from secular schools with 5 or more
pupils in the panel data set.
   Table 4: Descriptive Statistics, Proportion of Classroom Teachers Using Each of the Teaching
                                              Practices
                                                      Grade 5                                  Grade 8
                                         Mean           Min          Max          Mean           Min           Max
                                           (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)
A: Panel sample
T1:Instilment of knowledge and             0.76         0.61          0.93          0.65         0.44          0.84
enhancement of comprehension              (0.05)                                   (0.07)

T2:Instilment of analytical and            0.57         0.42          0.85          0.47         0.35          0.62
critical skills                           (0.05)                                   (0.05)

T3:Instilment of capacity for              0.58         0.40          0.92          0.42         0.24          0.65
individual study                          (0.07)                                   (0.08)

T4:Transparency, fairness and              0.64         0.40          0.88          0.61         0.35          0.82
feedback                                  (0.07)                                   (0.08)

B: Full sample
T1:Instilment of knowledge and             0.76         0.50          0.99          0.65         0.32          0.99
enhancement of comprehension              (0.06)                                   (0.07)

T2:Instilment of analytical and            0.57         0.32          0.95          0.47         0.20          0.83
critical skills                           (0.06)                                   (0.05)

T3:Instilment of capacity for              0.58         0.26          1.00          0.42         0.20          0.87
individual study                          (0.09)                                   (0.08)

T4:Transparency, fairness and              0.63         0.28          1.00          0.61         0.29          1.00
feedback                                  (0.09)                                   (0.08)


Notes: This table presents means, standard deviations and minimum and maximum values for the four teaching
practices measures. The figures in the table measure the proportion of classroom teachers using a given practice.
Column 1-3 present results for the fifth grade (2002) sample and columns 4-5 for the eight grade (2005) sample.
Panel A reports results for the secular schools that are represented in the panel data with 5 or more pupils and panel
B reports results for the population of all secular schools. Standard deviations are presented in parentheses.
                   Table 5: Estimates of the Effect of Teaching Practices on Pupils’ Test Scores
                                                       OLS              School fixed effect       School and pupil fixed
                                                                                                          effect
                                              Each           All         Each           All        Each            All
                                             measure     measures       measure     measures      measure      measures
                                            included     included      included     included     included      included
                                            separately     jointly     separately     jointly    separately      jointly
                                               (1)            (2)         (3)          (4)           (5)           (6)

A. Five plus sample (N= 20660)
T1: Instilment of knowledge and               1.659           2.258      1.518        1.910         1.111         0.792
enhancement of comprehension                 (0.558)         (0.647)    (0.230)      (0.268)       (0.248)       (0.292)

T2: Instilment of analytical and critical     0.087          -0.215      1.000        0.810         0.768         0.520
skills                                       (0.452)         (0.608)    (0.209)      (0.265)       (0.219)       (0.281)

T3: Instilment of capacity for individual    -0.015           0.410      0.384        0.320         0.214         -0.274
study                                        (0.351)         (0.475)    (0.149)      (0.192)       (0.159)       (0.206)

                                              0.287           0.459     -0.248        -0.510        0.473         0.123
T4: Transparency, fairness and feedback      (0.318)         (0.348)    (0.156)      (0.178)       (0.164)        0.191


B. Ten plus sample (N= 18168)
T1: Instilment of knowledge and               2.049           2.499      1.687        1.970         1.156         0.879
enhancement of comprehension                 (0.620)         (0.716)    (0.247)      (0.285)       (0.263)       (0.309)

T2: Instilment of analytical and critical     0.165          -0.329      1.128        0.940         0.734         0.544
skills                                       (0.526)         (0.684)    (0.227)      (0.286)       (0.235)       (0.299)

T3: Instilment of capacity for individual     0.080           0.395      0.345        0.148         0.114         -0.407
study                                        (0.389)         (0.513)    (0.161)      (0.206)       (0.169)       (0.217)

                                              0.493           0.522     -0.107        -0.408        0.478         0.126
T4: Transparency, fairness and feedback      (0.358)         (0.386)    (0.171)      (0.192)       (0.176)       (0.202)


Notes: This table reports OLS (columns 1-2), school fixed effects (columns 3-4) and pupil and school fixed
effects(columns 5-6) estimates of the effect of the four teaching practice measures on pupils test scores measured as z
scores, The z scores are computed based on the full sample. For the OLS regressions the standard errors are clustered at
the class level and robust standard errors are reported for the pupil and pupil and school fixed effects regressions. The
OLS regressions include as controls pupils' personal characteristics (parental education, gender, number of siblings,
immigrant status and three ethnic indicators), four subject dummies, class size, class means of the pupils' characteristics
and several class climate measure (class means of level of noise, incidence of violence, discipline). The estimates
presented in the odd columns are from regressions when each of the teaching practices is used as the only treatment
variable in the regression. The estimates presented in the even columns are from regressions where all four teaching
practices measures are used simultaneously as treatment variables in the regressions. The estimates presented in panel A
are based on the five plus sample and the estimates in panel B are based on the ten plus sample.
Table 6: Estimates of Effect of Alternative Measures of Teaching Practices on
                               Pupils’ Test Scores
                                      Proportion of            Proportion of           Proportion of
                                       answers 4                answers 5               answers 6
                                        and above                and above               and above

                                             (1)                     (2)                      (3)


T1: Instilment of knowledge                 0.668                   0.352                    0.138
and enhancement of                         (0.195)                 (0.173)                  (0.220)
                                           [0.816]                 [0.556]                  [0.257]

T2: Instilment of analytical                0.363                   0.289                    0.965
and critical skills                        (0.193)                 (0.217)                  (0.316)
                                           [0.561]                 [0.332]                  [0.141]

T3: Instilment of capacity for              -0.106                  -0.191                   -0.022
individual study                           (0.145)                 (0.159)                  (0.211)
                                           [0.532]                 [0.318]                  [0.136]

T4: Transparency, fairness                  0.098                   0.198                    0.147
and feedback                               (0.138)                 (0.126)                  (0.158)
                                           [0.674]                 [0.488]                  [0.265]

N                                          20660

Note: The estimates reported in this table are obtained from one regression. The treatment variables
are proportions of answers above a certain figure among all the questions the treatment conssists of.
Standard errors are reported in parentheses .The figures in square parenthesis are the average
proportions in the panel. The regression specification includes pupil and school fixed effects. See
note to Table 5 for additional controls included in the regression. The regression is based on the five
plus sample.
   Table 7: Effects of Teaching Practices by Pooled Math and Science and pooled Hebrew and
             English Samples, Based on a Model with Pupil and School Fixed Effects

                                                 Math and Science                      Hebrew and English
                                         Each measure        All measures        Each measure        All measures
                                           included         included jointly       included         included jointly
                                           separately                              separately
                                               (1)                (2)                 (3)                 (4)

A. Five plus sample
T1: Instilment of knowledge and               0.990               0.788               1.224               0.804
enhancement of comprehension                 (0.335)             (0.395)             (0.345)             (0.406)

T2: Instilment of analytical and              0.604               0.406               0.876               0.553
critical skills                              (0.299)             (0.382)             (0.301)             (0.390)

T3: Instilment of capacity for                0.126              -0.288               0.289              -0.257
individual study                             (0.214)             (0.277)             (0.222)             (0.289)

T4: Transparency, fairness and                0.352               0.037               0.599               0.217
feedback                                     (0.224)             (0.259)             (0.227)             (0.264)


                  N                          10464               10464               10196               10196


B. Ten plus sample
T1: Instilment of knowledge and               1.027               0.959               1.286               0.814
enhancement of comprehension                 (0.356)             (0.419)             (0.366)             (0.429)

T2: Instilment of analytical and              0.548               0.470               0.863               0.527
critical skills                              (0.322)             (0.408)             (0.323)             (0.415)

T3: Instilment of capacity for               -0.021              -0.443               0.230              -0.388
individual study                             (0.227)             (0.292)             (0.236)             (0.305)

T4: Transparency, fairness and                0.254              -0.051               0.709               0.306
feedback                                     (0.241)             (0.275)             (0.243)             (0.280)


                  N                           9178                9178                8990                8990

Notes: Columns 1-2 report the estimates and robust standard errors (in parentheses) from regressions of the four
treatment variables on pupils' achievements based on a sample that includes the Math and Science test scores.
Columns 3-4 report the respective estimates from a sample that includes the Hebrew and English test scores. The
estimates are based on the pupil and school fixed effect model. See notes to Table 5 for the controls included in
these regressions. The estimates presented in panel A are based on the five plus sample and the estimates in panel B
are based on the ten plus sample.
     Table 8: Effects of Teaching Practices on Pupils’ Test Scores By Gender and Parental
                  Education Based on a Pupil and School Fixed Effect Model

                                              Boys                Girl            High SES            Low SES
                                                (1)                (2)                (3)                 (4)


A. Five plus sample
T1: Instilment of knowledge and                0.213              0.997               0.119              0.940
enhancement of comprehension                  (0.439)            (0.426)             (0.503)            (0.412)

T2: Instilment of analytical and               0.742              0.303               0.362              0.357
critical skills                               (0.437)            (0.400)             (0.527)            (0.388)

T3: Instilment of capacity for                -0.591             -0.220              -0.018             -0.409
individual study                              (0.316)            (0.289)             (0.388)            (0.288)

T4: Transparency, fairness and                 0.443             -0.174               0.308              0.116
feedback                                      (0.282)            (0.278)             (0.327)            (0.277)

N                                             10230               10438               7860              12740


B. Ten plus sample
T1: Instilment of knowledge and                0.241              1.220              -0.101              1.137
enhancement of comprehension                  (0.468)            (0.439)             (0.538)            (0.424)

T2: Instilment of analytical and               0.887              0.163               0.631              0.459
critical skills                               (0.468)            (0.414)             (0.575)            (0.400)

T3: Instilment of capacity for                -0.885             -0.291              -0.097             -0.547
individual study                              (0.339)            (0.296)             (0.405)            (0.298)

T4: Transparency, fairness and                 0.503             -0.244               0.367              0.120
feedback                                      (0.303)            (0.286)             (0.358)            (0.284)


N                                              8922               9254                6645              11468


Notes: This table reports pupil and school fixed effects estimates of the effect of the four teaching practice
measures on various subsamples of students. All four teaching practices are entered simultaneously as treatment
variables in the regressions. The High and low SES samples refer to high and low parental schooling,
respectively. Robust standard errors are presented in parenthesis. See notes to Table 5 for list of controls that
are included in each of the four regressions.
      Table 9: Effect of Teaching Practices by Percentiles of Test Scores
                                 Distribution

                                             T1: Instilment of
The outcome measures are the                                              T2: Instilment of
                                              knowledge and
product of the z score and a                                               analytical and
                                             enhancement of
0/1 dummy indicator of                                                      critical skills
                                              comprehension
percentile ranking of students
                                                     (1)                          (2)

                                                    0.420                        0.108
Above 25th percentile
                                                   (0.155)                      (0.150)


                                                    0.367                        0.271
Above 50th percentile
                                                   (0.181)                      (0.175)


                                                    0.123                        0.311
Above 75th percentile
                                                   (0.165)                      (0.159)


                                                    0.038                        0.247
Above 80th percentile
                                                   (0.154)                      (0.149)


                                                    0.074                        0.178
Above 90th percentile
                                                   (0.121)                      (0.117)


N                                                   20660


Notes: This table reports pupil and school fixed effects estimates of the effect of the first
two teaching practice measures on test scores. The two measures are entered jointly as
treatment variables in the regressions. The estimates in each row are from one regression
based on the five plus sample. The dependant variable is a product of the z_score and the
dummy indicator for the specified percentile. The Panel includes pupils from secular
schools, with 5 or more pupils in the panel. Robust standard errors are reported in
parenthesis.
              Table A1: Correlations Between Treatment Variables
                               T1              T2               T3     T4
                               (1)             (2)              (3)    (4)

         T1                    1

         T2                   0.810             1

         T3                   0.809           0.873             1

         T4                   0.543           0.439            0.436   1


Notes:
T1: Instilment of knowledge and enhancement of comprehension
T2: Instilment of analytical and critical skills
T3: Instilment of capacity for individual study
T4: Transparency, fairness and feedback
                 Table A2: Effect of Teaching Practices on Pupils Test Scores by Subjects


                                             English              Hebrew                  Math                Science
                                                (1)                   (2)                  (3)                   (4)
A. Five plus sample

T1: Instilment of knowledge and                1.030                 0.550                0.747                 0.869
enhancement of comprehension                  (0.492)               (0.549)               (0.482)              (0.579)


T2: Instilment of analytical and               0.578                 0.631                0.015                 0.898
critical skills                               (0.476)               (0.527)               (0.464)              (0.565)

N                                              5100                  5096                  5292                 5172

B. Ten plus sample

T1: Instilment of knowledge and                0.987                 0.556                 0.931                1.008
enhancement of comprehension                  (0.527)               (0.583)               (0.509)              (0.613)


T2: Instilment of analytical and               0.470                 0.715                0.060                 1.025
critical skills                               (0.510)               (0.561)               (0.490)              (0.603)

N                                              4494                  4496                  4640                 4538

Notes: Columns 1-4 report the estimates and robust standard errors (in parentheses) from regressions of the four
treatment variables on pupils' achievements for each subject separately. All four teaching practices are included jointly
as treatment variables in the regressions. See notes to Table 5 for the controls included in these regressions. The
estimates presented in panel A are based on the five plus sample and the estimates in panel B are based on the ten plus
sample.
       Table A3: Estimates of the Effect of Teaching Practices on Pupils’ Test Scores:
                                    English, Hebrew and Science


                                         All          Boys           Girls      High SES       Low SES


                                         (1)           (2)            (3)          (4)            (5)

A. Five plus sample
T1: Instilment of knowledge and          0.824        0.072          1.198         -0.201        1.062
enhancement of comprehension            (0.341)      (0.520)        (0.492)       (0.588)       (0.483)

T2: Instilment of analytical and         0.679        0.864          0.446         0.630         0.476
critical skills                         (0.329)      (0.519)        (0.462)       (0.616)       (0.456)

T3: Instilment of capacity for          -0.180       -0.381         -0.195         0.024         -0.364
individual study                        (0.241)      (0.375)        (0.335)       (0.454)       (0.339)

T4: Transparency, fairness and           0.212        0.469         -0.004         0.403         0.131
feedback                                (0.222)      (0.334)        (0.321)       (0.381)       (0.324)

N                                       15374         7605           7769          5878          9448
B. Ten plus sample
T1: Instilment of knowledge and          0.848        0.045          1.313         -0.511        1.201
enhancement of comprehension            (0.360)      (0.554)        (0.506)       (0.630)       (0.494)

T2: Instilment of analytical and         0.712        1.024          0.320         1.020         0.598
critical skills                         (0.350)      (0.555)        (0.478)       (0.673)       (0.469)

T3: Instilment of capacity for          -0.301       -0.705         -0.230         -0.049        -0.514
individual study                        (0.254)      (0.402)        (0.342)       (0.475)       (0.350)

T4: Transparency, fairness and           0.248        0.548         -0.057         0.497         0.087
feedback                                (0.236)      (0.359)        (0.330)       (0.418)       (0.333)

N                                       13534         6639           6895          4975          8514
Notes: This table reports pupil and school fixed effects estimates of the effect of the four teaching
practice measures on pupils test scores measured as z scores. Test scores in mathematics are excluded
from these regressions. The z scores are computed based on the full sample. The controls added are four
subject dummies, class size, class means of the pupils' characteristics and several class climate measure
(class means of level of noise, incidence of violence, discipline). The estimates presented in panel A are
based on the five plus sample and the estimates in panel B are based on the ten plus sample.
