                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              GOING TO A BETTER SCHOOL:
                          EFFECTS AND BEHAVIORAL RESPONSES

                                        Cristian Pop-Eleches
                                          Miguel Urquiola

                                        Working Paper 16886
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16886


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2011




For useful feedback we are thankful to Josh Angrist, Ken Chay, Damon Clark, Rajeev Dehejia, Caroline
Hoxby, Chang-Tai Hsieh, Lawrence Katz, Ofer Malamud, Richard Murnane, Jonah Rockoff, Amy
Schwartz, Douglas Staiger, and Eric Verhoogen; for contributions at early stages of the project, to
Andreea Balan. For excellent research assistance we thank Anindya Roy. For financial support, we
are grateful to the National Science Foundation (SES 0819776), and to Columbia's Institute for Social
and Economic Research and Policy (ISERP) and Program for Economic Research (PER). Urquiola
is also grateful to the Russell Sage Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Cristian Pop-Eleches and Miguel Urquiola. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Going to a Better School: Effects and Behavioral Responses
Cristian Pop-Eleches and Miguel Urquiola
NBER Working Paper No. 16886
March 2011
JEL No. I20

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper: i) estimates the effect that going to a better school has on students' academic achievement,
and ii) explores whether this intervention induces behavioral responses on the part of children, their
parents, and the school system. For the first task, we exploit almost 2,000 regression discontinuity
quasi-experiments observed in the context of Romania's high school educational system. For the second,
we use data from a specialized survey of children, parents, teachers and principals that we implemented
in 59 Romanian towns. The first finding is that students do benefit from access to higher achieving
schools and tracks within schools. A second set of results suggests that the stratification of schools
by quality in general, and the opportunity to attend a better school in particular, result in significant
behavioral responses on the part of teachers, parents, and students. Although we do not expect the
magnitude or even the direction of these responses to hold everywhere, their existence has a number
of implications for evaluation, particularly since some of them change over time, and some would
seem to be relevant only once interventions reach a certain scale.


Cristian Pop-Eleches
Columbia University
SIPA and Economics Department
1022 International Affairs Building, MC 3308
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
cp2124@columbia.edu

Miguel Urquiola
Columbia University
SIPA and Economics Department
1022 IAB, MC 3308
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
msu2101@columbia.edu
                                                1. Introduction


     Whether students would benet from attending higher-achieving schools is an important question

in education. For example, part of the rationale underlying                No Child Left Behind     is that a child

in a low-achievement institution would be better o transferring to a higher-scoring school. Clear

evidence on this issue is scarce, in large part because students are not randomly allocated to schools.

Nevertheless, as discussed below, several papers provide credible estimates of the eect of having

access to a better school.

     Such estimates do not provide a complete roadmap for policy, however, as they may reect

but not reveal behavioral responses that amplify or reduce the impact of educational quality. For

instance, parents might react to their children going to a better school by lowering their own eort.

There might also be reactions on the part of students; for example, an individual who makes it

into a better school might feel inferior or be stigmatized.
                                                                       1    Importantly these responses might

change over time, and may thus inuence results dierently depending on when outcome data are

collected.    Additionally, some of these responseswhich we will refer to as equilibrium eects

                                                                                         2
may only emerge once interventions are taken to scale and sustained for a period of time.                        To

illustrate, stratifying students by ability might lead to reactions in the school system itself, e.g.,

the emergence of norms that assign more qualied teachers to brighter students. Thus, the very

characteristics of an intervention may depend on its reach. The bottom line, as emphasized by Todd

and Wolpin (2003), is that knowledge of such behavioral responses is crucial to a full understanding

of educational interventions. Yet, there is little evidence on their empirical relevance.

     In this context, this paper makes two contributions.           First, using administrative data from all

of Romania, it provides a rigorous estimate of the impact of going to a better school. Second, it

explores the existence of dynamic behavioral responses and equilibrium eects using data from a

specialized survey of parents, teachers, and principals that we implemented for three cohorts in a

subset of towns.

     As stated, our starting point is that identifying the eect of access to a better school is chal-

lenging. Nonetheless, several analyses have exploited compelling research designs, with Dale and

Krueger (2002), Cullen, Jacob, and Levitt (2006), and Hastings, Kane, and Staiger (2009) providing


1   Partially along these lines, Cullen, Jacob and Levitt (2006) explore how school choice aects students' attitudes
and behaviors.
2 See for example the discussions in Banerjee and Duo (2008), Acemoglu (2010), and Deaton (2010).

                                                           2
early examples.       Several more recent papers rely on regression discontinuity (henceforth RD) de-

signs. Specically, Park, Shi, Hsieh, and An (2008), Hoekstra (2009), Saavedra (2009), and Jackson

(2010a) nd that relative to students who just miss gaining admission to high achieving educational

institutions, those who make it have better academic and/or labor market outcomes. In contrast,

Clark (forthcoming), Duo, Dupas, and Kremer (forthcoming), and Sekhri and Rubinstein (2010),

nd scant evidence of impacts from getting into a better school or class (within a school).

     We also apply an RD design to Romania's high school system, exploiting the fact that as they

transition into secondary education, Romanian children's ability to choose a high school depends

solely on a score which is the average of their performance on a nationwide                       8th   grade test and

their grade point average.          After obtaining their transition score, students submit a list of high

school/track combinations they wish to enroll in (such as Mathematics and Social Studies). These

tracks are essentially  schools within a school in that their students take all their classes together

and do not take courses with members of other tracks, although they share inputs like facilities and

a principal.

     After students have submitted their choices, they are allocated to school/tracks via a nationally

centralized process that honors higher scoring students' requests subject to pre-established slot

constraints.
                3 This gives rise to cuto scores that we set equal to the transition score of the child

that lls the last slot in a given school/track.                 We show that there are clear discontinuities in

educational quality at these cutos. For instance, relative to students who score just below a school

cuto, those who score just above experience, on average, a highly signicant increase in the average

transition score displayed by their peers.

     Pooling data from three cohorts of entering students, this process generates about 2,000 cutos

and substantial sample sizes. The large number of cutos allows us to explore the heterogeneity of

school eectswhether being able to attend a more selective school, for example, is more valuable

to a student whose initial performance is high or lowsomething that to our knowledge has not

been possible in the previous RD-based research.

     We explore the eects of this variation on a  high stakes outcome: performance on a Baccalaure-

ate exam. Passing this exam is a requirement for application to university, and the grade is used by

many institutions as an important admission criterion. We nd that students do benet from access



3   As discussed below, the setting gives students incentives to truthfully reveal their preference rankings.
                                                             3
to higher ranked schools and tracks within schools. Specically, relative to individuals who just miss

scoring above a school cuto, those who succeed display a statistically signicant 0.05 standard de-

                                               4
viation advantage in Baccalaureate performance. If scaled by the associated improvements in peer

                                                                                          5
quality, these eects are of a magnitude consistent with some estimates in the literature. These

eects are often larger and more precisely estimated for cutos that occur at higher grade levels.

   Having established these results, we turn to exploring behavioral responses. We rely on a spe-

cialized survey we administered to teachers, parents, and students in a subset of towns, in a way

that allows us to match students to their schools and instructors. The resulting data yield evidence

of behavioral responses and equilibrium eects along potentially important dimensions.

   For instance, they are consistent with teachers sorting in response to the stratication of students:

teachers with higher certication standards are more likely to teach in better-ranked schools. This

sorting persists even within schools as one moves from a weaker to a stronger track, and even within

                                                      6
tracks as one moves from a weaker to a stronger class. As a result, although students who score just

above a cuto attend schools that on           average   have more certied teachers, the         marginal    (actual)

teachers assigned to them are not observably dierent from those assigned to students who score

just below the cuto. In short, more qualied teachers are matched with higher achieving students.

This seems to be an established norm in Romania, perhaps one that reects a long term outcome of

the interplay between teacher and parental preferences, as well as broader political-economy forces.

   In terms of parental eort, a rst nding is that children who just make it into higher achieving

schools receive   less homework-related help from their parents.           In this sense, Romanian parents may

view educational quality and their own eort as substitutes, and this may have real eects once

parents understand a tracking policy and expect it to persist. We also nd areas where there seems

to be no change in parental choices, again leading to dierences in average vs.                    marginal eects.

For example, children who make it into better schools/tracks/classes are exposed to peers whose

parents are signicantly more involved in their educationthey participate more at school, and are

more likely to devote resources to private tutoring (which is common in Romania)yet their own

parents show no greater sign of such engagement.


4 In a nding that facilitates the interpretation of this result, there is no signicant evidence of selection into test
taking.
5 For instance, a one standard deviation increase in peer quality is associated with a 0.1-0.2 standard deviation
increase in Baccalaureate grade performance.
6 Stratifying students into classes within tracks (when tracks are large enough) is a common but not universal or
codied practice in Romanian high schools.
                                                           4
  In terms of student responses, we nd that children who just make it into better schools perceive

themselves as weaker relative to their peers. This is not surprising in a setting in which tracking

by ability has been in place a long time and is well understood.       Additionally, however, this is

associated with greater frequency of negative interactions with peers, providing some evidence that

getting into a better school is associated with marginalization.

  For the parental and student dimensions, we also nd evidence that these responses have a

dynamic component. Namely, the RD-estimated feelings of stigmatization and reduction in parental

help are strongest earlier in students' high school careers, and diminish over time. This might reect,

for example, students' gradual realization that tracking involves some noise, or parents' realization

that their help is necessary even if their child is in a better school.   Such dynamics imply that

the estimated eects of going to a better school might depend, for example, on whether academic

outcomes are measured at the    9th   or   12th   grade level.

  Taken together, these results inform not just the literatures on tracking and school eects, but

also the research on experimental analyses of educational policy.       Specically, while we do not

expect the exact nature or even the direction of the responses we nd to extend to all settings,

our results suggest that large scale interventions can result in equilibrium responses by the dierent

actors involved in educational markets. These reactions may not be observed or are explicitly held

constant in partial equilibrium interventions. In salient examples, the STAR class size experiment

(e.g., Krueger (1999)) and the tracking experiment in Duo, Dupas, and Kremer (forthcoming)

report on contexts in which one dimension of educational quality was manipulated while teacher

quality was held constant by randomly assigning instructors to classrooms. In our data, in contrast,

relevant measures of teacher quality end up being correlated with educational quality. Similarly,

parental eort may not change in a temporary experiment, but might respond once an intervention

is sustained.

  As stated, such behavioral responses and equilibrium eects may well be setting-specic.         For

example, Duo, Dupas, and Kremer (forthcoming) are aware that teacher sorting could happen,

and point out that in Kenya this would result in more eective teachers being matched to weaker

children. In contrast, Lankford, Loeb, and Wycko (2002) suggest that in the U.S., low-achieving

students are typically matched with the least-skilled teachers.    Similarly, while we nd evidence

that Romanian parents view school quality and their own eort as substitutes, other parents might



                                                         5
view them as complements. Again, our point is not that there would be uniformity in responses

across all settings, but that such responses may be quantitatively important and hence aect the

key characteristics and impacts of an educational intervention.               Indeed, the presence or absence

of similar behavioral responses might partially account for the mixed ndings in the growing RD

literature on school eects cited above.

    Our work is also related to the literature that studies how families make decisions regarding

human capital investments (Becker (1964), Becker (1981), Becker and Tomes (1986)). The empirical

literature in this area has usually focused on the impact of parental characteristics on child outcomes

(e.g. Behrman et al. (1997), Case and Deaton (1999b), Brown (2006)) without considering parent-

school interactions. Das et al. (2010) is a notable exception that studies how parents adjust their

educational expenditures in response to anticipated and unanticipated school grants.
                                                                                                     7

    Finally, our results are also relevant for theoretical work suggesting that educational interventions

should ideally be analyzed with reference to their potential eects on the behavior of agents involved

in the educational process, e.g., Das et al. (2010), MacLeod and Urquiola (2009), and Albornoz,

Berlinski, and Cabrales (2010).

    The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents a conceptual framework. Sec-

tion 3 describes the student allocation mechanism, and sections 4 and 5 our data and methodology,

respectively. Section 6 presents results, and Section 7 concludes.




                                         2. Conceptual Framework


    The range of behavioral responses we focus on can be illustrated with a minor addition to the

useful framework set out in Todd and Wolpin (2003). The addition reects that while Todd and

Wolpin focus on responses on the part of households, here we also consider reactions on the part of

the school sector itself.

    Specically, consider a three period setting in which period         t = 0 precedes a child entering school,
and   t = 1 and t = 2 denote the rst and second years of school, respectively. Ft           stands for household

investments into children's skill acquisition in period t, and        µ for a child's innate ability. W      denotes

family wealth.      Finally, let   At   indicate a child's achievement at the        beginning   of period   t.   For


7   A related literature looks at private responses to public transfers (e.g., Mott (1992), Rosenzweig and Wolpin
(1994), Jacoby (2002), and Jensen (2003)). Case and Deaton (1999a) point out that the impact of transfers might
be dierent in the short and the long run, since it takes time for private behavioral responses to public transfers to
have an eect.
                                                          6
example,      A1   is a child's achievement as she enters school in period      1,   and reects only her family's

investments in the previous period and her innate ability:



                                                   A1 = g0 (F0 , µ)


where    gt   is a period-specic production function.

  Upon enrollment, children's learning is also enhanced by the school inputs they receive each

period,   S1   and   S2 .   Thus, a child's achievement at the start of the second year of school depends on

endowments and the history of family and school inputs:



                                               A2 = g1 (S1 , F1 , F0 , µ)


  Todd and Wolpin (2003) make a useful distinction between the amount of school inputs a child

would receive if this were entirely up to her family, and the amount she actually receives at school.

While families cannot control their children's school inputs, they can inuence their level. In the

U.S., for example, they can do this through residential choice or private schooling; in Romania,

they might help their children prepare for transition exams. Let               St    denote the amount of inputs

households target by such actions. Households choose this level as a function of their wealth and

their children's endowment and achievement at the beginning of each period. For example:



                                                 S 1 = θ(A1 , W, µ)


  Schools in turn can choose how to allocate resources to students. For example, a child making

clear progress towards reading might receive less attention than a struggling one.                   Additionally,

Todd and Wolpin cite that schools may use prior achievement to track students, a motivation

relevant in our setting. Schools therefore have decision rules; e.g., they condition the inputs a child

receives in period      1   on her achievement at the beginning of that period and on her endowment:




                                                   S1 = ψ(A1 , µ).

  With this, the deviation between the level of inputs children actually receive, and the amount

their families had targeted for the rst period is       (S1 −S 1 ).   Assume households observe this deviation

before   setting their own home input investment level. For example, for the rst schooling period

they use a decision rule:

                                                           7
                                     F1 = φ(A1 , W, µ, S1 − S 1 ).

In words, a household sets its own investment for the rst year of school as a function of its child's

achievement at the beginning of the year, endowments, and the deviation between the school-based

inputs they would want for their child and those she will actually receive (for instance, the child

may not have been admitted to the school they had thought she would attend).

  This simple setup illustrates the parameters that dierent types of work can identify. For example,

a common goal of research is to answer the question: What would be the eect of exogenously

changing the rst period school input,    S1 ,    say class size, while holding all other inputs constant?


                                        ∂A2         ∂A2   ∂g1
(2.1)                                             =     =
                                     ∂(S1 − S 1 )   ∂S1   ∂S1

This is a question about the properties of the production function.

  Todd and Wolpin argue that experiments more typically answer the question:                  What would be the
total eect of an exogenous change in S1 , not holding other inputs constant.            They refer to the STAR

class size experiment as an illustration, since class size was manipulated exogenously but parents

were free to adjust their own eort, for example. Such a policy eect is given by:


                               dA2         dA2   ∂g1   ∂g1  ∂F1
(2.2)                                    =     =     +
                            d(S1 − S 1 )   dS1   ∂S1 ∂F1 ∂(S1 − S 1 )

This is a well-dened and interesting measure, one that in comparison to (2.1) also contains the

indirect (behavioral) eect resulting from changes in parental investments.                At the same time, it

has some limitations; for example, cost benet calculations might require ascertaining the relative

contributions of school and family inputs. In addition it is worth noting that although in the present

framework the behavioral response by parents is instantaneous, in real world situations it might take

time for parents to notice and react to changes in school inputs. As a result, the estimated policy

eect (2.2) could vary with the time at which child achievement is measured.

  Now consider a second input such that there are two:             S1x   and   S1y .   A randomized experiment

might be able to vary one of these, say   S1x ,   while controlling the level of the other. In that case the

resulting impact will still resemble expression (2.2) This is broadly the way in which we interpret

Duo, Dupas, and Kremer (forthcoming). The setting allows the authors to manipulate the peer




                                                        8
quality of the classes children have access to, while at the same time constraining changes to other

school inputs. For example, teachers are randomly assigned to high or low achieving classes.

     Now suppose the increase in        S1x   originates not in an experiment but from an extensive and

sustained policy. Then the school system will have a chance to react to this, and the total eect is:

                                                                                                       !
                  dA2         dA2   ∂g1   ∂g1 ∂S1y   ∂g1                 ∂F1          ∂F1
(2.3)                   x   =     =     +   y      +                           x +           y             .
                  x
               d(S1 − S 1 )     x
                              dS1     x
                                    ∂S1   ∂S1 ∂S1x   ∂F1              ∂(S1 − S 1 ) ∂(S1y − S 1 )
                                                                         x


which diers from (2.2) in also including responses within the school system.

     To summarize, Todd and Wolpin (2003) make a useful distinction between production function

parameters (2.1) and policy eects (2.2). We wish to further emphasize that policy eects might be

dierent in situations where behavioral responses take time to unfold, or where these responses only

appear when certain interventions reach a certain scale(2.3) versus (2.2). A further implication is

that in the presence of behavioral responses, estimated policy eects are less likely to have external

validity, since this also requires the indirect (behavioral) eects to be the same in another setting.

     In short, aside from attempting to estimate the policy eect of having access to a better school,

it is precisely the quantitative importance of the behavioral responses on the part of schools and

parentsterms beyond the rst one in the right hand side of equation (2.3) that we attempt to

uncover below.




                                 3. The student allocation mechanism


     The transition between middle and high school (8
                                                                 th to   9th   grade) in Romania results in an

unusually systematic and transparent allocation of students to schools. Specically, every child who

completes middle school receives a transition score which equally weights:
                                                                                         8 i) her performance in a

national    8th   grade exam covering Language, Math, and History/Geography, and ii) her gymnasium

(grades 5-8) grade point average.
                                        9

     After receiving their transition scores, students submit an essentially unlimited list of ranked

choices which specify a combination of:           i) a high school, and ii) one of seven academic tracks:

Mathematics, Natural Sciences, Technical Studies, Services, Social Studies, Literature, and Natural



8   During the period we study, schooling in Romania was compulsory until the     10th   grade.   As a result the entire
cohort of students who complete middle school is required to participate in this allocation process.
9   All tests and grades use a scale ranging from 1 to 10, with a passing grade of 5. Students who score below 5 are
not allowed to apply to high school, but can enroll in vocational school.
                                                          9
                                       10
Resources and Environmental Protection.                  These tracks constitute  schools within a school in

that the students in them take all their coursework together and do not take classes with members

of other tracksalthough they share infrastructure and a principal, meet during breaks, and might

share teachers. Not all schools oer all tracks, and some schools oer more than one class per track,

with class sizes subject to a cap.

      Students' school/track choices are expressed through an application form submitted (through

their gymnasium) to the Ministry of Education in the capital, Bucharest. Using a computerized

system, the Ministry then allocates individuals into school/tracks, giving priority to higher scoring

students and assigning them their most preferred choices until predetermined school/track capacity

                 11
constraints bind.   Schools submit their track-specic capacities to the Ministry in advance, and

simply apply the admission lists returned from the capital. Under this set up (in contrast to many

                                                                                                12
school choice schemes), students have incentives to truthfully reveal their preference rankings.

      Finally, when a school oers multiple classes of the same track, the system just returns to it the

list of students admitted into the track, without further instructions on how to divide them into

classes. We have data on this division for only a subset of schools (as detailed in the next section);

these data and the anecdotal evidence suggest that many schools further stratify classes by ability.




                                                         4. Data


      We rely on two types of data: i) administrative information covering essentially the universe of

children who make the middle to high school transition, and ii) data from a survey we administered

                                             13
in most towns with two or three high schools.


10 For the 2001 sample, the administrative data on tracks is not as precise; it combines three of the tracks (Technical
Studies, Services, and Natural Resources and Environmental Protection) into one technical track.
11 No criteria other than students' stated preferences and their transition scores are used in the allocation process;
for example, there is no role for sibling preference or geographic proximity.
12 Further, all students are required to make at least one active choice in the rst round of the allocation process.
However, some students only request school-track choices with minimum entry scores above their own transition
scores. These individuals are assigned, in a second round process, to schools and tracks that did not ll in the rst
round. Students are warned against this outcome and the associated behavior is relatively rare. For example, in 2007
only 1.1 percent of the applicants were not allocated in the rst round. On a related note, the existing legislation
does not allow children to decline their initial assignment, although in rare situations children do manage to switch
schools and/or tracks over the years. Such switching does not pose a threat to our research design, given that our
 intent-to-treat empirical strategy is based on the oered school choice.
13 We use the term town to denote high school markets. The term that appears in the administrative data is locality
(   Localitate, in Romanian).   In most cases these units actually correspond to cities/towns. In a few, they denote the
largest of a number of small towns or villagesthe town which actually contains the high school that might draw from
a corresponding catchment area composed of smaller towns or villages. In all cases, these units should approximate
self-contained (high school) educational markets.
                                                             10
4.1.   Administrative data.        Our administrative data cover the 2001-2007 admission cohorts. They

provide the name, gymnasium, transition score, and the allocated school/track for all students, but

no information on their ranking of school/tracks or their socio-economic characteristics. We focus

on two subsamples of these administrative data:


       (1) The 2001-2003 cohorts, for which we linked admissions data with information on whether

          students took the Baccalaureate exam and how they performed (these cohorts took the

                             14
          exam in 2005-2007).        As stated, a satisfactory Baccalaureate grade is a prerequisite for

          applying to university, and an excellent one essentially guarantees admission to the most

                                   15
          prestigious institutions.      These cohorts contain about 334,000 students attending about

          800 high schools in 135 towns.

       (2) The 2005-2007 cohorts, for which we have only admissions information and can thus only

          explore  rst stages. This subsample consists of 301,000 students' originating in essentially

          the same schools and towns; it contains the students we surveyed, as described below.


Presenting descriptive statistics, Table 1 thus covers the universe of students admitted to high

school during these years, with three exceptions. The rst two reect that, as explained below, we

rank schools and set cuto scores under the assumption that towns are self-contained markets. We

therefore omit the capital, Bucharest, which is composed of six towns the borders of which students

can cross with relative ease. We do not nd this omission to aect our key conclusions. Second,

                                                                                                                     16
when our analysis focuses on between-school cutos, we omit towns that have only one high-school.

Finally, we drop all students who enroll in the vocational sector; this precludes their access to higher

                                                                      17
education and hence we do not observe Baccalaureate outcomes for them.   After these exclusions,

Table 1 presents summary statistics at the individual, track, school, and town level.




14 We merged the admission and Baccalaureate data by student name and county using a fuzzy matching technique to
allow for some misspelling of names. Our conclusions are not sensitive to dierent levels of precision in the matching
algorithm, and are also similar if we restrict the analysis to exact matches.   Our matched data do not allow us to
dierentiate between high school drop-outs and students who complete high school but do not take the Baccalaureate
exam. Additionally, students are generally not allowed to take the Baccalaureate exam early, but those who fail the
exam are allowed to retake it.
15 The Baccalaureate exam is a comprehensive test administered nationally. Students usually take six component
exams, with a combination of common subjects (written language, oral language, written foreign language) as well
as two track-specic exams and one elective exam. All the tests are graded on a scale from 1 to 10 and the overall
Baccalaureate grade is the unweighted average of these scores.
16 Despite these omissions, for simplicity we will describe the sample as covering  all towns unless we focus only on
those towns covered by our specialized survey.
17 For analyses of vocational education in Romania, see Malamud and Pop-Eleches (forthcoming).

                                                          11
4.2.   Survey data.    While the administrative data sets oer substantial sample sizes, they contain

only basic information.    To explore behavioral responses, we therefore carried out a survey that

included principal, parent, and student questionnaires.

  The way in which we carried out this survey partially explains our nal survey sample, and we

therefore begin with a brief description of its implementation. The 2005-2007 administrative data

described above provided students' names, but not their addresses or any way of contacting them

or their parents. The data also contained almost no information regarding school characteristics.

  We therefore approached schools and asked their principals/administrators to ll a school survey,

and to provide us with the addresses of the students in the mentioned cohorts (who were still

in school at the time).    The school survey collected information on the student population, and

on school resources and infrastructure.     The principals were also asked to provide a subjective

ranking of their schoolrelative to other schools in their townsalong dimensions like teacher

quality, student ability, and parental involvement. Our surveyors also collected administrative data

on the experience, education and certication levels of the teachers responsible for seven subjects:

Math, Romanian, History, Geography, Music, Sports and Computer Science. Each teacher was later

matched to the students in the household survey based on who (by name) the students indicated

were their teachers in these subjects.

  During the rst half of 2009, we used the list of addresses to directly approach parents and

students at home. The survey we administered to them had three components. First, we interviewed

the family to obtain demographic information on each member of the household, as well as basic

household characteristics. Second, we surveyed the primary caregiver to elicit information on each

child in the family.    Third, we conducted a separate interview with the child from the selected

school. Both the parental and the child surveys included questions on parent-child relationships,

school performance and school experiences, an evaluation of the child's teachers, and a range of

questions about child and family well being.

  Two factors determined that we restricted our target sample to towns containing two or three

schools. First, since we needed information from students on either side of admissions cutos, it

was imperative that all schools in each town agree to participate, and therefore the eort was more

likely to encounter problems in larger towns. Second, as shown below the administrative data reveal

that the magnitude of the rst stages is three to four times as large in smaller towns. We therefore



                                                  12
started with an initial sample of 57,534 children and 167 schools in the 71 towns with two or three

schools. If any school in a given town declined to participate, we simply abandoned the whole town.

   In the event, we obtained complete school surveys and student data from 148 schools in 63

towns; the administrators in these schools provided us with 32,307 addresses.                     We restricted the

                                                                                                    18
target sample further to 138 schools in 59 towns, which contained 30,676 children.                       Due to nan-

cial constraints we randomly sampled 19,878 children (about 65 percent of the total) out of this

population. From this target sample, we obtained 12,590 parent and child surveys. Our response

rate of 63 percent, is in line with Gallup Romania's (the rm we contracted with) interview rate for

this population. While the resulting sample is not completely representative of the population of

these schools, we found no evidence that response rates diered between households whose children

had a transition score just above a cuto, and their counterparts who scored just below.

   Table 2 presents descriptive statistics from the survey data, using the household and school

questionnaires. We return to further discussion of its entries in the results section below.




                                            5. Empirical strategy


   Although in principle a student can request any high school in the country, we suppose that

students restrict their choices to the towns they live in, a reasonable assumption since the applicants

are 13-14 year olds likely to still be living with their parents. Within each town, we rank schools

and school/tracks (in separate exercises) according to their average score, and set the cutos equal

                              19
to their minimum scores.           In other words, we set each school's (or school/track's) cuto equal to

the transition score of the child that lls its last slot, where as stated the number of available slots

are announced by schools prior to the admissions process.

   This yields a large number of quasi-experiments1,984 if one considers schools; 6,434 if one

considers school/trackssince each cuto score in our sample makes for a potential RD analysis. In

this section we rst discuss the conceptual basis for analyzing any given one of these experiments,

focusing on schools for simplicity. We then describe how we go about summarizing them.



5.1.   Empirical setup for a single between-school cuto.                    Consider a town in which        i   indexes

students and    s = 1, . . . , S   indexes schools, where the latter have been ordered from the worst to


18 The elimination of four towns reected that at least one school in each of them, though willing to ll out the school
questionnaire, was unable to provide student addresses.
19 We also implemented the exercise ranking schools and tracks by their minimum score, with quite similar results.

                                                          13
the best in terms of the average transition score observed among their students. Additionally, let

z = 1, . . . , (S − 1)   index cutos, such that, for example              z=1     denotes the cuto between the worst

and next-to-worst school in a town, and           z = (S − 1)             indicates the cuto between the top-ranked

school and the next best institution. Let        Ti   stand for the average transition score among student i's

peers (i.e., the average score among the children at her school), and let                      ti   denote the student's own

transition score. Finally, let tz be the minimum grade required for admission into the higher-ranked

of the two schools indexed by        z.
     In this setup, consider the regression:



(5.1)                                      Ti =a1{ti ≥t1 } + a(ti ) + ui


where    1{ti ≥ t1 }     is an indicator for whether a student's transition score is greater than or equal

to the cuto which determines access into the next-to worst school (cuto                             z = 1),   and   a(ti )    is a

exible control function for the transition score. In this case,                    a   estimates by how much students'

peer groups improve, on average, when their score is just above rather than just below                           t1 .
     The idea behind RD designs, originally proposed by Thistlewaite and Campbell (1960), is that

discontinuities like those measured by       a   can be used to identify the causal eect of scoring above a

cuto even if students' transition scores are systematically related to factors that aect outcomes

like Baccalaureate grades.
                                 20 Intuitively, suppose the transition score is smoothly related to char-

acteristics that aect achievement. Under this assumption, students with scores just below                                 t1   will

provide an adequate control group for individuals with scores just above, and any dierences in

their outcomes can be attributed to the fact that they have access to schools of dierent quality.

     Specically, one can run a reduced form regression analogous to (5.1) to explain outcomes like

Baccalaureate performance, which we denote              Yi :


(5.2)                                     Yi = b1{ti ≥t1 } + a(ti ) + vi


Again, if in a small enough neighborhood around the cut-o,                             a(t)   is constant, then the eect

of achieving access to the next to worst school,                    b,   is non-parametrically identied at           t1   (Hahn,

Todd, and Van der Klaauw, 2001). More generally, if                       a(t)   is specied correctly, it will capture all

dependence of the Baccalaureate grade on the transition scores away from the cut-o, and one can



20   For an overview of the RD design, see Imbens and Lemieux (2008).
                                                               14
use all the data to estimate (5.2). Below we will present such results, but also estimates that rely

only on observations close to cuto scores.

     Finally, in addition to studying the impacts on Baccalaureate outcomes, we consider how a series

of behaviors and/or characteristics on the part of students, parents, teachers, principals, and schools

change as one crosses the cutos. For example, in a specication like (5.2), we ask if relative to

children who score just below           t1 ,   those who who score just above are more likely to have teachers

who are certied, or parents who help with homework.




5.2.   Summarizing information for many cutos.                         Specications (5.1) and (5.2) explain how

one might exploit one regression discontinuitythat arising from the hypothetical transition from

the worst to the next-to worst school in a given town.                   In fact, as stated our data contain 1,984

such between-school cutos, and 6,434 between-track cutos.
                                                                             21 Below, we present information that

exploits this wealth of quasi-experiments, exploring, for example, how the impact of scoring above

a given cuto varies with where in the transition test score distribution these cutos are located.

     However, in order to summarize these data and for the sake of statistical power, we rst report

regressions in which we pool data across cutos. For this, we normalize each cuto score,                       z , to zero,
and create a variable that measures the distance between each cuto and the transition score of

each student in a town. In some cases we then  stack the resulting data such that every student

in a town serves as an observation for every cuto, and (since individual level observations are used

more than once) run the analyses clustering at the student level.
                                                                                22 Including all student observations

for every cuto is relevant in that, for example, the student with the best score in town could in

principle attend any school she wanted. We note, however, that regressions restricted to students

in bands close to the cutos in fact rarely use student-level observations more than once.




                                                        6. Results


     This section rst presents results that pool all the between-school and between-track cutos. It

then turns to describing the heterogeneity in eects observed when discontinuities take place at



21   The between-school cutos are 663, 655, and 666 for the 2001, 2002, and 2003 entry cohorts, respectively; for the
between-track cutos, the corresponding numbers are 1,956, 1,952, and 2,526.
22   To illustrate, in the rst year of our data, 2001, the rst town in our data, Alba-lulia, has 836 students in 7 schools,
producing 6 between-school cutos.        For that year, this produces a data set of 5,016 (=836*6) observations, with
similar calculations for the other two years of data.
                                                              15
dierent points of the transition score distribution. Finally, it closes with exercises that, using our

survey data, explore behavioral responses.


6.1.   The rst stage.        Figure 1, Panel A illustrates the basic rst stage result in our data, pooling

all between-school cutos as described in Section 5. The x-axis describes students' transition scores

relative to the cutos (normalized to zero) that allow the opportunity to access a better school;

the y-axis describes the peer quality students experience, as measured by the mean transition score

at their respective school. Panel A plots this mean transition score collapsed into cells containing

individuals who are within 0.01 of a transition grade from each other. The right hand side Panel

B plots analogous information, but the y-axis is based on residuals from a regression of the mean

                                                                                                   23
transition score on a linear trend in students' transition grade and a series of cuto xed eects.

Both panels suggest that the average peer quality students experience increases signicantly and

discontinuously if their transition score crosses the threshold that gives them the option of going

to a better school. The vertical distance between the points close to the discontinuity, further, is

analogous to the estimate of            a   in expression (5.1).

   Table 3, Panel A presents the regression analog to these results, where columns 1-3 refer to all

the towns in our sample. Panel A refers to the 2001-2003 admissions cohorts, those for which we

have Baccalaureate outcomes.                 Column 1 uses about 3.6 million observations from 1,984 cutos

observed across the three cohorts. It regresses the average transition grade that students experience

at school on an indicator for whether their scores are above cutos. The specication includes: i) a

linear spline in students' grade distance to the cutos, one which allows the slope to vary on each

                                                                                                           24
side of the cuto, and ii) cuto dummies analogous to those used in Figure 1, Panel B.                          The key

estimate suggests that scoring above a cuto results in a highly statistically signicant jump in the

peer quality students experience0.09 points, which is equivalent to about 0.1 standard deviations

in transition test performance.

   Column 2 restricts the sample to include only students whose transition scores are within 1 point

of a cuto, reducing the number of observations to about half of those in Column 1. This is our

preferred specication, as it attempts to balance the goal of focusing on observations close to the

cutos while providing enough data to yield fairly precise estimates. We experimented with several

23 Figures 1-9 all have a similar structure in that the left hand side panels use raw data, and the right hand side
panels use residuals based on regressions that control for a linear trend in the transition grade and cuto xed eects.
24 We note that these and all the following results are not qualitatively aected by instead using a linear, quadratic,
or cubic specication for   a(ti )   in (5.1), or by excluding the cuto xed eects.
                                                               16
                                                                    25
more stringent windows, with similar conclusions.                        We opt to feature, in Column 3, a regression

within the bandwidths suggested by the procedure in Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2009) (henceforth

                                                                                            26
IK), which in our data is generally more restrictive than the 1 point band used in Column 2.   In

the event, all these samples result in similar and highly signicant estimates of                            α.
     Columns 4-6 repeat the specications in columns 1-3 using the same administrative data, but

focus only on towns included in our specialized surveymost towns with two or three schools, as

described in Section 4. The corresponding graphical evidence for the survey towns is in Figure 2,

panels A and B. The observed discontinuities are always statistically signicant, and about four

times the size of those observed in the full sample.

     The  rst stages in Table 3, Panel A are those that will be relevant for the Baccalaureate

outcomes.
             27 They show that the Romanian high school admissions process provides a clear rst

stage for an RD analysis of the impact of having access to a better school, at least if school quality

                                                  28
is judged by average transition scores.                Below we will explore other dimensions along which school

characteristics vary at the cutos.

     Recall that in applying for high school slots students choose school/track combinations, and so the

between-track cutos also provide candidate rst stages. Figure 3 (panels A and B) present these

using the same specications as panels A and B in gures 1 and 2. The corresponding regression

results are presented in panel B of Table 3. In all cases the coecient of interest is somewhat smaller

(although always statistically signicant) than that observed for the between school cutos.

     This is consistent with some sorting happening between-tracks within schools, with the implica-

tion being that students who just make it into a higher ranked school will indeed experience better

peers, but that this will be more the case if the measure is the average score of their                                 school -level
rather than their     track -level classmates.         Panel C in Table 3 conrms this expectation, as it uses the

track    level average transition grade students experience as a dependent variable, and explores how

25 For example, a previous version of the paper focused on only the administrative data (which oer substantial
sample sizes) featured specications that for each cuto used only the two students immediately to the left and right.
26 Specically, we follow Lee and Lemieux (forthcoming)                   and use a simple rectangular kernel.               Further,
we    implemented   the   bandwidth   selection    procedure   using     the   Stata   ado   le   labeled   rdob.ado    available   at
http://www.economics.harvard.edu/faculty/imbens/software\_imbens.
27   For the sake of space, we omit very similar results for the 2005-2007 cohorts.
28 Aside from rst stage results like those described in Table 3, the RD approach requires that there be no discrete
changes in other student characteristics that aect outcomes like Baccalaureate performance.                      While our adminis-
trative information does not contain such variables, our survey data suggest this condition is fullled. Specically,
Appendix Table A.1 shows that a number of background characteristics (mother's age, mother's ethnicity, mother's
education, child age, and child gender) do not vary discontinuously around the grade cuto once we consider estimates
within 1 point and IK bandwidths (all but two of the nine estimates are also insignicant in the full sample).
                                                               17
it changes at the cutos that determine access to a higher ranked              school.   The observed estimates

are still highly signicant, but as expected are smaller those observed when peer groups are dened

at the school level (panel A).

     In order to elaborate on how these rst stage results originate, and because it is relevant for later

interpretation, we note that while scoring above a cuto gives students a chance to attend a better

school, not all of them take up the opportunity. Specically, panels A and B in (Appendix) Figure

A.1 summarize information regarding the cutos that determine access to fairly selective schools,

namely those that separate the best and second-best school (cuto                z = S−1        in the notation of

Section 5) in towns that contain at least three schools. Panel A plots transition score cell means

of the percentage of students who attend the best school, and not surprisingly this is equal to zero

when students' scores are to the left of the cutothese students are not eligible to attend the most

selective school in their town. While the proportion of students in the best school jumps discretely

once one moves to the right, it does not rise to one; rather, roughly 40 percent of children eligible

for enrollment in the best school take advantage of the opportunity.                  Panel B, which plots the

percentage of individuals in the second best school, shows that about 25 percent of those eligible for

the best decide to remain in the second-best school, with another 35 percent attending institutions

other than the top two.
                             29

     Multiple factors (e.g.       proximity) may account for why not all students take up the chance to

go to the best school they are eligible for, an aspect we discuss further below. Whichever ones are

actually operative, Figure A.1 underlines that results generated using the rst stages in Table 3

                                                      30
should be interpreted in an  intent to treat spirit.


6.2.   Baccalaureate outcomes.            A rst outcome we consider is simply whether students took the

Baccalaureate exam. Panels C and D in Figure 1 present the graphical evidence for the 2001-2003

cohortsthe ones for which we have Baccalaureate dataand suggest few if any changes in test-

taking rates at the cutos. This is conrmed in regressions in Panel A of Table 4, where columns 1-3

refer to the full sample of towns. The coecient of interest suggests that getting the opportunity to

go to a better school resulted in small and (except for the rst specication) statistically insignicant

29   A related note is that all regressions exclude the child whose score was exactly equal to the cuto, since that
student may be selected.    This reects that this student's score dictates the cuto score and, mechanically, that
student attends the better school with probability one, which is empirically not the case with the individuals right
above him or her. This exclusion does not have a qualitative eect on any of our conclusions.
30 For further reference, panels C and D in Figure A.1 show analogous evidence for the cutos separating the worst
and the next to worst schools in each town; panels E and F plot similar information for towns with only two schools.
                                                         18
changes in the probability of taking the Baccalaureate exam.                 The results within bands allow us

to rule out dierences in test-taking rates of less than a third of a percentage point. In short, the

opportunity to enroll in a better school does not seem to aect the likelihood that students take

the Baccalaureate test.

   A generally similar conclusion emerges among the towns in our survey sample (Figure 2, panels

C and D and Table 4, Panel A, columns 4-6) and when we analyze the opportunity to enroll in a

                                                              31
better track (Figure 3, panels C and D, and Table 4, panel C). This consistent lack of evidence of

selection into test taking makes it easier to interpret eects on Baccalaureate performance.

   Turning to this issue, panels E and F in Figure 1 describe grade outcomes at the cutos, suggesting

a discrete increase in average achievement, particularly in Panel F. The corresponding regression

evidence is in Panel B of Table 4, which presents statistically signicant gains equivalent to about

                                                                                                                      32
0.02 to 0.10 standard deviations, depending on whether one looks at the full or the survey sample.

   The bottom line is that students who score above cutos giving them access to a better school

perform better in the high stakes Baccalaureate exam, and under the assumptions underlying RD

designs, this impact can be viewed as causal.             A similar conclusion emerges when looking at the

towns covered in our specialized survey (Figure 2, panels E and F, and Table 4, Panel B, columns

4-6), and when one considers between-track rather than between school cutos (Figure 3, panels E

and F, and Table 4, Panel D). The magnitude of the eects on test performance is greatest in the

survey towns, which is consistent with the larger rst stage estimates observed there (Table 3).


6.3.   Heterogeneity in Baccalaureate outcomes.                 The results presented thus far pool all between

school and between track cutos. We now explore how the Baccalaureate eects vary according to

where the cutos are located in the transition score distribution. To provide a visual summary of

the results, Figure 4 presents evidence on the rst stages observed in the top (panels A and B) and

bottom terciles (panels C and D) of between-school cutos if these were ordered according to the

grades at which they happen. These panels reveal that the discontinuities in average peer quality

are of a roughly similar magnitude in both sets of cutos. At a rst pass level, students seem as

interested in attending the best schools as they are in getting out of the worst.

31 In contrast to Table 3, Table 4 no longer has columns 7-9. Again, this reects that for the 2005-2007 cohorts we
do not have Baccalaureate outcomes, so these variables are not available for the children we surveyed.
32 As stated, if scaled by the peer improvements in Table 3, these estimates are of a magnitude similar to some observed
in the literature on peer eects. To further explore this we could run instrumental variable-type specications where
peer quality is instrumented by students' position relative to the cuto. We refrain from this, however, because as
the results below show, many factors other than peer quality change at the cutos.
                                                          19
                                                                                          33
   Panels E-H present the graphical evidence on Baccalaureate performance.                     Specically, panels

E and F suggest that gaining admission to a better schoolwhen the cuto in question is in the

top third of cutosraises testing performance. Panels G and H point to a similar, if less precisely

estimated eect among the bottom cutos.

   Table 5 explores these and other points related to heterogeneity.               For the sake of space, this

table presents only specications using observations within one point of the cutos, and focuses on

the between-school cutos. To illustrate, Panel A refers to the full sample of cutos and repeats

results presented above.          Column 1 presents the rst stage (from Table 3, Panel A, Column 2).

Within Panel A, column 2 features the track level average transition score as a dependent variable,

and columns 3 and 4 a dummy for taking the Baccalaureate exam, and performance on this test,

respectively.

   Within Table 5, panels B and C refer to the top and bottom tercile of cutos. Column 1 shows

that the rst stages are of about 30 percent larger for the top tercile. Comparing columns 1 and

2 conrms that as observed in the aggregate sample, when children get the opportunity to enroll

in a better school, their track-level peer groups do not improve as much as their school-level peer

groups. Turning to the heterogeneity in Baccalaureate eects, Column 3 shows that the lack of an

eect on test taking persists in all the subsamples. The coecients are never statistically signicant

at the ve percent level, and are still generally suggestive of only small impacts on test taking rates.

   In contrast, the estimates surrounding Baccalaureate performance (Column 4) generally suggest

a positive impact from having the opportunity to attend a higher ranked school. The magnitude

of the eect is larger and only signicant in the top tercile, but cannot be clearly distinguished

                                                                            34
from that in the bottom tercile, which is itself statistically insignicant.   The bottom line is that

gaining access to a better school might be valuable to both high and low-scoring children, but

statistical power constrains our ability to explore such heterogeneity. More generally, school eects

are dicult to identify, and sample size issues alone might account for some of the variation in

conclusions observed in the literature.



6.4.   Behavioral responses.          Using our survey of principals, parents, and children, we now inves-

tigate whether a major educational intervention like giving a child access to a better school (or


33 We omit the evidence on test taking because there is again no evidence of an eect along this dimension.
34 The two eects would be particularly dicult to tell apart in IV specications which would account for the larger
rst stages in the top tercile.
                                                        20
introducing tracking altogether) might lead to behavioral responses. It is important to note that

our analysis does not attempt to determine to what extent specic factors (e.g., parents, teach-

ers, or peers) account for the impact that attending a better school has on children's academic

                  35
achievement.

   To present results in this area, we make some notes on the structure of all remaining tables (6-11)

and gures (5-9). In each table, Panel A aggregates outcomes to the school level; Panel B aggregates

them to the track level, and Panel C presents them at the child or parent level. For example, in

Table 6 one dependent variable is an indicator for whether Language teachers passed a certication

exam. Panel A thus compares the children who scored just above a threshold with those who scored

just below, and asks if on average their       schools   have more certied language teachers; Panel B asks

if the   tracks   they are in are more likely to have certied teachers; Panel C asks if their         own   teacher

                                  36
is more likely to be certied.         Note that the variables from the principal survey only vary at the

school level, so Panels B and C are blank for them. As before, for each variable we present three

specications, where our preferred one is that restricted to individuals within one transition grade

from the cuto; we usually use these when discussing the results. Finally, here we focus only on the

top cutos. Among our survey towns, this restriction is relevant only for those with three schools

                                                                                                               37
(19 of the 59 towns in the sample), as the two school towns of course contain only one cuto.

   As above, in all gures the panels on the left hand side present simple means of the outcome

variables, while the right hand side panels show tted values of residuals from regressions of outcomes

on a linear trend in transition scores and cuto xed eects. Since we have fewer observations in

the survey data, the cells that we plot are within 0.05 of a transition score from each other. In each

gure, panels A and B are aggregated to the school level, C and D to the track level, and E and F

are at the student/parent level.


6.4.1.   Teacher characteristics.      Figure 5 and Table 6 describe the impact that scoring above a school

cut-o has on the teacher characteristics that students experience. The rst three columns of Table

6 show that students above the cuto are about 13 percent more likely to attend a school which the

35 Econometrically this would be hard to do without strong assumptions, given that we have one source of exogenous
variation in the treatment (attending a better school), and many variables that might account for this eect (e.g.,
teacher, school, parent, and peer eects).
36 An individual student's outcome can be dierent from that observed in his track because some schools feature
multiple classes within a track. Our survey asked each student for his or her Language teacher's name, and we used
that to match students to teachers and teacher characteristics as supplied by the school based on administrative data.
37 This restriction reects that the dierence in peer quality between the bottom two schools in three school towns
was small.
                                                          21
principal declares has the best teachers in town. The remaining columns describe Language teacher

                                                                           38
qualications as provided by their schools based on administrative records.

  The dependent variable in columns 4-6 is an indicator for whether teachers have attained the

highest certication standarda credential that about 60 percent of teachers in Romania have.

Panel A shows that relative to those who just miss, students who score above a school cuto attend

schools where on average Language teachers are about 10 percent more likely to have reached this

standard.    Panel B shows this eect is reduced to about 3 percent when one looks at the                     tracks
students are enrolled in. Panel C shows that the eect essentially disappears once one considers

the actual teachers assigned to studentsthose just above a cuto are not more likely to have a

certied teacher than those just below.

  This conclusion is also visible in Figure 5, where Panel A shows a sharp discontinuity in the

school-level probability of Language teachers having the highest certication standard.                   Panel B

shows signicantly smaller discontinuities at the track level, and panel C suggests no discontinuity

in terms of the actual teacher students encounter.

  In short, in terms of teacher certication dierences between schools exist on average, but these

dierences disappear when one considers the actual teachers experienced by students at the margin.

This is consistent with teachers sorting both across and within schools in a way clearly associated

with student stratication. For example, the pattern of results could reect the highest certication

teachers having a preference forand through seniority gravitating towardsthe highest academic

ability children. Consistent with this columns 7-9 (Table 6) reveal a similar pattern when teacher

quality is measured using years of experience.

  However, it is worth noting that dierences at the margin persist for some of our measures of

teacher quality.      Columns 10-12 show that attending a better school decreases the probability of

having a novice teacher (one with two or fewer years of experience) not just on average, but also

                 39
on the margin.




6.4.2.   Parental eort.   Table 7 and Figures 6 and 7 describe the impact that being able to attend a

better school has on measures of parental involvement and eort. We focus on measures of parents'




38 We focus on Language teachers since all children in all tracks take this subject.
39 On average teachers have about 15 years of experience, with only six percent having less than two years.

                                                        22
participation at school and also on variables intended to capture their interactions with their own

                                                                                                     40
children, such as the willingness to help with homework or pay for tutoring services.

   The rst six columns of Table 7 indicate that children above cutos attend schools where parents

are on average more involved at school. This emerges both in principals' reports of parental partic-

ipation (columns 1-3, Panel A) and in parents' self-reports on volunteering (columns 4-6, Panel A).

However, the impacts at the track and individual level become small and statistically insignicant

(columns 4-6, panels B and C). Figure 6 conrms that there is a discontinuity in parental volunteer-

ing at the school level, but not at the parent level. As was the case with teacher characteristics, this

implies dierences between the average and marginal parental eort: Children who score just above

cutos have peers whose parents participate more at school, but their                 own   parents do not partic-

ipate more than those of children who score just below. A similar conclusion emerges in columns

7-9, where we use the frequency of parental expenditures on tutoring as the outcome variable.

   However, there is evidence of parental behavioral responses in other dimensions. Table 7 considers

the extent to which they help their children with homework.                 Columns 10-12 (Panel A) point to

no dierences at the cutos on the average likelihood that parents help on a daily or almost-daily

basis. This might not be surprising given that the need for help might depend on children's academic

ability. However, the most striking result is shown in Panel C, as well as in Panel F of Figure 7a

reduction      in average parental help with homework for children just above cutos.                 This suggests

that at least in our setting, parents might view their own eort and school quality as substitutes.


6.4.3.   Interactions with peers.     Section 6.1 showed that children who score above cutos are on

average exposed to peers that have higher average transition scores. This rst stage is conrmed

and expanded upon by columns 1-3 of Table 8, which measure peer quality using principals' ranking

of student quality among schools within their towns.

   According to the often cited linear-in-means model, which assumes homogeneous treatment ef-

fects, these ndings would imply positive peer eects for the children who make it into a better

          41
school.        However, scoring above a cuto could adversely impact children if their relative ability

40 To illustrate the variation in these dimensions, 11 percent of parents report that during the last year, they
volunteered in their child's classroom, school oce, or library. About 24 percent of parents report having paid for
private tutoring lessons, a common practice in Romania. In addition, roughly 20 percent of parents claim to help
with homework on a daily or almost daily basis. Finally, we note that secondary education is free in Romania; hence
we do not consider tuition expenses as a measure of parental eort.
41 Peer eects have been a focus in the educational literature, with a large number of papers attempting to empirically
determine their presence and functional form (for instance, see Hoxby and Weingarth (2006), Lavy, Paserman, and
Schlosser (2007), and Jackson (2010b)).
                                                          23
ranking matters, since this makes them a small sh in a big pond. Indeed, models which stress

relative comparisons suggest negative eects through a reduction in condence and/or self-esteem.

   To explore this possibility, we rst investigate whether children who score just above cutos

actually perceive being lower in their peer ability distribution. Columns 4-6 explore this by running

regressions in which children are asked about their rank within their track. The responses ranged

from 1 to 7 with higher numbers indicating a better rank in terms of academic ability. Panels A-B

in columns 4-6 show that on average children in better schools are more likely to feel they are strong

relative to their peers, and as might be expected if they have over-optimistic views, the coecient

is positive rather than zero.       More interestingly Panel C conrms that in contrast, children who

score just above cutos rank themselves lower than those who score just belowthe coecients

are negative (and also signicant) in this case. This might not be surprising given that Romania's

student allocation system is well understood by most students.

   Finally we explore whether such feelings of inferiority are associated with the nature of children's

interaction with their peers. We measure this using an index of negative interactions that averages

four indicators for whether children report that, in the last month, their peers have: i) been mean to

them, ii) hit them, iii) taken their things without asking, or iv) made them feel marginalized. The

possible responses for each of these items ranged from zero (happened daily) to 5 (did not happen

at all); the average of 4.87 across all four indicators suggests that these events are relatively rare.

The results in Table 8 (columns 7-9) do not reveal average dierences at the school level. However,

the track and most importantly the individual level provide evidence of more frequent negative

interactions for children who score just above cutos, a pattern conrmed by the graph in Panel F

of Figure 8. In short, these results leave open the possibility that getting into a better school might

result in feelings of insecurity or marginalization.           It is also possible that the realization of such

eects is behind the fact that not all students take up the opportunity to enroll in a more selective

school (Figure A.1).


6.4.4.   Student eort.   Finally, we explore eort responses on the part of students.
                                                                                      42
                                                                                         Our variables

of interest are indicators for whether students did homework daily or almost daily in the month

prior to the survey, an assessment of which our survey solicited from both parents and the children

42 In results not reported in the paper, we have also explored how enrollment in higher-ranked school aects students'
access to educational infrastructure. We nd no signicant dierences in infrastructure availability at all three levels
of aggregations, a result that holds for both principal and student reports.      This is not a surprising outcome in
Romania, where essentially all schools are public and in principle similarly equipped.
                                                          24
themselves. The results are presented in the rst six columns of Table 9, where Panel A suggests that

students in better schools do more homework on average, suggesting higher eort in such settings.

In this case this eect persists on the margin at least for the parental reports, which suggest a 5

                                                                                       43
percent increase in the probability of doing homework on a daily or almost daily basis.   Finally,

columns 7-9 show that while on average children at better schools perceive homework to be easier,

the coecient ceases to be statistically signicant and changes sign at the margin, suggesting that,

perhaps not surprisingly, marginal children encounter more diculty with homework at higher-

ranked schoolsthis may be yet another reason not all children attend the highest-ranked school

they are eligible for.




6.5.   Within track analysis.         Thus far, we have focused on the reduced-form eects of having the

chance to attend a better school or track within a school. This is a natural rst approach given

that students apply for high school/track combinations. In this section, we consider the eects of

being able to enroll in a better      class   within a given track.

   Specically, the Ministry of Education stipulates that after students are admitted to a particular

                                                                                          44
track within a school, they should be allocated to classes containing at most 28 students.   In fact

the track-specic slot availabilities which schools submit prior to the allocation process need to be

multiples of 28. Since the Ministry does not specify how the allocation of students to classes within

tracks is to be implemented, each school decides its own allocation. Our survey data suggest that

                                                                                     45
many schools further stratify children into classes based on their transition scores.

   To estimate the eect of having access to a better class (within a track), we focus only on tracks

which had slot oerings that were multiples of 28 (i.e.                         56, 84, 112, etc.), and which were also

                                                                          46
completely lled at the time of the admission process.                          We ranked the students in these tracks

in descending order based on their transition scores, and calculated class level cuto scores based

on the transition score of the        28th   (or   56th   or   84th ,   etc.)    student.   As above, we normalized the

transition scores relative to the cutos, and stacked the data by keeping, on each side of a particular



43 The results on children's homework eort are conrmed graphically in Figure 9.
44 After being allocated to a particular class, students usually spend the next four years with the same peers, taking
all subjects together.
45 In anecdotal evidence, our conversations with headmasters conrm that many schools have this policy.
46 As mentioned earlier, our identication strategy is based on the fact that the majority of schools reach their
pre-announced capacity constraint. At the same time, it is worth mentioning that enrollment in many of the less
desirable schools is often less than the number of initial slot oerings.
                                                               25
cuto, the 28 students within a track with scores closest to the cuto. Also as above, our analysis

focuses on intent to treat estimates of scoring above a particular class level cuto.
                                                                                                     47

     Understanding these eects is interesting for two reasons. First, by looking at children in dierent

classes but in the same track, we are able to make comparisons between children who are exposed

to the same curriculum. These results therefore provide a robustness check for our school and track

level analysis, in which we cannot control for potential curriculum dierences. Second, considering

classes allows us to analyze behavioral responses in a setting that even more closely approximates the

experimental setting of Duo, Dupas, and Kremer (forthcoming), where an RD analysis compares

students who are on the margin of being assigned to low or high achieving classes.

     Table 10 presents the results at the class (Panel A) and child or parent level (Panel B). For

variables that do not vary within classes, such as class-level peer quality or teacher qualications,

the results in both panels are identical and are therefore presented only once. Column 1 begins by

illustrating the rst stage showing that there is a clear discontinuity in classroom peer quality at

the class cutos. An increase of 0.13 points in the average transition emerges from a regression using

observations within 1 point of the transition score cutos. Although the eect is highly signicant,

its magnitude is about half the size of the track-based estimates, and about one fourth the size of

the school-based estimates. This reects that there is signicantly less variability in the transition

scores between classes within school/tracks.

     Columns 2-4 (Table 10) consider the same teacher characteristics examined in Table 6.                           The

evidence suggests that teacher sorting is also prevalent across classes in a school/track. Students

who score above a class cuto are exposed to teachers who are 5 percent more likely to have the

                                                                         48
highest certication and have 1.8 more years of experience.

     The remaining columns present all the other outcome variables featured in our previous analysis

of the survey data (measures of parental participation, children's interaction with peers, and child

homework eort) with results that are qualitatively similar to those found in Tables 7-9.                            For

example, although the parent of the child who just makes it into a better class is not more likely

to pay for tutoring services, this child is more likely to be exposed to peers whose parents buy

such services.       At the same time, several key coecients in this table, especially the marginal


47   Again, while not every school in our sample allocates children to classes based only on the transition score, as long
as a fraction of schools do so, we can estimate the eects of being able to attend a better class within a track.
48 The small and insignicant result on novice teachers (Column 4) is not surprising given the results in Table 6,
which suggested no dierence in this dimension across tracks.
                                                            26
eects in Panel B, are imprecisely estimated, which could be explained both by the smaller sample

sizes and the fact that the dierences in educational environments (as seen in Column 1) are less

stark than in the school or track level analysis. Nevertheless, the bottom line is that many of the

behavioral responses we observed previouslyparticularly the sorting of more qualied teachers to

better classescan also be observed across classes within the same track.




6.6.   Eects across cohorts.    Finally, we investigate whether the behavioral responses identied

have a dynamic component:       For example, do students' responses emerge only gradually during

their high school years? This matters because such dynamics suggest that the estimated eects of

experimental or quasi-experimental analyses may vary depending, for example, on when in students'

careers post-test scores are collected.

  For the sake of space, Table 11 focuses only on specications including students within one

transition score point of the cutos. For reference, Panel A repeats specications at the student

level from previous tables. For example, the dependent variable in Column 2 is the Language teacher

experience measured in years.    The coecient (-0.625) is from Table 6, Column 8, Panel C, and

shows there is no change (at the cuto ) in the experience of the teacher students experience.

  Panel B explores whether these eects vary with time by looking at how they change across the

three entry cohorts we surveyed: 2005, 2006, and 2007.      This comparison allows us to explore if

there are dierences according to whether students are in their second, third, or fourth year of high

school. This is achieved by including an indicator for whether students' transition scores were above

the cuto and interacting this dummy with indicators for the 2005 and 2006 cohorts, such that the

rst coecient refers to the 2007 (the youngest) cohort.

  The results contain some interesting variation.      For example, columns 6 and 7 suggest that

children's feelings of academic inferiority, and the frequency of their negative interactions with

peers, are more marked in earlier stages of high school. This might not be surprising to the extent

that the transition scores contain noise, and therefore the children ranked lowest upon entry are

unlikely to on average turn in the worst performance during the year. As this information is revealed

students' self assessment their and peers perceptions might change, aecting behavior.

  Similarly, the reductions in parental help with homework happen early on and are partially

reversed by the senior year. Specically, in column 5 the key coecient is signicant for the youngest
                                                  27
cohort (2007), but the joint test for the oldest cohort (2005) is not statistically signicant (p-

value=0.29).         This might be consistent, for example, with parents gradually realizing that their

child's admission into a better school might not eliminate the need for support on their part.

Consistent with this, Column 4 shows that while the parents of children who just make it into

more selective schools are not more likely to invest in tutoring in the second year of high school,

by the fourth they are in fact more likely to do so. If tutoring indeed raises academic achievement

(e.g.    Banerjee, Cole Duo, and Linden, 2007) then this eect might contribute towards nding

school eects by the fourth but not the second year. Finally, columns 2 and 3 show less evidence of

variation across cohorts in terms of teacher characteristics.

  To summarize, we also nd evidence that in Romania some of the behavioral responses identied

above have a dynamic component. This is relevant, for example, because it implies that the esti-

mated eects of going to a better school might depend on whether academic outcomes are measured

at the   9th   or   12th   grade level.




                                               7. Conclusion


  In elds ranging from Labor to Development Economics, distinct interest surrounds the impact

of educational quality on individual outcomes. This impact has not been fully established mainly

because it is dicult to nd situations in which otherwise comparable students enroll in schools of

dierent quality.

  In this paper, our rst contribution has been to address this obstacle by analyzing Romania's ed-

ucational system, which allocates students to high schools in one of the most systematic procedures

observed around the world. This mechanism yields a large number of RD-based quasi-experiments,

and has enabled us to contribute to the literature with unusually large sample sizes and an explo-

ration of the heterogeneity in eects at dierent points of the test score distribution. Our second

contribution has been to implement a specialized survey in a subset of towns, and to use the re-

sulting data to explore behavioral responses and equilibrium eects that arise when a child has the

opportunity to attend a better schoolin this case in a school system where children are stratied

by ability.

  Our rst reduced form result is that access to a better school has a positive impact on cognitive

outcomes as measured by a high-stakes exam. This result has not been a consistent nding in the
                                                      28
literature, as some papersincluding some which also rely on an RD approachnd little indication

that enrolling in a higher-achievement school or class raises learning.

  Our second set of results provides evidence of signicant behavioral responses and equilibrium

eects.   Specically, we nd that teachers sort in response to the stratication of students, such

that an individual who just makes it into a more selective school is assigned a teacher who is less

qualied than the average instructor at the school, and possibly no dierent than the teacher she

would have encountered at the school she just avoided. This teacher sorting may be an equilibrium

outcome that has developed over time in this stratied school system.       Similarly, while children

who make it into a better school encounter greater average parental participation, there is little

evidence that their   own   parents increase their commitment to education, and in fact there is some

indication that they reduce the extent to which they help with homework. Along the same lines,

while children who make it into better schools are exposed to better peers, they also seem to realize

they are weaker and to feel marginalized. For the behavioral responses by parents and children, we

also provide evidence that these eects have a dynamic componentthe estimates depend on how

many years the child has attended a particular school.

  While the magnitude or even the direction of these responses may reect institutions that are

specic to Romania, their existence suggests that (perhaps as one would expect) educational markets

are sophisticated arenas in which several agents interact. As a result, the causal mechanisms that

link any given school input to outcomes like wages or learning are likely to be complicated.

  This has implications regarding the experimental evaluation of educational interventions. This

research typically relies on partial equilibrium experiments that attempt to hold constant factors

including responses like those explored here; additionally, it often measures outcomes in the short

run. If dynamic behavioral responses are relevant, however, then the very nature (and impact) of a

given intervention may change as actors have a chance to respond. Further, some of these responses

may only be observed when an intervention is taken to scale and sustained.         These possibilities

amplify the usual concerns regarding small scale experiments' external validity.

  More broadly, our ndings imply that educational interventions and educational institutions

should be analyzed with reference to how their design aects the behavior of dierent agents involved

in the educational process. This point is explored theoretically in recent work including MacLeod

and Urquiola (2009), Das et al. (2010), and Albornoz, Berlinski, and Cabrales (2010)).



                                                   29
                                                References

Acemoglu, D. (2010): Theory, general equilibrium, and political economy in development eco-
  nomics,   Journal of Economic Perspectives, 24(3), 1732.
Albornoz, F., S. Berlinski,         and   A. Cabrales (2010): Incentives, resources, and the organi-
  zation of the school system, Mimeo, University College, London.
Banerjee, A., S. Cole, E. Duflo,            and   L. Linden (2007): Remedying Education: Evidence
  from Two Randomized Experiments in India,               Quarterly Journal of Economics,   122(3), 1235
  1264.
Banerjee, A.,     and   E. Duflo (2008): The experimental approach to development economics,
  Discussion Paper 14467, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Becker, G. (1964):  Human capital: A theoretical and empirical analysis, with special reference to
 Education. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
       (1981): A treatise on the family. Harvard University Press, Cambridge.
Becker, G., and N. Tomes (1986): Human capital and the rise and fall of families, Journal of
 Labor Economics, 4, S1S39.
Behrman, J., S. Khan, D. Ross,            and   R. Sabot (1997): School quality and cognitive achieve-
  ment production: A case study for rural Pakistan,          Economics of Education Review, 16(2), 127
  142.
Brown, P. (2006): Parental education and child learning: Human capital investments in time and
  money,    Economic Development and Cultural Change, 54(4).
Case, A.,    and A. Deaton (1999a):       Large cash transfers to the elderly in South Africa,   Economic
  Journal, 450, 13301361.
          (1999b): School inputs and educational outcomes in South Africa,         Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 114(3), 10471084.
Clark, D. (forthcoming): Selective schools and academic achievement,          B.E. Journal of Economic
  Analysis and Policy: Advances.
Cullen, J., B. Jacob,      and    S. Levitt (2006): The eect of school choice on student outcomes:
  Evidence from randomized lotteries,       Econometrica, 74(5), 11911230.
Dale, S. B.,    and   A. B. Krueger (2002): Estimating the payo to attending a more selective
  college:   An application of selection on observables and unobservables,         Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 117(4), 14911527.
Das, J., S. Dercon, J. Habyarimana, K. Muralidharan, V. Sundararaman,                         and    P. Kr-
  ishnan (2010): When can school inputs improve test scores?, Mimeo, University of California
  at San Diego.
Deaton, A. (2010): Instruments, randomization, and learning about development,                   Journal of
  Economic Literature, 48, 424455.
Duflo, E., P. Dupas,        and   M. Kremer (forthcoming):          Peer eects, teacher incentives, and
  the impact of tracking: Evidence from a randomized evaluation in Kenya,           American Economic
  Review, pp. 13951435.
Hahn, J., P. Todd,      and W. van der Klaauw (2001):           Identication and estimation of treatment
  eects with regression discontinuity design,      Review of Economic Studies, 69(1), 201209.
Hastings, J., T. Kane,      and    D. Staiger (2009): Heterogeneous Preferences and the Ecacy of
  Public School Choice, Mimeo, Brown University.
Hoekstra, M. (2009):        The eect of attending the agship state university on earnings:              A
  discontinuity-based approach,     Review of Economics and Statistics, 91(4), 717724.
Hoxby, C.,     and   G. Weingarth (2006): Taking race out of the equation: School reassignment
  and the structure of peer eects, mimeo, Harvard Universtiy.



                                                      30
Imbens, G.,     and K. Kalyanaraman (2009):          Optimal bandwith choice for the regression discon-
  tinuity estimator, Mimeo, Harvard University.
Imbens, G.,      and   T. Lemieux (2008):      Regression discontinuity designs: A guide to practice,
  Journal of Econometrics, 142(2), 615635.
Jackson, C. K. (2010a): Do students benet from attending better schools?: Evidence from rule
  based student assignments in Trinidad and Tobago,         The Economic Journal.
           (2010b): Peer quality or input quality? Evidence from Trinidad and Tobago, Working
  Paper 16598, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Jacoby, H. (2002):       Is there an educational intrahousehold 'ypaper eect' ?     Evidence from a
  school feeding program,     The Economic Journal, 112, 196221.
Jensen, R. (2003): Do Private Transfers 'Displace' the Benets of Public Transfers?           Evidence
  from South Africa,     Journal of Public Economics, 88, 89112.
Krueger, A. (1999):        Experimental Estimates of Education Production Functions,         Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 114(2), 497532.
Lankford, H., S. Loeb,          and   J. Wyckoff (2002):      Teacher sorting and the plight of urban
  schools: A descriptive analysis,    Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 24(1), 3762.
Lavy, V., M. D. Passerman,            and   A. Schlosser (2007): Inside the black box of ability peer
  eects: Evidence from variation in high and low achievers in the classroom, Mimeo, Hebrew
  University.
Lee, D.,   and T. Lemieux (Forthcoming):        Regression discontinuity designs in Economics,   Journal
  of Economic Literature.
MacLeod, W. B.,         and   M. Urquiola (2009): Anti-lemons: School reputation and educational
  quality, Working paper no. 15112, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Malamud, O.,      and   C. Pop-Eleches (forthcoming): General education versus vocational train-
  ing: Evidence from an economy in transition,        Review of Economics and Statistics.
Moffitt, R. (1992): Incentive eects of the U.S. welfare system: A review,     Journal of Economic
  Literature, 30, 160.
Park, A., X. Shi, C.-T. Hsieh,          and   X. An (2008): Does School Quality Matter?: Evidence
  from a Natural Experiment in Rural China, Mimeo, University of Chicago.
Rosenzweig, M.,        and K. Wolpin (1994):      Transfers to young women and their children,    Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 84, 11951212.
Saavedra, J. (2009): The learning and early labor market eects of college quality: A regression
  discontinuity analysis, Mimeo, Harvard University.
Sekhri, S.,   and Y. Rubinstein (2010):        Do public colleges in developing countries provide better
  education than private ones? Evidence from general education sector in India, Mimeo, University
  of Virginia.
Thistlewaite, D.,       and   D. Campbell (1960): Regression discontinuity analysis: An alternative
  to the ex-post facto experiment,     Journal of Educational Psychology, 51(6), 309317.
Todd, P.,   and K. Wolpin (2003):       On the specication and estimation of the production function
  for cognitive achievement,     The Economic Journal, 113, F2F33.




                                                      31
Figure 1: Between-school cutoffs, all towns


                      Panel A: Average transition score--no controls                                         Panel B: Average transition score--controls




                                                                                                      .1
          7.7
  7.55 7.6 7.65
 School level score




                                                                                 School level score
          7.5




                                                                                                      -.1
                      -.2        -.1           0             .1        .2                                    -.2        -.1           0             .1     .2
                                    Score distance to cutoff                                                               Score distance to cutoff


                      Panel C: Baccalaureate taken--no controls                                              Panel D: Baccalaureate taken--controls
          .75




                                                                                                      .02
          .74
 Taken




                                                                                 Taken
  .73     .72




                                                                                                      -.02
          .71




                      -.2        -.1           0             .1        .2                                    -.2        -.1           0             .1     .2
                                    Score distance to cutoff                                                               Score distance to cutoff


                      Panel E: Baccalaureate grade--no controls                                              Panel F: Baccalaureate grade--controls
          8.15




                                                                                                      .1
          8.1
 Grade




                                                                                 Grade
  8.05    8
          7.95




                                                                                                      -.1




                      -.2        -.1           0             .1        .2                                    -.2        -.1           0             .1     .2
                                    Score distance to cutoff                                                               Score distance to cutoff



Note: All panels are based on administrative data for the 2001-2003 admission cohorts, and restrict
observations to individuals with transition scores within 0.2 points of a cutoff (normalized to zero in all
cases). The left hand side panels plot (0.01 point) transition score cell means of the dependent variable.
The right hand side panels plot analogous means of residuals from a regression of the dependent variable
on a linear trend in the transition score and cutoff fixed effects. In each panel, the solid lines are fitted
values of regressions of the dependent variable on a linear trend in the transition score, estimated separately
on each side of the cutoff. The dependent variable in panels A and B is the average transition score of the
peers students encounter at school; the dependent variable in panels C and D is an indicator for having
taken the Baccalaureate test; the dependent variable in panels E and F is the Baccalaureate exam grade.




                                                                            32
Figure 2: Between-school cutoffs, survey sample towns

                         Panel A: Average transition score--no controls                                      Panel B: Average transition score--controls




                                                                                                .3
             8




                                                                                                     .1 .2
                   7.8
    School level score




                                                                                       School level score
           7.6




                                                                                    -.2 -.1
    7.4      7.2




                                                                                                -.3
                         -.2        -.1           0             .1        .2                                 -.2        -.1           0             .1     .2
                                       Score distance to cutoff                                                            Score distance to cutoff


                         Panel C: Baccalaureate taken--no controls                                           Panel D: Baccalaureate taken--controls
             .75




                                                                                                .05
                                                                                                .02
             .7
    Taken




                                                                                    Taken
                                                                                                -.02
             .65




                                                                                                -.05
             .6




                         -.2        -.1           0             .1        .2                                 -.2        -.1           0             .1     .2
                                       Score distance to cutoff                                                            Score distance to cutoff


                         Panel E: Baccalaureate grade--no controls                                           Panel F: Baccalaureate grade--controls
                                                                                                .2
             8.2




                                                                                                .1
          8.1
    Grade




                                                                                    Grade
     8




                                                                                                -.1
             7.9
             7.8




                                                                                                -.2




                         -.2        -.1           0             .1        .2                                 -.2        -.1           0             .1     .2
                                       Score distance to cutoff                                                            Score distance to cutoff



Note: All panels are based on administrative data for the 2001-2003 admission cohorts, and restrict
observations to individuals with transition scores within 0.2 points of a cutoff (normalized to zero in all
cases). The left hand side panels plot (0.01 point) transition score cell means of the dependent variable.
The right hand side panels plot analogous means of residuals from a regression of the dependent variable
on a linear trend in the transition score and a cutoff fixed effects. In each panel, the solid lines are fitted
values of regressions of the dependent variable on a linear trend in the transition score, estimated separately
on each side of the cutoff. The dependent variable in panels A and B is the average transition score of the
peers students encounter at school; the dependent variable in panels C and D is an indicator for having
taken the Baccalaureate test; the dependent variable in panels E and F is the Baccalaureate exam grade.




                                                                               33
Figure 3: Between-track cutoffs, all towns


                                    Panel A: Average transition score--no controls                                   Panel B: Average transition score--controls
                     7.95




                                                                                                              .1
       7.75 7.8 7.85 7.9
         School level score




                                                                                          School leve score
                     7.7




                                                                                                              -.1
                                    -.2         -.1           0             .1       .2                              -.2         -.1           0             .1    .2
                                                   Score distance to cutoff                                                         Score distance to cutoff


                                    Panel C: Bacc. taken-all cutoffs--no controls                                    Panel D: Bacc. taken-all cutoffs--controls




                                                                                                              .02
       .745 .75 .755 .76 .765 .77
                Bac taken




                                                                                          Bac taken
                                                                                                              -.02




                                    -.2         -.1           0             .1       .2                              -.2         -.1           0             .1    .2
                                                   Score distance to cutoff                                                         Score distance to cutoff


                                    Panel E: Baccalaureate grade--no controls                                        Panel F: Baccalaureate grade--controls
                     8.35




                                                                                                              .05
                     8.3
       Grade




                                                                                          Grade
       8.25          8.2
                     8.15




                                                                                                              -.05




                                    -.2         -.1           0             .1       .2                              -.2         -.1           0             .1    .2
                                                   Score distance to cutoff                                                         Score distance to cutoff



Note: All panels are based on administrative data for the 2001-2003 admission cohorts, and restrict
observations to individuals with transition scores within 0.2 points of a cutoff (normalized to zero in all
cases). The left hand side panels plot (0.01 point) transition score cell means of the dependent variable.
The right hand side panels plot analogous means of residuals from a regression of the dependent variable
on a linear trend in the transition score and cutoff fixed effects. In each panel, the solid lines are fitted
values of regressions of the dependent variable on a linear trend in the transition score, estimated separately
on each side of the cutoff. The dependent variable in panels A and B is the average transition score of the
peers students encounter at school; the dependent variable in panels C and D is an indicator for having
taken the Baccalaureate test; the dependent variable in panels E and F is the Baccalaureate exam grade.




                                                                                     34
Figure 4: Top and bottom terciles of between-school cutoffs

                          Panel A: Top cutoffs--Avg. trans. score--no controls                                  Panel B: Top cutoffs--Avg. trans. score--controls




                                                                                                          .1
    School level score




                                                                                        School level score
         8.2      8.4




                                                                                      -.1
   8




                          -.2         -.1              0             .1     .2                                 -.2          -.1           0             .1          .2
                                            Score distance to cutoff                                                           Score distance to cutoff


                          Panel C: Bottom cutoffs--Avg. trans. score--no controls                              Panel D: Bottom cutoffs--Avg. transition score--controls
   6.6 6.7 6.8 6.9




                                                                                                          .1
     School level score




                                                                                        School level score
                                                                                      -.1
                          -.2         -.1              0             .1     .2                                 -.2         -.1              0             .1        .2
                                            Score distance to cutoff                                                             Score distance to cutoff


                           Panel E: Top cutoffs--Bacc. grade--no controls                                       Panel F: Top cutoffs--Bacc. grade--controls
                8.7




                                                                                                    .1
   8.5 8.6
    Grade




                                                                                      Grade
                8.4




                                                                                                    -.1




                          -.2         -.1           0             .1        .2                                 -.2          -.1           0             .1          .2
                                         Score distance to cutoff                                                              Score distance to cutoff


                          Panel G: Bottom cutoffs--Bacc. grade--no controls                                     Panel H: Bottom cutoffs--Bacc. grade--controls
              7.4




                                                                                                    .1
   Grade




                                                                                      Grade
    7.3       7.2




                                                                                                    -.1




                          -.2         -.1           0             .1        .2                                 -.2          -.1           0             .1          .2
                                         Score distance to cutoff                                                              Score distance to cutoff



Note: All panels are based on administrative data for the 2001-2003 admission cohorts, and restrict
observations to individuals with transition scores within 0.2 points of a cutoff (normalized to zero in all
cases). The left hand side panels plot (0.01 point) transition score cell means of the dependent variable.
The right hand side panels plot analogous means of residuals from a regression of the dependent variable
on a linear trend in the transition score and cutoff fixed effects. In each panel, the solid lines are fitted
values of regressions of the dependent variable on a linear trend in the transition score, estimated separately
on each side of the cutoff. Panels A, B, E and F refer to the top tercile of between-school cutoffs ordered by
the scores at which they take place; panels C, D, G, and H to the bottom tercile. The dependent variable in
panels A-D is the average transition score of the peers students encounter at school; the dependent variable
in panels E-H is the Baccalaureate exam grade.




                                                                                 35
Figure 5: Teacher certification


                    Panel A: no controls - school level                                     Panel B: controls - school level
         .7




                                                                                  .1
               .6




                                                                                        0
 Certification




                                                                          Certification
                                                                               -.1
      .5




                                                                                  -.2
         .4




                                                                                  -.3
         .3




                    -1          -.5           0             .5   1                          -1          -.5           0             .5   1
                                   Score distance to cutoff                                                Score distance to cutoff


                    Panel C: no controls - track level                                      Panel D: controls - track level
         .7




                                                                                  .1
               .6




                                                                                        0
 Certification




                                                                          Certification
                                                                               -.1
      .5




                                                                                  -.2
         .4




                                                                                  -.3
         .3




                    -1          -.5           0             .5   1                          -1          -.5           0             .5   1
                                   Score distance to cutoff                                                Score distance to cutoff


                    Panel E: no controls - student level                                    Panel F: controls - student level
         .7




                                                                                  .1
         .6




                                                                                  0
 Certification




                                                                          Certification
                                                                                   -.1
          .5




                                                                           -.2
  .4




                                                                                  -.3
         .3




                                                                                  -.4
         .2




                    -1          -.5           0             .5   1                          -1          -.5           0             .5   1
                                   Score distance to cutoff                                                Score distance to cutoff



Note: All panels are based on survey data for the 2005-2007 admission cohorts, and restrict observations to
individuals with transition scores within 1 points of a cutoff (normalized to zero in all cases). The left hand
side panels plot (0.05 point) transition score cell means of an indicator for whether teachers have attained
the maximum certification standard. The right hand side panels plot analogous means of residuals from a
regression of the dependent variable on a linear trend in the transition score and cutoff fixed effects. The
solid lines are fitted values of regressions of the dependent variable on a linear trend in the transition score,
estimated separately on each side of the cutoff. Panels A and B present the outcome variable aggregated to
the school level, and panels C and D present it aggregated to the track level. Panels E and F present the
outcome variable at the child or parent level.




                                                                     36
Figure 6: Parental volunteering at school


                     Panel A: no controls - school level                                        Panel B: controls - school level




                                                                                    .01
          .14
 Parent voluneteer




                                                                            Parent voluneteer
                                                                                           0
            .12




                                                                                   -.01
   .1




                                                                           -.02     -.03
          .08




                     -1          -.5           0             .5   1                             -1          -.5           0             .5   1
                                    Score distance to cutoff                                                   Score distance to cutoff


                     Panel C: no controls - track level                                         Panel D: controls - track level




                                                                                    .02
          .16
 Parent voluneteer




                                                                            Parent voluneteer
                                                                                           0
              .14




                                                                                  -.02
       .12




                                                                           -.04
 .1




                                                                                    -.06
          .08




                     -1          -.5           0             .5   1                             -1          -.5           0             .5   1
                                    Score distance to cutoff                                                   Score distance to cutoff


                     Panel E: no controls - parent level                                        Panel F: controls - parent level
                                                                                    .05
          .15
 Parent voluneteer




                                                                           Parent voluneteer
                                                                                        0
            .1




                                                                            -.05
  .05




                                                                                    -.1
          0




                     -1          -.5           0             .5   1                             -1          -.5           0             .5   1
                                    Score distance to cutoff                                                   Score distance to cutoff



Note: All panels are based on survey data for the 2005-2007 admission cohorts, and restrict observations to
individuals with transition scores within 1 points of a cutoff (normalized to zero in all cases). The left hand
side panels plot (0.05 point) transition score cell means of an indicator for whether parents have
volunteered at school in the past year. The right hand side panels plot analogous means of residuals from a
regression of the dependent variable on a linear trend in the transition score and cutoff fixed effects. The
solid lines are fitted values of regressions of the dependent variable on a linear trend in the transition score,
estimated separately on each side of the cutoff. Panels A and B present the outcome variable aggregated to
the school level, and panels C and D present it aggregated to the track level. Panels E and F present the
outcome variable at the child or parent level.




                                                                      37
Figure 7: Parental help with homework

                             .26
                                   Panel A: no controls - school level                                                       Panel B: controls - school level




                                                                                                                    .03
   Parent help with homework




                                                                                            Parent help with homework
                       .24




                                                                                                               .02
               .22




                                                                                                        .01
        .2




                                                                                         -.01    0
 .18




                                   -1          -.5           0             .5   1                                            -1          -.5           0             .5   1
                                                  Score distance to cutoff                                                                  Score distance to cutoff


                                   Panel C: no controls - track level                                                        Panel D: controls - track level




                                                                                                                       .04
                           .3
 Parent help with homework




                                                                                             Parent help with homework
                                                                                                                .02
                  .25




                                                                                                          0
        .2




                                                                                         -.04   -.02
                 .15




                                   -1          -.5           0             .5   1                                            -1          -.5           0             .5   1
                                                  Score distance to cutoff                                                                  Score distance to cutoff


                                   Panel E: no controls - parent level                                                       Panel F: controls - parent level
                           .35




                                                                                                                      .1
 Parent help with homework




                                                                                            Parent help with homework
                      .3




                                                                                                               .05
                .25




                                                                                                         0
          .2




                                                                                                -.05
   .15




                                                                                         -.1
                 .1




                                   -1          -.5           0             .5   1                                            -1          -.5           0             .5   1
                                                  Score distance to cutoff                                                                  Score distance to cutoff



Note: All panels are based on survey data for the 2005-2007 admission cohorts, and restrict observations to
individuals with transition scores within 1 points of a cutoff (normalized to zero in all cases). The left hand
side panels plot (0.05 point) transition score cell means of an indicator for whether, in the month before the
survey, parents declare helping their children with homework on a daily or almost daily basis. The right
hand side panels plot analogous means of residuals from a regression of the dependent variable on a linear
trend in the transition score and cutoff fixed effects. The solid lines are fitted values of regressions of the
dependent variable on a linear trend in the transition score, estimated separately on each side of the cutoff.
Panels A and B present the outcome variable aggregated to the school level, and panels C and D present it
aggregated to the track level. Panels E and F present the outcome variable at the child or parent level.




                                                                                    38
Figure 8: Negative interaction with peers at school

                                4.9
                                      Panel A: no controls - school level                                                        Panel B: controls - school level
   Negative Interaction with Peers




                                                                                            Negative Interaction with Peers
                                                                                             -.08 -.06 -.04 -.02        0
 4.75      4.8        4.85




                                      -1          -.5           0             .5   1                                             -1          -.5           0             .5   1
                                                     Score distance to cutoff                                                                   Score distance to cutoff


                                      Panel C: no controls - track level                                                         Panel D: controls - track level
                               4.9




                                                                                                                           .05
  Negative Interaction with Peers




                                                                                              Negative Interaction with Peers
                       4.85




                                                                                                            -.05     0
      4.75      4.8




                                                                                            -.15    -.1
 4.7




                                      -1          -.5           0             .5   1                                             -1          -.5           0             .5   1
                                                     Score distance to cutoff                                                                   Score distance to cutoff


                                      Panel E: no controls - student level                                                       Panel F: controls - student level
                                5
  Negative Interaction with Peers




                                                                                              Negative Interaction with Peers
                                                                                                                          .05
                        4.9




                                                                                            -.2 -.15 -.1 -.05 0
 4.6    4.7     4.8




                                      -1          -.5           0             .5   1                                             -1          -.5           0             .5   1
                                                     Score distance to cutoff                                                                   Score distance to cutoff



Note: All panels are based on survey data for the 2005-2007 admission cohorts, and restrict observations to
individuals with transition scores within 1 points of a cutoff (normalized to zero in all cases). The left hand
side panels plot (0.05 point) transition score cell means of an index of children’s negative interactions with
peers at school (Section 4). The right hand side panels plot analogous means of residuals from a regression
of the dependent variable on a linear trend in the transition score and cutoff fixed effects. The solid lines
are fitted values of regressions of the dependent variable on a linear trend in the transition score, estimated
separately on each side of the cutoff. Panels A and B present the outcome variable aggregated to the school
level, and panels C and D present it aggregated to the track level. Panels E and F present the outcome
variable at the child or parent level.




                                                                                       39
Figure 9: Children’s homework effort (parental report)


                                Panel A: no controls - school level                                                      Panel B: controls - school level




                                                                                                                  .05
                           .8
 Child Does Homework Daily




                                                                                         Child Does Homework Daily
                  .75




                                                                                                         0
             .7




                                                                                                -.05
      .65




                                                                                      -.1
                .6




                                -1          -.5           0             .5   1                                           -1          -.5           0             .5   1
                                               Score distance to cutoff                                                                 Score distance to cutoff


                                Panel C: no controls - track level                                                       Panel D: controls - track level




                                                                                                                   .05
                           .8
 Child Does Homework Daily




                                                                                          Child Does Homework Daily
                  .75




                                                                                                     -.05   0
      .65    .7




                                                                                      -.15     -.1
                .6




                                -1          -.5           0             .5   1                                           -1          -.5           0             .5   1
                                               Score distance to cutoff                                                                 Score distance to cutoff


                                Panel E: no controls - parent level                                                      Panel F: controls - parent level
                                                                                                               .05
                     .75 .8
    Child Does Homework Daily




                                                                                      Child Does Homework Daily
                                                                                        -.15 -.1 -.05     0
 .55 .6     .65 .7




                                                                                                       -.2




                                -1          -.5           0             .5   1                                           -1          -.5           0             .5   1
                                               Score distance to cutoff                                                                 Score distance to cutoff



Note: All panels are based on survey data for the 2005-2007 admission cohorts, and restrict observations to
individuals with transition scores within 1 points of a cutoff (normalized to zero in all cases). The left hand
side panels plot (0.05 point) transition score cell means of an indicator for whether, based on parental
reports, children do homework on a daily or almost daily basis. The right hand side panels plot analogous
means of residuals from a regression of the dependent variable on a linear trend in the transition score and
cutoff fixed effects. The solid lines are fitted values of regressions of the dependent variable on a linear
trend in the transition score, estimated separately on each side of the cutoff. Panels A and B present the
outcome variable aggregated to the school level, and panels C and D present it aggregated to the track level.
Panels E and F present the outcome variable at the child or parent level.




                                                                                 40
Table 1: Descriptive statistics, administrative data

                                                                                        High school admission cohort
                                                           2001                                     2002                                        2003
                                           Mean    S.D.    Min  Max        N         Mean S.D.     Min Max           N          Mean    S.D.    Min Max         N
             Panel A.1: Individual level
             Transition grade               7.68    0.80   5.90    9.52   107,812      7.87    0.75   6.03    9.41   110,912     7.96    0.97   5.13      10   115,413
             Baccalaureate taken           0.847   0.360      0       1   107,812     0.822   0.383      0       1   110,912    0.809   0.393      0       1   115,413
             Baccalaureate grade            8.31    0.93   5.19   10.00    87,411      8.28    0.95   5.18   10.00    85,946     8.51    0.88   5.27   10.00    84,110
             Panel A.2: Track level
             9th grade enrollment           62.6    49.0     1     276      1,722      66.6    50.6     1     280      1,665     71.5    53.3     1     329      1,615
             Panel A.3: School level
             9th grade enrollment          135.3    61.4     2     352         797    140.6    63.1     9     420         789   144.1    69.2     3     432         801
             Number of tracks                2.2     1.2     1       5         797      2.1     1.2     1       5         789     2.0     1.2     1       5         801
             Panel A.4: Town level
             9th grade enrollment          804.6   849.6     62   3,819        134    827.7   875.5    60    4,088        134   854.9   919.5    45    4,169        135
             No. of schools                  5.9     6.0      2      29        134      5.9     5.8     2       28        134     5.9     5.9     2       29        135
             No. of tracks                  12.9    11.9      2      58        134     12.4    11.4     2       56        134    12.0    10.9     2       52        135

                                                           2005                                       2006                                      2007
                                           Mean    S.D.    Min  Max        N         Mean     S.D.    Min Max         N         Mean    S.D.    Min Max         N
             Panel B.1: Individual level
             Transition grade               8.14    0.80   6.50    9.64   105,737      8.26    0.76   6.41    9.67    98,647     8.39    0.77   3.68    9.74    97,069
             Baccalaureate taken             n/a     n/a    n/a     n/a       n/a       n/a     n/a    n/a     n/a       n/a      n/a     n/a    n/a     n/a       n/a
             Baccalaureate grade             n/a     n/a    n/a     n/a       n/a       n/a     n/a    n/a     n/a       n/a      n/a     n/a    n/a     n/a       n/a
             Panel B.2: Track level
             9th grade enrollment           62.8    47.8     1     308      1,684      60.4    44.3     1     280      1,634     59.1    42.4     3     252      1,644
             Panel B.3: School level
             9th grade enrollment          129.4    70.6     2     420         817    120.3    64.8     1     336         820   116.8    62.2     3     308         831
             Number of tracks                2.1     1.2     1       5         817      2.0     1.2     1       5         820     2.0     1.2     1       5         831
             Panel B.4: Town level
             9th grade enrollment          766.2   839.8     45   3,767        138    720.1   764.6    46    3,650        137   683.5   728.5    57    3,462        142
             No. of schools                  5.9     6.0      2      32        138      6.0     6.2     2       34        137     5.9     6.0     2       33        142
             No. of tracks                  12.2    11.4      2      58        138     11.9    11.2     2       60        137    11.6    10.9     2       59        142


Note: This table describes data covering the universe of Romanian towns with two exceptions (discussed in Section 4): i) towns that make up Bucharest, and ii)
towns that contain a single school. Panel A.1 presents student level statistics for the 2001-2003 cohorts. Panels A.2, A.3, and A.4 refer to characteristics at the
track, school, and town level, respectively. Panels B.1-B.4 present analogous information for the 2005-2007 cohorts.




                                                                                        41
Table 2: Descriptive statistics, survey data

                                                                              Mean     Std. Dev.     N
Panel A: Socioeconomic characteristics (Household survey)
Female head of household                                                      0.112      0.316     11,931
Age of household head                                                         46.752     7.145     11,843
Ethnicity of household head
 Romanian                                                                     0.938      0.240     11,931
 Hungarian                                                                    0.050      0.218     11,931
 Gypsy                                                                        0.003      0.056     11,931
 Other                                                                        0.008      0.091     11,931
Education of household head
 Primary                                                                      0.665      0.472     11,840
 Secondary                                                                    0.205      0.404     11,840
 Tertiary                                                                     0.130      0.337     11,840
Female Child                                                                  0.584      0.493     11,931
Age of Child                                                                  18.077     0.939     11,866
Panel B: Parental responses (Household survey)
Parent has volunteered at school in the past 12 months                        0.111      0.314     11,868
Parent has paid for tutoring services in the past 12 months                   0.237      0.425     11,850
Parent helps child with homework every day or almost every day                0.197      0.398     11,815
Child does homework every day or almost every day                             0.752      0.432     11,779
Panel C: Child responses (Household survey)
Relative rank among peers (1-7, with 7 better ranked)                         4.745      1.300     11,798
                                        1                                     4.879      0.369     11,838
Index of negative interactions with peers
Child does homework every day or almost every day                             0.632      0.482     11,908
Child perceives homework to be easy (1-7, with 7 easiest)                     5.450      1.015      9,628
Panel D: Language teacher qualifications
    (school data matched to children)
Proportion of teachers with highest state certification                       0.608     0.488      11,169
Years of experience                                                           15.801    12.228     11,169
Proportion of teachers who are "novices" (less than 2 years of experience)    0.061     0.238      11,169

Notes: This table describes a specialized survey collected in 135 schools among 59 towns for the 2005-
2007 admissions cohorts (see Section 4).
1
  Index based on the sum of four indicators for whether, during the past month, children’s peers: i) were
mean to them, ii) hit them, iii) took their things without asking, or iv) made them feel marginalized. Each
indicator ranges between 0 (happened daily) and 5 (did not happen in the past month).




                                                       42
Table 3: First stages
Dependent variable:                                          Administrative data                                                 Survey data
                                             All towns                                 Survey towns
                                Full           Within          Within     Survey towns Within             Within        Full           Within       Within
                               sample          1 point           IK          sample        1 point          IK         sample          1 point       IK
                                             of cutoff         bound                      of cutoff       bound                       of cutoff     bound
                                 (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)          (5)            (6)          (7)             (8)         (9)
Panel A: School-level avg. transition grade - 2001-2003 cohorts - between school cutoffs
                                       ***             ***            ***           ***            ***          ***
1{Trans. grade≥Cutoff}          0.094           0.107           0.115         0.454        0.446          0.447
                              (0.001)         (0.001)         (0.001)       (0.005)      (0.007)        (0.007)
Linear spline                     Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes
 2
R                               0.817           0.790           0.792         0.729        0.754          0.754
N                          3,609,572       1,857,376       1,160,458        64,052        39,363         39,104
Panel B: Track-level avg. transition grade - 2001-2003 cohorts - between track cutoffs
                                       ***             ***            ***           ***            ***          ***
1{Trans. grade≥Cutoff}          0.067           0.063           0.065         0.203        0.188          0.187
                              (0.001)         (0.001)         (0.001)       (0.003)      (0.003)        (0.003)
Linear spline                     Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes
 2
R                               0.873           0.857           0.857         0.779        0.792          0.793
N                          8,802,699       4,845,812       4,400,772       265,896      172,656        154,366
Panel C: Track-level avg. transition grade - 2001-2003 cohorts - between school cutoffs
                                       ***             ***            ***           ***            ***          ***
1{Trans. grade≥Cutoff}          0.068           0.073           0.082         0.283        0.266          0.266
                              (0.001)         (0.001)         (0.001)       (0.005)      (0.006)        (0.006)
Linear spline                     Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes
 2
R                               0.870           0.849           0.852         0.783        0.811          0.812
N                          3,609,572       1,857,376       1,160,458        64,052        39,363         39,104
Panel D: School-level avg. transition grade - 2005-2007 cohorts - between school cutoffs
                                       ***             ***            ***           ***            ***          ***             ***         ***             ***
1{Trans. grade≥Cutoff}          0.107           0.107           0.106         0.435        0.414          0.438         0.516       0.477           0.477
                              (0.001)         (0.001)         (0.001)       (0.006)      (0.007)        (0.009)       (0.014)     (0.018)         (0.018)
Linear spline                     Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes         Yes             Yes
 2
R                               0.830           0.808           0.811         0.669        0.700          0.691         0.700       0.700           0.700
N                          3,302,846       1,611,388       1,822,434        62,503        34,855         22,485        11,838       6,559           6,382

Note: All regressions are clustered at the student level and include cutoff fixed effects. All panels present reduced
form specifications where the key independent variable is a dummy for whether a student’s transition score is greater
than or equal to the cutoff (normalized to zero).




                                                                          43
Table 4: Effects on Baccalaureate taking and performance

Dependent variable:                       All towns                                Survey towns
                                Full        Within          Within        Full         Within       Within
                               sample       1 point           IK        sample         1 point         IK
                                          of cutoff         bound                    of cutoff       bound
                               (1)            (2)             (3)         (4)            (5)           (6)
Panel A: Bacc. taken dummy - 2001-2003 cohorts - between school cutoffs
                                    ***                                        ***
1{Trans. grade≥Cutoff}        0.001          0.000           0.001       0.021          0.012        0.012
                            (0.001)        (0.001)         (0.001)     (0.007)        (0.009)      (0.009)
Linear spline                   Yes            Yes             Yes         Yes            Yes           Yes
 2
R                             0.056          0.054           0.059       0.086          0.081        0.080
N                        3,609,572      1,857,376       1,160,458      64,052         39,363       39,104
Panel B: Bacc. grade - 2001-2003 cohorts - between school cutoffs
                                    ***             ***            ***         ***             ***          ***
1{Trans. grade≥Cutoff}        0.037          0.018           0.015       0.144          0.105        0.104
                            (0.001)        (0.002)         (0.003)     (0.012)        (0.015)      (0.015)
Linear spline                   Yes            Yes             Yes         Yes            Yes           Yes
 2
R                             0.567          0.483           0.472       0.566          0.494        0.494
N                        2,546,208      1,256,038         840,750      44,115         25,393       25,201
Panel C: Bacc. taken dummy - 2001-2003 cohorts - between track cutoffs
                                    ***                                        *
1{Trans. grade≥Cutoff}       -0.005         -0.001          -0.001       0.007          0.000        0.000
                            (0.001)        (0.001)         (0.001)     (0.004)        (0.004)      (0.004)
Linear spline                   Yes            Yes             Yes         Yes            Yes           Yes
  2
R                              0.060              0.057             0.059              0.091           0.084           0.086
N                          8,802,699          4,845,812         4,400,772            265,896         172,656         154,366
Panel D: Bacc. grade - 2001-2003 cohorts - between track cutoffs
                                        ***               ***                  ***             ***             ***             ***
1{Trans. grade≥Cutoff}          0.042            0.011                0.015            0.062           0.036           0.037
                              (0.001)           (0.001)              (0.001)         (0.006)         (0.007)         (0.007)
Linear spline                     Yes               Yes                  Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
  2
R                              0.567              0.490             0.506              0.559           0.495           0.498
N                          6,165,081          3,371,726         3,923,073            183,321         117,179         122,320

Note: All regressions are clustered at the student level and include cutoff fixed effects. All panels present reduced
form specifications where the key independent variable is a dummy for whether a student’s transition score is greater
than or equal to the cutoff (normalized to zero).




                                                                44
Table 5: Heterogeneity in Baccalaureate effects (all specifications within 1 point of cutoffs)

                                     School              Track-           Baccalaureate      Baccalaureate
                                      level               level              taken              grade
                                    average             average
                                   transition          transition
                                      score              score
                                       (1)                 (2)                 (3)                  (4)
Panel A: Full sample
                                                ***                 ***                                     ***
1{Grade≥Cutoff}                        0.107                0.073               0.000               0.018
                                     (0.001)              (0.001)             (0.001)             (0.002)
Linear spline                            Yes                  Yes                 Yes                 Yes
 2
R                                      0.790                0.849               0.054               0.483
N                                 1,857,376            1,857,376           1,857,376           1,256,038
Panel B: Top tercile
                                                ***                 ***                                     ***
1{Grade≥Cutoff}                         0.158               0.098               0.003               0.048
                                      (0.002)             (0.001)             (0.002)             (0.003)
Linear spline                             Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes
 2
R                                       0.749               0.816               0.028               0.448
N                                    756,141             756,141             756,141             579,566
Panel C: Bottom tercile
                                                ***                 ***
1{Grade≥Cutoff}                         0.099               0.086              -0.006               0.011
                                      (0.003)             (0.003)             (0.004)             (0.009)
Linear spline                             Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes
 2
R                                       0.459               0.549               0.050               0.222
N                                    392,475             392,475             392,475             212,282

Note: All regressions are clustered at the student level and include cutoff fixed effects. All panels present reduced
form specifications where the key independent variable is a dummy for whether a student’s transition score is greater
than or equal to the cutoff (normalized to zero). For comparison, panel A replicates the I-K bound specifications in
tables 3 and 4. Panels B and C present analogous specifications for the top and bottom tercile of cutoffs, respectively.




                                                          45
Table 6: Teachers
Dependent variable:      Principals perceive their school to be                  Language teacher has the                            Language teacher                            Language teacher is a "novice"
                               the best in teacher quality                    highest certification standard                        experience in years                         (less than two years experience)
                              Full          Within     Within                  Full       Within       Within                  Full       Within       Within                     Full        Within      Within
                             sample         1 point      IK                   sample      1 point       IK                   sample       1 point        IK                     sample        1 point       IK
                                          of cutoff    bound                             of cutoff     bound                             of cutoff      bound                                of cutoff    bound
                               (1)            (2)        (3)                    (4)         (5)         (6)                    (7)          (8)          (9)                      (10)         (11)        (12)
Panel A: School level
                                       ***             ***             ***             **             ***             ***             ***             ***               ***                          ***             ***
1{Trans. grade≥Cutoff}         0.148           0.128           0.112           0.079          0.095           0.087           2.130           1.894            1.790           -0.015       -0.037          -0.033
                             (0.039)         (0.028)         (0.033)         (0.035)        (0.025)         (0.028)         (0.596)         (0.490)          (0.522)          (0.018)      (0.011)         (0.012)
Linear spline                    Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes          Yes             Yes
 2
R                              0.380           0.490           0.470           0.570          0.610           0.600           0.590           0.600            0.580            0.510        0.600           0.590
N                            11,431            6,290           7,380         11,084           6,065           6,736          11,084           6,065            6,825           11,084        6,065           6,128
Panel B: Track level
                                                                                                                                                                                                     ***
1{Trans. grade≥Cutoff}                                                         0.048          0.026           0.037           0.508          -0.076            0.118           -0.018       -0.036          -0.027
                                                                             (0.035)        (0.033)         (0.034)         (0.914)         (0.878)          (0.913)          (0.019)      (0.014)         (0.017)
Linear spline                                                                    Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes          Yes             Yes
 2
R                                                                              0.410          0.480           0.450           0.380           0.410            0.370            0.340        0.450           0.390
N                                                                            11,084           6,065           7,977          11,084           6,065            8,978           11,084        6,065           8,305
Panel C: Student/parent level
                                                                                                                                                                                                     ***             **
1{Trans. grade≥Cutoff}                                                         0.026         -0.005          -0.011          -0.074          -0.625         -1.077**           -0.012       -0.036          -0.026
                                                                             (0.017)        (0.021)         (0.021)         (0.444)         (0.539)           (0.496)         (0.010)      (0.011)         (0.010)
Linear spline                                                                    Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes               Yes             Yes          Yes             Yes
 2
R                                                                              0.320          0.370           0.370           0.300           0.310             0.300           0.270        0.360           0.340
N                                                                            11,084           6,065           5,955          11,084           6,065             7,801          11,084        6,065           7,242

Note: All regressions include cutoff fixed effects. The regressions in Panel A are clustered at the school-cohort level, the regressions in Panel B are clustered at
the school-track-cohort level, and the regressions in Panel C are clustered at the student level. All panels present reduced form specifications where the key
independent variable is a dummy for whether a student’s transition score is greater than or equal to the cutoff (normalized to zero). Panel A presents outcome
variables that are aggregated at the school level. Panel B presents outcome variables that are aggregated at the track level. Panel C presents outcome variables
that are at the child or parent level (see Section 6.4 for further discussion).




                                                                                                        46
Table 7: Parents
Dependent variable:      Principals perceive their school to be               Parents have volunteered                   Parents have paid for tutoring                        Parents help child
                           the best in parental participation                     in the past year                             services for child                             with homework often
                             Full         Within       Within               Full       Within      Within                 Full       Within       Within                  Full       Within       Within
                            sample        1 point        IK                sample      1 point      IK                  sample       1 point        IK                  sample       1 point        IK
                                         of cutoff     bound                          of cutoff    bound                            of cutoff     bound                             of cutoff     bound
                              (1)           (2)         (3)                  (4)         (5)        (6)                   (7)          (8)          (9)                  (10)         (11)         (12)
Panel A: School level
                                     **             ***             ***             *             **             **             ***             ***             ***
1{Trans. grade≥Cutoff}       0.129          0.125           0.130           0.011         0.012          0.012          0.064           0.063           0.064          -0.003        0.000          0.000
                           (0.055)        (0.044)         (0.042)         (0.007)       (0.005)        (0.005)        (0.010)         (0.009)         (0.010)         (0.009)      (0.007)        (0.007)
Linear spline                  Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes          Yes            Yes
 2
R                            0.460          0.480           0.490           0.730         0.710          0.700          0.770           0.750           0.750           0.720        0.740          0.730
N                          11,047           6,139           5,558         11,776          6,522          7,142        11,757            6,501           7,255         11,723         6,488          9,674
Panel B: Track level
                                                                                                                                *                               *                            **             **
1{Trans. grade≥Cutoff}                                                      0.009         0.005          0.006          0.022           0.009           0.020          -0.015       -0.026         -0.022
                                                                          (0.008)       (0.006)        (0.007)        (0.012)         (0.012)         (0.011)         (0.011)      (0.010)        (0.010)
Linear spline                                                                 Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes          Yes            Yes
 2
R                                                                           0.470         0.490          0.470          0.590           0.550           0.560           0.480        0.500          0.500
N                                                                         11,776          6,522          7,606        11,757            6,501           5,363         11,723         6,488          7,141
Panel C: Student/parent level
                                                                                                                                                                                             **             **
1{Trans. grade≥Cutoff}                                                     -0.001        -0.002          0.007         -0.009          -0.003          -0.003          -0.021       -0.043         -0.033
                                                                          (0.011)       (0.015)        (0.014)        (0.014)         (0.018)         (0.017)         (0.015)      (0.019)        (0.017)
Linear spline                                                                 Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes          Yes            Yes
 2
R                                                                          0.070         0.070          0.070          0.170           0.130           0.130           0.080        0.090          0.090
N                                                                         11,776         6,522          7,905         11,757           6,501           6,771          11,723        6,488          8,840

Note: All All regressions include cutoff fixed effects. The regressions in Panel A are clustered at the school-cohort level, the regressions in Panel B are clustered
at the school-track-cohort level, and the regressions in Panel C are clustered at the student level. All panels present reduced form specifications where the key
independent variable is a dummy for whether a student’s transition score is greater than or equal to the cutoff (normalized to zero). Panel A presents outcome
variables that are aggregated at the school level. Panel B presents outcome variables that are aggegated at the track level. Panel C presents outcome variables that
are at the child or parent level (see Section 6.4 for further discussion).




                                                                                                       47
Table 8: Peers

Dependent variable:         Principals perceive their school to be               Child's perception of his/her                  Child's experience of negative
                                  the best in student quality                          rank in his/her track                        interactions with peers
                                Full         Within       Within                  Full        Within       Within                Full       Within      Within
                               sample        1 point        IK                  sample        1 point        IK                 sample      1 point       IK
                                            of cutoff     bound                              of cutoff     bound                           of cutoff    bound
                                 (1)           (2)          (3)                   (4)           (5)          (6)                  (7)         (8)         (9)
Panel A: School level
                                         ***             ***             ***             ***             ***             ***
1{Trans. grade≥Cutoff}           0.342           0.336           0.333           0.172           0.172           0.159          -0.002        -0.004         -0.005
                               (0.052)         (0.045)         (0.046)         (0.032)         (0.028)         (0.032)         (0.009)       (0.008)        (0.008)
Linear spline                      Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes
 2
R                                0.450           0.470           0.470           0.670           0.690           0.680           0.660         0.690          0.690
N                              11,733            6,513           6,737         11,708            6,478           8,264          11,745         6,500          6,612
Panel B: Track level
                                                                                         ***             ***             ***
1{Trans. grade≥Cutoff}                                                           0.117           0.090           0.100          -0.010        -0.012         -0.014
                                                                               (0.033)         (0.031)         (0.033)         (0.010)       (0.011)        (0.011)
Linear spline                                                                      Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes
 2
R                                                                                0.500           0.520           0.520           0.450         0.480          0.490
N                                                                              11,708            6,478           9,666          11,745         6,500          8,162
Panel C: Student/parent level
                                                                                         ***             ***             ***             *             **             **
1{Trans. grade≥Cutoff}                                                          -0.214          -0.134          -0.126          -0.027        -0.045         -0.036
                                                                               (0.046)         (0.059)         (0.051)         (0.014)       (0.019)        (0.017)
Linear spline                                                                      Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes
 2
R                                                                                0.170           0.120           0.130           0.070         0.080          0.080
N                                                                              11,708            6,478           9,009          11,745         6,500          8,289

Note: All regressions include cutoff fixed effects. The regressions in Panel A are clustered at the school-cohort level, the regressions in Panel B are clustered at
the school-track-cohort level, and the regressions in Panel C are clustered at the student level. All panels present reduced form specifications where the key
independent variable is a dummy for whether a student’s transition score is greater than or equal to the cutoff (normalized to zero). Panel A presents outcome
variables that are aggregated at the school level. Panel B presents outcome variables that are aggegated at the track level. Panel C presents outcome variables that
are at the child or parent level (see Section 6.4 for further discussion).




                                                                                  48
Table 9: Child homework

Dependent variable:            Child does homework every day                   Child does homework every day                       Index: Child perceives
                              or almost every day (child report)              or almost every day (parent report)                    homework to be easy
                                 Full      Within       Within                   Full       Within       Within                 Full       Within      Within
                               sample      1 point         IK                   sample      1 point        IK                  sample      1 point       IK
                                          of cutoff      bound                             of cutoff     bound                            of cutoff    bound
                                 (1)         (2)          (3)                     (4)         (5)          (6)                   (7)         (8)         (9)
Panel A: School level
                                        ***             ***             ***             ***             ***             ***             **
1{Trans. grade≥Cutoff}          0.078           0.072           0.068           0.101           0.091           0.092           0.059          0.038     0.027
                              (0.014)         (0.012)         (0.013)         (0.013)         (0.012)         (0.012)         (0.028)        (0.024)   (0.026)
Linear spline                     Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes       Yes
 2
R                               0.730           0.770           0.750           0.750           0.760           0.760           0.730          0.760     0.750
N                              11,815           6,544           8,262          11,689           6,471           6,584           9,556          5,468     6,557
Panel B: Track level
                                        ***             ***             ***             ***             ***             ***
1{Trans. grade≥Cutoff}      0.067               0.050           0.056           0.093           0.075           0.075           0.045          0.011     0.011
                          (0.014)             (0.014)         (0.014)         (0.014)         (0.013)         (0.014)         (0.032)        (0.031)   (0.031)
Linear spline                 Yes                 Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes       Yes
 2
R                           0.570               0.610           0.600           0.600           0.640           0.630           0.510          0.560     0.550
N                          11,815               6,544           8,565          11,689           6,471           6,793           9,556          5,468     6,478
Panel C: Student/parent level
                                                                                        ***             **              **
1{Trans. grade≥Cutoff}      0.020               0.024           0.019           0.081           0.051           0.046          -0.023         -0.021    -0.020
                          (0.018)             (0.023)         (0.019)         (0.017)         (0.021)         (0.020)         (0.042)        (0.053)   (0.047)
Linear spline                 Yes                 Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes       Yes
 2
R                           0.160               0.180           0.170           0.170           0.200           0.190           0.120          0.140     0.130
N                          11,815               6,544           9,999         11,689            6,471           7,177           9,556          5,468     7,042

Note: All All regressions include cutoff fixed effects. The regressions in Panel A are clustered at the school-cohort level, the regressions in Panel B are clustered
at the school-track-cohort level, and the regressions in Panel C are clustered at the student level. All panels present reduced form specifications where the key
independent variable is a dummy for whether a student’s transition score is greater than or equal to the cutoff (normalized to zero). Panel A presents outcome
variables that are aggregated at the school level. Panel B presents outcome variables that are aggegated at the track level. Panel C presents outcome variables that
are at the child or parent level (see Section 6.4 for further discussion).




                                                                                  49
Table 10: Class effects (all specifications within 1 point of cutoffs)
Dependent variable:      First Stage                       Teachers                                     Parents                                  Peers                                 Child
                            Class         Language          Language         Language       Parents       Parents           Parents       Child's        Child's     Child does      Child does          Child
                             level         teacher           teacher        teacher has       have          have              help      perception      negative     homework        homework          perceives
                          transition        has the        experience       two or less   volunteered     paid for         child with    of his/her interaction        almost          almost          homework
                            score          highest          (in years)         years         in the       tutoring         homework       rank in      with peers     every day      every day           to be
                                         certification                      experience     past year     services            often         track                    (child report) (parent report)        easy
                             (1)              (2)            (3)               (4)           (5)           (6)               (7)          (8)            (9)             (10)           (11)              (12)
Panel A: Class level
                                   ***                **              ***                                            ***                          **                              ***             **
1{Trans. grade≥Cutoff}     0.127              0.046           1.832           -0.006          0.006          0.026           0.004        0.044          -0.007           0.021           0.017         0.032
                         (0.017)            (0.021)         (0.500)          (0.006)        (0.005)        (0.007)         (0.005)      (0.019)         (0.005)         (0.008)         (0.007)         (0.02)
Linear spline                Yes                Yes             Yes              Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes          Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes          Yes
 2
R                          0.890              0.560           0.600            0.530          0.560          0.740           0.590        0.620           0.520           0.720           0.700         0.620
N                          5,396              5,179           5,179            5,179          5,362          5,346           5,349        5,342           5,350           5,385           5,355         4,443
Panel B: Student/parent level
                                                                                                                                                  ***
1{Trans. grade≥Cutoff}                                                                       -0.008         -0.001          -0.012       -0.142          -0.018           0.003           0.010         -0.032
                                                                                            (0.012)        (0.016)         (0.015)      (0.047)         (0.013)         (0.017)         (0.015)         (0.042)
Linear spline                                                                                   Yes            Yes             Yes          Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes
 2
R                                                                                             0.120          0.250           0.120        0.200           0.100           0.240           0.230          0.190
N                                                                                             5,373          5,357           5,360        5,353           5,361           5,396           5,366          4,453

Note: All regressions include cutoff fixed effects. The regressions in Panel A are clustered at the school-class-cohort level and the regressions in Panel B are
clustered at the student level. All panels present reduced form specifications where the key independent variable is a dummy for whether a student’s transition
score is greater than or equal to the cutoff (normalized to zero). Panel A presents outcome variables that are aggregated at the class level. Panel B presents
outcome variables that are at the child or parent level.




                                                                                                      50
Table 11: Marginal effects across cohorts

Dependent variable:                              First Stage                      Teachers                             Parents                             Peers
                                                 School level             Language       Language             Indicator      Indicator           Child's          Child's
                                               transition score            teacher      teacher has          for parents    for parents        perception       experience
                                                                         experience        two or           having paid        helping          of his/her      of negative
                                                                          measured      fewer years         for tutoring     child with          rank in       interactions
                                                                          in years           of                services     homework             his/her         with peers
                                                                                        experience                              often             class
                                                     (1)                     (2)             (3)                  (4)            (5)               (6)              (7)
Panel A: Student/parent level
                                                                   ***                                ***                                 **                **                **
1{Trans. grade≥Cutoff}                                   0.477               -0.625          -0.036              -0.003         -0.043             -0.134           -0.045
                                                       (0.018)              (0.539)         (0.011)             (0.018)        (0.019)            (0.059)          (0.019)
Bandwidth within 1 point of cutoff                         Yes                  Yes             Yes                 Yes            Yes                Yes              Yes
  2
R                                                          0.700              0.310          0.360               0.130           0.090              0.120            0.080
N                                                          6,559              6,065          6,065               6,501           6,488              6478             6500
Panel B: Student/parent level by cohort
                                                                   ***                                *                                   **                **                **
1{Trans. grade≥Cutoff}                                   0.483               -0.764          -0.027              -0.029         -0.061             -0.165           -0.055
                                                       (0.022)              (0.688)         (0.014)             (0.020)        (0.026)            (0.075)          (0.025)
1{Trans. grade≥Cutoff}*cohort2006                       0.043*                0.384          -0.024               0.013          0.018             -0.012           -0.002
                                                       (0.024)              (0.738)         (0.016)             (0.021)        (0.028)            (0.083)          (0.025)
                                                                   **                                                     **
1{Trans. grade≥Cutoff}*cohort2005                       -0.060                0.047          -0.004               0.065          0.037              0.103            0.031
                                                       (0.024)              (0.775)         (0.015)             (0.026)        (0.027)            (0.083)          (0.027)
Bandwidth within 1 point of cutoff                         Yes                  Yes             Yes                 Yes            Yes                Yes              Yes
  2
R                                                          0.700              0.310          0.360               0.130           0.090              0.120            0.080
N                                                          6,559              6,065          6,065               6,501           6,488              6,478            6,500
p_Statistic (1{Trans. grade≥Cutoff}                         0.00               0.58           0.00                0.49            0.08               0.02             0.02
  +1{Trans. grade≥Cutoff}*cohort2006=0)
p_Statistic (1{Trans. grade≥Cutoff}                 0.00                       0.31           0.01                 0.16           0.29               0.42             0.29
  +1{Trans. grade≥Cutoff}*cohort2005=0)

Note: All regressions are clustered at the student level and include cutoff fixed effects. All panels present reduced form specifications where the key
independent variable is a dummy for whether a student’s transition score is greater than or equal to the cutoff (normalized to zero). Panel A presents outcome
variables that are aggegated at the child or parent level. Panel B presents outcome variables that are at the child or parent level and it also includes interactions of
for being in the 2005 and 2006 entry cohort with the dummy for whether a student’s transition score is greater than or equal to the cutoff.




                                                                                      51
Table A.1: Continuity checks

                                                                                        Dependent variable
                                     Mother's       Mother        Mother        Mother      Mother has Mother has        Mother has   Child Gender     Child's
                                     birthyear        is            is           is             has          has            has          gender       birthyear
                                                   Romanian      Hungarian      Roma         primary      secondary       tertiary
                                                                                            education     education      education
                                        (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)          (6)            (7)            (8)           (9)
Panel A: Full sample                  -0.297        -0.001         0.001        -0.002        -0.002       0.039*        -0.022**         0.026         0.013
                                      [0.240]       [0.008]       [0.007]       [0.003]      [0.005]       [0.020]        [0.009]        [0.019]       [0.019]

Panel B: Within 1 point of cutoff     -0.222         0.003         0.000         0.000          0.001        -0.003        -0.005         0.025         0.032
                                      [0.317]       [0.011]       [0.009]       [0.004]        [0.006]       [0.026]       [0.011]       [0.024]       [0.025]

Panel C: Within IK bounds             -0.325         0.003         0.003        -0.002          0.001         0.018        -0.014         0.027         0.017
                                      [0.278]       [0.010]       [0.008]       [0.004]        [0.006]       [0.023]       [0.009]       [0.021]       [0.023]

Note: All regressions are clustered at the student level and include cutoff fixed effects. All results are based on reduced form specifications where the key
independent variable is a dummy for whether a student’s transition score is greater than or equal to the cutoff (normalized to zero). All outcome variables are at
the child or parent level (see Section 6.4 for further discussion).




                                                                               52
Figure A.1: Top and bottom cutoffs in towns with 3 or more schools; 2-school towns

                                        Panel A: Cutoffs for the best two schools                                                         Panel B: Cutoffs for the best two schools
 % of students in school above cutoff




                                                                                                   % of students in school below cutoff
                                 1




                                                                                                                                   1
                         .75




                                                                                                                           .75
                  .5




                                                                                                                    .5
         .25




                                                                                                           .25
  0




                                                                                                    0
                                        -.2         -.1           0             .1       .2                                               -.2         -.1           0             .1       .2
                                                       Score distance to cutoff                                                                          Score distance to cutoff


                                        Panel C: Cutoffs between the worst two schools                                                    Panel D: Cutoffs between the worst two schools
 % of students in school above cutoff




                                                                                                   % of students in school below cutoff
                                 1




                                                                                                                                   1
                         .75




                                                                                                                           .75
                  .5




                                                                                                                    .5
         .25




                                                                                                           .25
  0




                                                                                                    0




                                        -.2         -.1           0             .1       .2                                               -.2         -.1           0             .1       .2
                                                       Score distance to cutoff                                                                          Score distance to cutoff


                                        Panel E: Cutoffs in two-school towns                                                              Panel F: Cutoffs in two-school towns
 % of students in school above cutoff




                                                                                                   % of students in school below cutoff
                                 1




                                                                                                                                   1
                         .75




                                                                                                                           .75
                  .5




                                                                                                                    .5
         .25




                                                                                                           .25
  0




                                                                                                    0




                                        -.2         -.1           0             .1       .2                                               -.2         -.1           0             .1       .2
                                                       Score distance to cutoff                                                                          Score distance to cutoff



Note: Panels A and B describe cutoffs that determine access to the best school in towns that contain at least
three schools. Panels C and D refer to the lowest cutoffs in such towns. Panels E and F describe the cutoffs
in two-school towns. All panels are restricted to individuals with a transition score within 0.2 points of a
cutoff. The left hand panels plot (0.01 point) transition cell means of the proportion of students who attend
the school above the cutoff; the right hand side ones the proportion of students who enroll in the school
below. The solid lines plot fitted values of residuals from regressions of the dependent variable on a linear
trend in the transition score, estimated separately on each side of the cutoff.




                                                                                              53
