NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BYE, BYE, MISS AMERICAN PIE? THE SUPPLY OF NEW RECORDED MUSIC
SINCE NAPSTER
Joel Waldfogel
Working Paper 16882
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16882

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2011

The title refers to Don McLean’s song, American Pie, which chronicled a catastrophic music supply
shock, the 1959 crash of the plane carrying Buddly Holly, Richie Valens, and Jiles Perry “The Big
Bopper” Richardson, Jr. The song’s lyrics include, “I saw Satan laughing with delight/The day the
music died.” I am grateful to seminar participants at the Carlson School of Management and the WISE
conference in St. Louis for questions and comments on a presentation related to an earlier version
of this paper. The views expressed in this paper are my own and do not reflect the positions of the
National Academy of Sciences’ Committee on the Impact of Copyright Policy on Innovation in the
Digital Era or those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Joel Waldfogel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Bye, Bye, Miss American Pie? The Supply of New Recorded Music Since Napster
Joel Waldfogel
NBER Working Paper No. 16882
March 2011
JEL No. K11,L82
ABSTRACT
In the decade since Napster, file-sharing has undermined the protection that copyright affords recorded
music, reducing recorded music sales. What matters for consumers, however, is not sellers’ revenue
but the surplus they derive from new music. The legal monopoly created by copyright is justified
by its encouragement of the creation of new works, but there is little evidence on this relationship.
The file-sharing era can be viewed as a large-scale experiment allowing us to check whether events
since Napster have stemmed the flow of new works. We assemble a novel dataset on the number of
high quality works released annually, since 1960, derived from retrospective critical assessments of
music such best-of-the-decade lists. This allows a comparison of the quantity of new albums since
Napster to 1) its pre-Napster level, 2) pre-Napster trends, and 3) a possible control, the volume of new
songs since the iTunes Music Store’s revitalization of the single. We find no evidence that changes
since Napster have affected the quantity of new recorded music or artists coming to market. We reconcile
stable quantities in the face of decreased demand with reduced costs of bringing works to market and
a growing role of independent labels.

Joel Waldfogel
Frederick R. Kappel Chair in Applied Economics
3-177 Carlson School of Management
University of Minnesota
321 19th Avenue South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
jwaldfog@umn.edu

The decade since Napster has seen a stark drop in revenue to the recorded music industry
that many observers attribute to file sharing. Between 1999 and 2008, annual revenue from
physical recorded music products fell from $12.8 billion to $5.5 billion in the US after nearly
continuous increases over the previous decades.1 Even with digital sales included, US revenue
was a third below its 1999 level. The decline is not confined to the US: Worldwide revenue
from physical recorded music fell from $37 billion in 1999 to $25 billion in 2007. The struggles
of the recorded music industry have spawned practioner, policy maker, and academic debates
over the role of unauthorized file sharing.2 Although it is still controversial in some circles, most
observers agree that file sharing is responsible for much if not most of the reduction in revenue
to the recorded music industry. To put this another way, most observers agree that technological
change since the late 1990s has sharply reduced effective copyright protection for music.
Organizations representing the recording industry have argued vigorously that piracy will
have serious consequences for whether new works will be brought to market and made available
to consumers. According to the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry (IFPI),
“[m]usic is an investment-intensive business… Very few sectors have a comparable proportion
of sales to R&D investment to the music industry.” But, according to a Warner Music official,
“piracy makes it more difficult for the whole industry to sustain that regular investment in
breaking talent.”3 The Recording Industry Association of America voices similar concerns:
“Our goal with all these anti-piracy efforts is to protect the ability of the recording industry to
invest in new bands and new music…” And: “this theft has hurt the music community, with
1

See http://www.riaa.com/keystatistics.php?content_selector=keystats_yearend_report , accessed April 28, 2010.
Also, see Leibowitz (2006).
2
Oberholzer-Gee and Strumpf (2006) initiated the contemporary empirical debate over file sharing. See also Rob
and Waldfogel (2006), Blackburn (2004), Zentner (2006), among others.
3
See http://www.ifpi.org/content/section_news/investing_in_music.html , accessed October 20, 2010.

1

thousands of layoffs, songwriters out of work and new artists having a harder time getting signed
and breaking into the business.”4
While the question of whether file sharing displaces legal sales and weakens copyright is
an interesting academic question – and vital for the recorded music industry – it is arguably not
the most important question about copyright raised by new technology. Copyright has
traditionally allowed the recording industry to get revenue from music sold on CDs. If economic
returns provide the incentive for producers to make music, then factors threatening the ability of
copyright to protect intellectual property may reduce the quantity of new recorded music. File
sharing is not the only consequence of technological change affecting music since Napster. New
developments in computer and communications (e.g. the Internet) may also have reduced costs
of creating, distributing, and promoting new recorded music. While much existing research
focuses on the effect of file sharing on demand for legal recorded music, the more important
question for the well-being of consumers is whether the overall effect of recent technological
changes has reduced quantity of consequential music brought to market.5 We can use the piracy
decade as a compound experiment to ask whether reduced returns, in conjunction with
potentially reduced costs, have stemmed the avalability of new music.
Economists generally agree that monopolies are bad.6 Governments grant some of the
basic textbook examples of monopolies for intellectual property, in the form of patents and
copyrights. Their bad effects – allowing prices above marginal costs and therefore restricting

4

See http://www.riaa.com/physicalpiracy.php, accessed October 20, 2010.
These questions have not escaped inquiry entirely. See Handke (2006, 2009) and Oberholzer-Gee and Strumpf
(2009), which we discuss further below.
6
Boldrin and Levine (2008) remind us of this point in the specific context of protections for intellectual property.
They also make the point, with interesting historical references, that music was produced for hundreds of years
without intellectual property protection.
5

2

the supply of output – are thought to be justified by their incentive effects on production. But
apart from introspection and anecdotes, we don’t really know much about the effects of
remuneration incentives on production in the music industry. Paul McCartney recounts a famous
story that John Lennon, while remodelling his house, said to Paul, “OK! Today, let’s write a
swimming pool.” And Paul continued, “It was a great motivation.”7 But is the lesson of this
anecdote true more generally? Does the prospect of greater rewards bring forth more music? If
so, then unless other factors offset the reduced revenue, the past decade should have been a dry
period for music. This is the question we address in this study.
Characterizing the volume of creative products is difficult, particularly if one’s goal is
quantify the effect of new products on welfare. The most natural measure – the number of new
recordings available for sale – is quite imperfect. First, there is intense skew in the sales
distribution for recorded music, making the link between the number of products and welfare
unclear. New technologies have reduced the cost of creating new works, and the number of new
recordings available has increased substantially. Yet – now as before – the vast majority of these
products sell very few copies, casting doubt on whether the number of new works made available
for sale would be proportional to welfare.
A natural second impulse is to want detailed data on prices and quantities of music
purchased, along with other data, for estimating demand systems for calculating the consumer
and surplus from new music. But even this approach faces a daunting challenge: Because of file
sharing, an album of equal notional appeal released today rather than 15 years ago generates far

7

See “McCartney + Lennon Wrote Swimming Pool.” Contact Music, 23 August, 2005.
(http://www.contactmusic.com/new/xmlfeed.nsf/story/mccartney-+-lennon-wrote-swimming-pool-song , accessed
October 8, 2010).

3

less realized demand, simply because the willingness to pay has diminished in the face of unpaid
alternatives. Hence, the surplus implied by a demand system estimated in the file sharing era
will understate the contribution of new products to welfare.
What we want is a measure of the number of products whose appeal surpasses some
time-constant threshold. The index of appeal should be related to demand, but the index must be
unaffected by file sharing so that it can be used to create an index of the supply of new creative
goods over time, including during the era of unpaid consumption. That is, we cannot quantify
supply with, say, the number of albums selling more than 5000 copies. If file sharing
undermines purchase incentives, then an album needs to be better now to garner 5000 sales than
15 years ago.
Our proposed solution to this conundrum is a time-constant quality threshold based on
critics’ retrospective lists of the best works of multi-year time periods. Our measure of new
products is the number of albums released each year that surpass one of various quality
thresholds based on critics’ reviews. To quantify this, we have assembled data on album quality
from 88 Anglophone sources, chiefly from retrospective lists (e.g. Rolling Stone’s 500 best
albums, Pitchfork Media’s 200 best albums of the 1990s, etc.). Each of these rankings allows us
to create an index of the number of albums released each year meeting the criterion. Because use
of these data to measure new products is novel, we devote some effort to justifying the approach.
We show that the indices are highly correlated with each other and that indices reflect wellknown facts about the history of popular music. We also demonstrate that albums that are more
highly regarded by critics sell more, which indicates that the indices are not simply reflective of
critics’ esoteric tastes. Instead, these indices provide a measure of the quantity of new work that
4

is relevant to consumer and producer surplus but whose meaning is not undermined by file
sharing. We use simple regression models to splice these indices together to produce overall
indices of new, consequential albums (and songs) since 1960. We document the evolution of the
album index surrounding Napster, and we also measure its movement relative to a plausible
control, new songs since the 2003 launch of the iTunes Music Store.
The study proceeds in three sections. Section 1 provides the theoretical background
linking file sharing to the well-being of consumers and producers in the short and longer run.
Section 2 describes the various data sources employed in the study, along with evidence
supporting our use of such data to measure music supply. Section three then reports our main
results. Using indices collectively covering the period since 1960, we document that the annual
number of new albums passing various quality thresholds has remained roughly constant since
Napster, is statistically indistinguishable from pre-Napster trends, and has not diverged from
song supply since iTunes’ revival of the single format in 2003. We also document that the role
of new artists in new recorded music products has not diminished since Napster. We offer a
reconcilation of a stable quantity of acclaimed new products in the face of diminished demand
with evidence of an outward shift in supply, reflecting reduced costs of bringing new works to
market. We conclude with a discussion of what the results do – and do not – mean.

I.

Welfare from Music

1. Static and Dynamic Welfare Analysis

5

Like any product, music generates surplus for two parties, buyers and sellers. While
recorded music is durable in some senses – the recordings can last forever and can be reproduced
digitally without degradation in quality – it is subject to taste depreciation. Obviously, there are
exceptions. Many people still listen to classical music that is hundreds of years old. But for the
most part, consumers prefer new music. There is direct evidence that music depreciates in Rob
and Waldfogel (2006): consumers attach lower value to popular music, the longer they have
owned it.8
The possibility that music depreciates is important for a welfare analysis of supply
disruptions. If it did not, then the consumer losses from a disruption to new supply would be of
only second-order importance. If the amount of music available increased a few percent in a
normal year, then a complete cessation of new production would still leave consumers with
nearly as much variety as they would have faced if new products had continued to arrive. If
additional varieties are substitutes for existing varieties, then under usual assumptions about
marginal utility in the face of multiple varieties, the failure to add relatively small numbers of
products to the existing stock of available products would have small effects on welfare. But
because most music does seem to depreciate for most users, disruptions to supply are potentially
important for the welfare that this product delivers.
The welfare analysis of sharing zero-marginal-cost digital products has two parts, which
could be termed static and dynamic. The static analysis describes music that already exists. It is
easy to see that file sharing simply increases welfare. Producers lose, but their losses – when
8

There is interesting variation across works’ depreciation rates. Rob and Waldfogel (2006) estimate that the value
that survey respondents attached to a Beatles album appreciated 26 percent per year of ownership while a Britney
Spears album depreciated 28 percent annually.

6

consumers steal things they used to pay for – are all transfers to consumers, who now enjoy
greater surplus (the price they had formerly paid plus the former consumer surplus). In addition
to the transfers from producers to consumers, file sharing also turns deadweight loss –
circumstances in which consumers valued music above zero but below its price and therefore did
not consume – into consumer surplus. In a purely static analysis, eliminating intellectual
property rights benefits consumers more than it costs producers and is therefore beneficial for
society.
Of course, the static analysis above is valid only for works that already exist. The
dynamic analysis is different. If developing products requires investments of time or money,
then producers may only make these investments in the hopes of obtaining returns. If the returns
are eliminated, then producers may stop investing. If music fully depreciates in one period, then
there is no supply available in the second period, and there is no surplus for either party. In
contrast to the welfare-improving static effects of file sharing on welfare, the dynamic impact is
potentially devastating. Despite recent concern about new works since Napster, we have little
evidence on whether the quantity of economically consequential work has declined since
Napster. This is the question we now turn to.

2. Measuring Supply
At first blush the obvious way to measure the supply of recorded music is with the
number of songs or albums available. By extension, the new supply is the number of new songs
or albums available in, say, a given year. Oberholzer-Gee and Strumpf (2009) and Handke
7

(2006, 2010) point to evidence that the number of albums released in the US and Germany – and
that the number of labels operating in Germany – have not declined in the past decade to argue
that file sharing has not interrupted the flow of new works. While this evidence is quite
interesting, one might be concerned about that the great skew in the sales distribution
undermines proportionality – and perhaps even the monotonicity – between titles and welfare.
According to SoundScan, there were 97,751 new albums released in 2009, but only 2050 sold
over 5000 units.9 Thus, the amount of surplus generated is not proportional to the number of
products made available, so the number of products provides an incomplete measure of the
welfare effects of new works.10 And while the evidence on the number of recording labels
operating is quite interesting – more on this below at section IV – it is not by itself a measure of
the amount of surplus that recorded music generates for consumers or producers.
An alternative approach is to measure the flow of new works as the number of albums
that meet some importance threshold. For example, it might be informative to examine the
number of albums selling over 5000 copies in a year. Apart from the fact that those data are hard
to come by, it too seems potentially misleading. If we accept that sales are falling over time
because of growth in unpaid consumption, then the threshold would have to vary over time for
the number of albums above the threshold to maintain its meaning. We don’t really know either
the threshold nor its rate of decline, so this method does not seem promising. As argued in the

9

See Glenn Peoples. “Analysis: Important Sales Trends You Need to Know.” Billboard.Biz, June 2, 2010.
Variation in the number of new titles from one year to the next can also provide a misleading measure of new
production. The number of new albums in SoundScan fell from 105,000 in 2008 to 97,751 in 2009 because “in
recent years, digital distributors flooded online retail with foreign catalogs being licensed to new territories. In
effect, these distributors are catching up to all the music that’s available from around the world. …this won’t go on
forever. As fewer and fewer old recordings find their way to U.S. retailers for the first time, the unique number of
titles released in a given year will fall.” See Peoples (2010).
10

8

introduction, estimating a demand system for purchases of recorded music would also not
circumvent this problem.
While traditional approaches to quantifying the welfare effects of new products are
stymied by the growth of piracy, there are other ways of quantifying the number of new albums
meeting some importance threshold each year. Both professional and amateur music listeners
are in the habit of rating and ranking their music. We can use these ratings and rankings as
thresholds. We can then ask what is happening to the quantity of new music meeting any
particular threshold over time.

II.

Data and Reliability

1. Sources
The basic data for this study are professional critics’ retrospective rankings of songs and
albums from multiple years, such as “best-of-the-decade” lists. For these lists, the staff of a
magazine or website produce a list of the best albums (or songs) of the past decade, or quarter
century, or all time. That is, experts evaluate music from different years, subjecting all of it to a
time-constant quality threshold for list inclusion. Prominent examples include Rolling Stone’s
2004 list of the 500 best albums or Pitchfork Media’s list of best 200 albums of the 2000s (see
the Appendix Table 1 for a full list of the sources and their coverage). We have 88 different

9

rankings (and ratings), 64 covering albums and the remainder covering songs. All of the
rankings are from Anglophone countries (the US, England, Canada, and Ireland).11
These rankings generate data of the form: µ1 > … > µN, where µi is the quality of work i.
If Tk is a quality threshold such that µk > Tk > µk+1, then each of these rankings allows us to
calculate the number of works above a constant Tk released in each year. These rankings allow
ready creation of indices showing the volume of works released in each year that pass some
threshold.
For example, Rolling Stone released its 500 best albums list in 2004. Entries on the
“were chosen by 273 of the world’s pre-eminent musicians and critics ranging from Fats Domino
to Moby” (Levy 2005). Figure 1 depicts the supply index derived from Rolling Stone’s list, and
a few things are immediately evident. First, perhaps because Rolling Stone was founded in
1967, its editors are very fond of 1960s music. Second, the index trails off toward the year that
the list appeared (2004). This may arise partly mechanically from the process of ranking:
rankings released in a given year may be the result of a process begun a year earlier.
Most of our indices are based on retrospective lists, which – unlike ongoing reviews –
allow their creators some chronological perspective on the works they rank. By construction,
however, these rankings are assembled close to the last year of the period evaluated, giving rank
creators less time to assess recent works. This gives rise to a bias against recent works in these
rankings. For example, Pitchfork Media produced a list of the top 100 albums of the 1990s in
October 1999, then another list covering the same period in November 2003. The latter list was
11

We discovered rankings in a variety of places. The Acclaimed Music website lists many of these, including the
majority of the lists we use for the period since 1999. See, in particular, the lists of the top albums and songs of the
2000s at http://www.acclaimedmusic.net/, accessed December 21, 2010.

10

introduced with a statement contrasting it with their 1999 ranking, “…looking back at that list a
lot has changed: our perceptions of the decade are different now, our personal tastes have
expanded, our knowledge of the music has deepened…”12 And, indeed, the later ranking
includes a greater emphasis on the last years of the decade. Ten percent of the albums on the
2003 list were released in the last two years of the decade, compared with only seven percent for
the 1999 list. Hence, we can use the retrospective rankings but exclude the year the ranking
appeared as well as the previous year to avoid a bias against recent works.
The contemporaneous ratings reported at Metacritic provide a second sort of quality data.
Metacritic translates reviews from multiple sources into a unified 100-point scale.13 Reviews
appear in Metacritic only when an album has been reviewed by at least three of the underlying
sources that Metacritic incorporates. These sites do not review all of the albums released.
Estimates of the number of new albums each year vary between 30,000 and 100,000; regardless,
Metacritic produces reviews of only a small fraction. If the method for choosing albums for
review were constant over time – so that an album of given quality were equally likely to be
reviewed regardless of release year – then the number of albums passing a quality threshold
would provide a clean measure of the quantity of new works exceeding some quality threshold.
But album selection rules change over time, and the number of albums reviewed has grown
steadily from 222 to nearly 500 from 2000 to 2007, then jumped roughly 60 percent in 2008. 14

12

See http://pitchfork.com/features/staff-lists/5923-top-100-albums-of-the-1990s/, accessed October 18, 2010.
“Metacritic's proprietary Metascore distills the opinions of the most respected critics writing online and in print to
a single number.” See http://www.metacritic.com/about-metacritic , accessed October 8, 2010.
14
Metacritic’s database includes 222 reviews from 2000, 300 for 2001, 362 for 2002, 429 for 2003, 457 for 2004,
477 for 2005, 506 for 2006, 486 for 2007, 805 for 2009, 976 for 2010, and 522 for 2010 (as of October 18, 2010).
These figures are from http://apps.metacritic.com/search/index.shtml, accessed October 18, 2010.
13

11

Using Metacritic’s all time best list, I have obtained the roughly 4700 albums that have
received Metacritic scores above 61 between 2000 and late 2010. I calculate an index from the
number of such albums released each year, then divide the index by the number of albums that
Metacritic reviewed each year.
A third source of ranking/rating information might be termed wiki ratings. These begin
with Zagat’s survey based ranking of the top 1000 albums, released in 2003. Their list was
based on a survey of 10,600 survey respondents who listened “to an average of 24.2 hours of
music per week.” Because Zagat’s ranking book as published in September 2003, we exclude
2003 from the Zagat data for the mechanical reason that respondents cannot possibly have
included as many 2003 albums. We also exclude 2002 to deal with the anti-recency bias
discussed above.
Recently, various websites have emerged where users – amateur music aficionados –
upload their rankings or ratings of music. Such sites include BestEver.com, where users upload
their rankings, typically their top 50. As of October 2010, nearly 1900 individuals had uploaded
their rankings. At RateYourMusic.com, users enter ratings of songs. Based on these user
ratings, the sites produce rankings, for example the top 1000 albums of all time. A challenge
with these rankings, particularly the latter two, is that users upload their rankings at different
times. If a user uploaded his ranking in 2006, it will clearly not include works from subsequent
years (and may not yet include recent works either). The overall rankings, aggregating rankings
produced in different years, do not adjust for the different exposure of recent works, i.e. their
depressed possibility of being included in users’ rankings. The only “fair” comparisons from
such rankings is over periods when all works are at risk of being included, that is the period prior
12

to when the first user made his ranking. RateYourMusic.com was founded in December 2000.15
Bestever albums.com was founded in 2005.16 Thus, these sources’ overall rankings are valid
only through 2000 and 2004, respectively.
A final sort of ranking that does not fit neatly into the scheme above are the list at
Acclaimed Music, a site operated by a Swedish statistician who synthesizes over 100 different
professional music critics’ rankings to produce overall rankings of the top 3000 albums, and
songs, of all time.17 Acclaimed Music also produces rankings of the top albums – and top songs
– of the decade 2000-2009, and they provide the underlying individual critical outlets’ best-of
lists, which we use directly. These included 56 album lists and 22 song lists from US, Canadian,
and UK sources.18 Together, the 64 album lists cover the period 1960-2007 and include 15,158
entries. The 24 song lists also cover 1960-2007 and include 1806 entries.

2. Data Validation
The first question we need to address is whether the data measure something meaningful.
We would like to advance the interpretation that the data – on the number of songs or albums
above some critics’ threshold released in a year – provide a reasonable measure of supply. We
can subject these indices to various tests of legitimacy. First, we can ask whether they track
well-known historical trends in music. For example, historians of contemporary popular music

15

See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rate_Your_Music, accessed October 20, 2010.
See http://www.besteveralbums.com/howitworks.php, accessed October 20, 2010.
17
See the “Questions & Answers” page at http://www.acclaimedmusic.net/, accessed October 27, 2010.
18
We exclude lists that do not cover rock music generally. Thus, we exclude terrorizer (a metal-only list), the Times
Jazz and World lists, and so on.
16

13

believe that the late 1960s was a period of unparalleled creative output in recorded music.19 Do
the indices reflect this?
Figure 2 shows the number of top albums released in each year from five separate
rankings covering a long sweep of the history of rock music, Rolling Stone, Zagat, Rate Your
Music, Acclaimed Music, and the BestEver site. All show spikes in the late 1960s, as well as a
second spike in the mid-1990s. The Rolling Stone list is more heavily skewed toward the 1960s,
relative to the other two, but all five provide some reflection that both the late 1960s and the
early-to-mid 1990s were fertile periods for music. A second question is whether the indices are
similar to each other. If the late 1960s was in fact an important period, then all indices should
reflect this. Of the indices in Figure 2, all pairwise correlations exceed 0.7, except the
correlations with Zagat (which lie between 0.05 and 0.53).
That the different indices, dervied from independent assessments of music, are highly
correlated provides some reassurance that the indices measure something meaningful about the
each year’s contribution to the supply of music. Moreover, the high correlations between indices
based on amateurs’ rankings (such as Zagat and, especially, BestEver and Rate Your Music) and
indices based on professional critics’ rankings (Rolling Stone and Acclaimed Music) provide
evidence that the indices reflect recorded music products with broad appeal. However, the
variation in musical output over time also suggests a caution: because there were no changes in
the returns to creating music in the periods of high output, it appears that supply varies over time
for reasons unrelated to the incentive effects we seek to examine in this study.

19

For example, Larkin (2007) writes, “The 60s will remain, probably forever, the single most important decade for
popular music.”

14

Because the period following 1999 is crucial to this study, it is important to provide
evidence of the reasonableness of the rankings and resulting indices for the post-1999 period.
We have 56 professional critics’ album lists – and 22 professionals’ songs lists – covering this
period (beginning in 2000). To determine whether these lists contain a common signal rather
than simply noise, we do a few things. First, we examine overlap across lists.
Table 1 shows the albums appearing on the most lists. Two albums – Funeral by Arcade
Fire and Kid A by Radiohead appear on 47 of the 56 lists covering the 2000s. Is this It? by the
Strokes and Stankonia by Outkast appear on 45 and 37 lists, respectively. Figure 3 shows the
overlap across lists more systematically, via an album Lorenz curve: 100 albums account for 40
percent of the entries on decade-best lists, 250 albums account for over 60 percent, and 500
albums account for over three quarters of the 4202 entries on 56 publications’ best-of-the-2000s
lists. At least 300,000 albums were released during the decade. Yet, 500 albums – less than
0.2% of the decade’s new releases – account for three quarters of the entries on 56 critical best of
the 2000s lists. Table 2 and Figure 4 repeat the exercise for songs, which exhibit a similarly
substantial degree of overlap across the 22 song lists for the 1990s. The concordance far exceeds
what would arise by chance and suggests a large systematic component to the determination of
critics’ rankings.

3. High Rankings and Sales
If the designation of being an acclaimed album is meaningful – relevant to whether the
album’s existence and consumption generated extra satisfaction for consumers – then critically
15

acclaimed albums should sell more. That is, our measure of supply should be relevant to the
generation of additional economic surplus. While album sales data are generally difficult for
researchers to obtain, one source of approximate US album sales data is the RIAA certifications.
An album is certified “gold” with 0.5 million sales and “platinum” with 1 million. As sales pass
the second or third million, etc., they receive additional “multi-platinum” certifications. The
certifications thus allow the creation of a dataset with all albums over 0.5 million in sales, with
categoric sales measures: 0.5 corresponds to sales between 500,000 and 1 million, 1 million
corresponds to sales between 1 and 2 million, and so on. Critical acclaim and sales are linked.
The most acclaimed albums of the 2000-2009 decade, in Table 1, also tend to have sold rather
well. Half of the 50 albums on the list sold at least half a million copies.
We can explore this more systematically as well. The RIAA certifications data are
available online, and I merged a dataset consisting of the cumulative sales of the 7700 certified
albums as of 2004 with the Zagat (2004) album ratings. Zagat includes 1000 albums, and 610 of
these also appeared among the RIAA certified albums. I merged these data and coded the Zagatincluded albums as critically acclaimed (albeit by amateur critics). This is a slightly peculiar
data set: it includes all albums selling 0.5 million copies or more (up to 2004), as well as almost
400 critically acclaimed albums that were not certified and therefore (we can infer) sold fewer
than 0.5 million copies. What the dataset is missing, of course, is the vast lot of albums that
never reach “gold.”
A regression of log sales on a Zagat-rated indicator shows that rated albums sell roughly
double the number of units, among the sample of largely RIAA certified albums. See Table 3,
column (1). Columns 2 and 5 add year dummies, with similar results. Finally, column 3 adds
16

artist fixed effects. In this specification, the effect of certification is identified from the sales
difference between an artist’s rated and unrated albums. The effect size increases in size and
significance: albums that are critically acclaimed sell more than twice as many copies. This
relationship provides additional evidence that the number of critically acclaimed albums
produced in a year is relevant to demand and therefore to consumer and producer surplus.

III.

Results
1. Empirical Strategy
We would like to measure the impact of the various post-Napster changes in music

demand and supply on the quantity of new music coming to market Ideally, we would have data
on both an “experiment” and a “control.” Here, we observe the experiment – the world that
experienced the decade since Napster – but we have no obvious control. We can nevertheless
make a few comparisons that are suggestive of the effect on supply since Napster. First, we can
compare the post-Napster period with the dawn of the Napster era (1999), simply asking whether
supply has contracted. This is of course imperfect as a way to measure Napster’s effect because
– as we have seen above – music supply exhibits trends even in the absence of shocks to
appropriability (e.g. the peaks in creative output in the 1960s and 1990s). Second, if we think
the pre-Napster trend in the flow of new works would have continued, then we can measure a
possible contraction relative to a trend defined by the pre-Napster supply index. Third, we can
use the the flow of critically acclaimed new songs – rather than albums – as a control and ask

17

whether the flow of consequential new albums shrinks relative to the flow of new songs,
particularly following the iTunes Music Store’s revitalization of the single in 2003.
Even if we cannot know the supply that would have been available absent Napster, we
can assess the most dire predictions concerning whether music supply has dwindled. That is, we
can ask how the recent decade compares with the previous four decades.
2. Does the Volume of High Quality Music Decline Post-Napster?
Of our 64 album indices, 58 extend at least a few years into the post-Napster period. A
glance at the various album indices gives little definitive indication of whether supply declines
following Napster. Some appear to rise while others appear to fall. If each of the indices
contains noise along with signal, we can get more information out of the indices by averaging
them. However, indices vary substantially in the number of works included and, as a result, in
their year-to-year variability as well. For example, the Paste Magazine list includes 50 albums
for the 2000-09 decade, while the Pitchfork Media list includes 200 albums for the same period
and our Metacritic data include over 4000 albums for roughly the same period. Because indices
based on more underlying works should provide more accurate descriptions of each year’s
output, we weight indices in all what follows (we also report unweighted indices for
comparison). Specifically, we weight by the number of works included in an index, divided by
the number of years the index covers. Hence, the weight for Pitchfork’s top 200 albums of the
2000s decade is 20, while the weight for SPIN’s top 125 albums of the 25-years between 1985
and 2010 is 5.

18

We can measure the change in annual new works following Napster via the following
weighted regression:
ln

, where

is album supply index in time t (e.g. the number of albums

from 2003 on Pitchfork’s list of the top 200 albums of the 2000s), t is a time trend, and

is an

index-specific fixed effect, and the model is estimated for years following Napster. In this model
α shows the annual percent change in supply indices. As Table 4 shows, the weighted album and
song indices exhibit no statistically discernible trends following Napster. Based on the post1999 trends, there is little evidence that the supply of new works has increased or contracted
since Napster.
While the post-Napster trend is interesting, it does not provide an estimate of the effect of
Napster, except under the restrictive assumption that the supply would have remained constant at
its 1999 level in the absence of Napster. A comparison of pre- and post-Napster supply indices
has greater promise for revealing the effect of Napster on supply. While none of our individual
indices of supply cover the entire period since 1960 (or even 1980), the series collectively cover
the period back to 1960. If we could “splice” the series together, then we could construct a
continuous index covering both a long period prior to Napster and the decade following Napster.
Figure 5 shows the time periods covered by the 88 different indices.20 Importantly, all
consecutive years are covered by at least one series. For example, 78 series begin in 2000, but
nine series cover both 1999 and 2000, effectively allowing us to construct a continuous series
over the interval 1999-2000. All two-year intervals since 1960 are similarly covered.

20

The lines in Figure 5 cover only the years we do not exclude for reasons discussed in the data section.

19

We can describe the time pattern of new works supply with a regression with index
dummies and flexible time dummies: ln

, where

is a time effect common

across indices for year t (and other variables are defined as above). We estimate this model
using the weights described above. Figure 6 shows time series plots of the annual values of

,

along with a vertical line in 1999. Dotted lines define the 95 percent confidence intervals.
Figure 7 repeats the exercise for songs. Because the regression dependent variable is in logs, the
index is in percent terms.
All of the indices exhibit some decline following Napster. But all of the indices were
also falling fairly steadily in the half decade prior to Napster. This suggests a second approach to
measuring the effect of Napster, using the pre-Napster period to identify the trend in supply.
That is, we can estimate the equation ln

, , where

is a

dummy that is 1 for the period following 1999 and 0 before. The coefficient β shows the time
trend pre-Napster, and α measures the annual divergence in the supply growth rate following
Napster. The key question in implementing this approach is how much pre-Napster data to
include for identifying β (and therefore α). It is clear from Figure 6 that album supply was
falling prior to Napster. If we begin the estimation with data from the mid-1990s, we will
impose the assumption that music supply would have continued to decline following Napster.
This will, in turn, cause α to be positive, suggesting that music supply growth has diverged
upward from its pre-Napster trend.
Of course, as we include more years of pre-Napster data, we can generate very different
values for α. Table 5 shows the different estimates obtained with different pre-Napster periods.
For example, when the pre-Napster period begins in 1995, the growth rate in supply increases
20

relative to the pre-existing trend; and this difference is statistically significant, and it swamps the
pre-Napster rate of decline. This pattern holds for the other estimation starting dates, except for
1980. When we begin the pre-Napster period in 1980, both the pre-Napster trend and the postNapster divergence are statistically insignificant. Thus, this approach provides no indication that
supply patterns have changed, relative to pre-existing trends, since Napster.
A third approach is to find a suitable control for the quantity of new albums. A
potentially promising avenue is the comparison between songs and albums. While the returns to
producing all recorded music fell after 1999, the appearance – and rapid rise – of the iTunes
Music Store in 2003 re-established individual songs (“singles”) as highly marketable works. For
example, in 1999 sales of singles stood at 62.5 million units, accounting for only 2 percent of US
recorded music sales. In 2009, by contrast, singles sales stood at $1.14 billion, or almost 15
percent of US recorded music sales.21 Thus, while the rewards from producing albums appear to
have fallen since 1999, the rewards from producing singles appear to have risen since 2003. If
this is so, then we can compare the time pattern of creative supply of albums and singles to
identify a copyright-induced effect on album supply relative to single supply. The evident date
for the “experiment” is the 2003 appearance of the iTunes Music Store.
Figure 8 shows our index of album supply juxtaposed with our index of singles supply
since 1980, based on separate album and song year effects from weighted regressions. At face,
they look rather similar. We can test for an album supply effect (relative to the single) using the
following model:

21

See RIAA’s 2003 Yearend Statistics and the RIAA’s 2008-09 shipment statistics at
http://www.riaa.com/keystatistics.php?content_selector=2008-2009-U.S-Shipment-Numbers, accessed October 26,
2010.

21

ln

,
and

where

are indicators that are zero until 1999 and 2003, respectively, and one

thereafter. Table 6 reports results, and none of the coefficients on the indicators are statistically
significant. Thus, this approach, like the others we have explored, provides no evidence of an
effect of changed appropriability of albums, relative to songs, on the quantity of consequential
new albums.
3. New Artists vs New Music
The evidence thus far indicates no decline in the volume of new recorded music products
forthcoming since Napster. It is possible, however, that the new music is coming from artists
who were established prior to Napster. While products still come to market, it is possible that
new artists are not establishing careers.
To explore this we examined the albums on three analogous best-of lists, for the 1980s,
the 1990s, and the 2000s, from Pitchfork Media. For each of the 300 albums, we determined the
year the artist released his, her, or their first recording (whether an album, a single, or an “EP”).22
These data allow us to calculate the career age of an artist at the time he has an album on a bestof list. The question is whether artists have continued to establish careers since 1999. To
explore this, we calculate the share of best albums since 1999 whose artists’ first recordings
appeared after 1999. Since 1999, 49 percent of artists on the best of the 2000s list debuted
following Napster. Figure 9 shows this year-by-year pattern: there is a systematic, although not
a monotonic, rise from 10 percent of albums in 2000 to 100 percent at the end of the decade. On
22

We obtained the discography information from http://www.discogs.com, accessed January 1, 2011.

22

average, about half of the best-of albums since Napster are from artists whose recording debut
occurred since Napster.
Although this is clearly a substantial share, determining whether the launching of new
artists has changed requires a comparison with earlier periods. To this end, we calculate
analogous annual shares for the two previous decades, the annual share of 1980s best-of albums
from artists debuting after 1979, and the share of 1990s best-of albums from artists debuting after
1989. All three patterns are very similar, rising fairly steadily to 100 percent by the end of each
decade. A regression of a dummy for whether an artist debuted since the beginning of the
decade of his appearance on dummies for years since the beginning of the decade and a dummy
for the post-Napster decade confirms the lack a statistically meaningful difference in the
tendency for new artists to appear on the list since Napster.

IV.

Discussion and Conclusion
How do we reconcile the demand reduction wrought by piracy since Napster with the

continued creation of new recorded music documented above? One possibility is that the supply
curve is vertical, i.e. that creative activity is invariant to reward. While new music itself might
be created without regard for reward, the mundane aspects of bringing it to market – production,
promotion, and distribution – are generally undertaken by profit-seeking private firms, and they
have costs which must be covered to keep new products coming forth. These are presumably the
costs that concern IFPI and RIAA members. The intuitive reasonableness of an upward-sloping
supply curve for new products suggests a different reconciliation of reduced demand with
23

continued “output,” that new technologies have reduced costs, shifting supply out as demand has
contracted. Bringing music successfully to market has three component activities – creation,
promotion, and distribution – and new technologies have changed each of these substantially.
Creation includes both solitary artistic activity as well as recording, mixing, engineering,
and manufacturing salable recorded music products. Many aspect of creation were traditionally
expensive, but a succession of new technologies has reduced costs. Caves (2000) points out that
the development of low-cost tape recording equipment after World War II “promoted the entry
of more than a thousand new record labels between 1948 and 1954.”23 Kalmar (2002) notes that
with the development of digital audio tape in 1987, “a label can set up their own recording studio
for about five grand.”24 The cost reductions have accelerated since Napster: Software such as
Pro Tools turns an inexpensive personal computer into a home recording studio. A starter
version of the software sells for about $100.25
Music is an experience good, and consumers need to become aware of music to be
interested in purchasing it. Record companies have traditionally made consumers aware of their
products by promoting their new releases on radio. Even prior to the Internet, the labels
produced more music than radio stations could air, so the labels paid the stations to promote their
music. While the literal practice of “payola” was outlawed in 1960, labels continued to pay for
airplay through independent promoters, “men (large and accompanied by bodyguards) who were
willing and able to gain control of radio stations’ playlists.” These payments were substantial: in

23

See Caves (2000), pp. 157-8.
See Kalmar (2002), p. 73.
25
See Donald Bell, “Avid Introduces new Pro Tools Studio Bundles.” CNET, Oct 1, 2010
(http://news.cnet.com/8301-17938_105-20018292-1.html, accessed October 28, 2010).
24

24

1985 the record labels collectively paid $65 million for airplay when the industry’s pre-tax profit
was $200 million. The cost of promoting a hit single was about $150,000.26
Since Napster, the process of musical discover has changed substantially. While radio
listening is in decline, consumers now learn about new music from a variety of web sources,
including Pandora, MySpace, and YouTube. According to the 2010 “Infinite Dial” study
conducted by Edison Research and Arbitron, the Internet was by far the most popular medium
that consumers age 12-34 used first to learn about new music. Over half (52 percent) turned first
to the Internet, followed by 32 percent using radio. Just over a quarter (27 percent) of the
population 12 and over had used Internet radio in the previous month, and Pandora was the most
recognized name: among those who had ever listened to Internet radio, 28 percent named
Pandora, followed by Yahoo Music (9 percent), AOL Radio (6), and Last.fm (4).27 As the
Infinite Dial name suggests, the Internet has undermined the scarcity of terrestrial radio stations
as music promotion channels.
Distribution, too, has been changed substantially by the Internet. Caves (2000)
emphasizes a number of factors favoring large scale enterprises in physical distribution during
the physical era, including a need to get a large quantity of physical product into many stores
before popularity wanes. Of course, it is now possible to distribute musically electronically,
eliminating inventory issues. Using TuneCore’s service, for example, an artist can make his

26

Caves (2000), p. 292, provides the source for the quote and the data cited in this paragraph.
See “The Infinite Dial 2010: Digital Platforms and the Future of Radio.”
(http://www.fmqb.com/goout.asp?u=http://www.edisonresearch.com/home/archives/2010/09/the_american_youth_s
tudy_2010_part_one_radios_future.php accessed October 28, 2010).
27

25

song available on iTunes for $9.99.28 Clearly, the various costs of bringing music to market
have come down substantially since Napster.
In his critical account of the music industry’s response to digital transformation, Steven
Knopper (2009) argues out that these changes largely obviate the roles of the major record
labels:
[Prior to Napster, an] “artist who wanted to make a record needed studio time – and that cost money, which
meant a sizable loan from a label. An artist who wanted to get a single onto a radio playlist needed
connections – and that usually meant a label executive who had the money to hire an independent
promoter. An artist who wanted to sell millions of copies of a record needed a big-time distributor with the
clout to push CDs into big stores like Best Buy or Target – and that meant one of the label’s own
subsidiaries, like WEA or CEMA. Today, it’s not necessary to hook up with a label to do all these things.
An artist can make a record cheaply, and professionally, using software like Pro Tools. An artist can forgo
the radio, building buzz and exposure online via do-it-yourself websites like MySpace, viral videos on
YouTube, or any number of social networking services from Facebook to Garageband.com. As for
distribution, who needs crates, trucks, warehouses, stores, or even the discs themselves?”29

Leeds (2005) makes the similar point that independent labels appear to have lower costs,
allowing them to subsist on smaller sales:
“Unlike the majors, independent labels typically do not allocate money to producing slick videos or
marketing songs to radio stations. An established independent like Matador Records - home to acts
including Pretty Girls Make Graves and Belle and Sebastian - can turn a profit after selling roughly 25,000
copies of an album; success on a major label release sometimes doesn't kick in until sales of half a million.”

Changes in the cost structure of operating a record label are consistent with Handke’s (2006)
observation that the number of German record labels expanded following the advent of file
sharing.
Do the data support the contention that independent labels are bringing forth more of the
supply following Napster? Pitchfork Media’s ranking of the top albums of the 1980s, 1990s, and
28

See http://www.tunecore.com/, accessed October 28, 2010. At the site: “What Does Worldwide Distribution
Cost” $9.99 per single, $9.99 per ringtone, $49.99 per album.”
29
See Knopper (2009), p. 246.

26

the 2000s includes each album’s issuing label or, more commonly, a less recognized entity that
may be either an independent label or a sub-label of one of the majors. Using mostly Wikipedia
entries, I have been able to code each of the labels on the top 100 albums of each decade as
either a major or an independent. This is not a trivial task, as the major owners produce records
under a long list of label imprints.
The data provide support for the idea that independent labels are playing an increasing
role (see Figure 10). While the share of the top 100 on independent labels was 50 percent in both
the 1980s and the 1990s, it rose to 60 percent in the period since 1999.30 This difference
(between the 2000s and the previous two decades) is significant at the 5 percent level in a onesided test (p-val =0.04). The ascendance of independent labels has been noted elsewhere.
Leeds (2005) writes of the independent labels’ success in the face of the majors’ difficult times:
“Even as the recording industry staggers through another year of declining sales over all, there are new
signs that a democratization of music made possible by the Internet is shifting the industry's balance of
power. …But no factor is more significant than the Internet, which has shaken up industry sales patterns
and, perhaps more important, upended the traditional hierarchy of outlets that can promote music. Buzz
about an underground act can spread like a virus, allowing a band to capture national acclaim before it even
has a recording contract, as was the case this year with Clap Your Hands Say Yeah, an indie rock band.”

The heightened role of independent labels suggests a simple reconciliation of the
continued supply of music despite financial distress at major labels: it appears that entities other
than the major labels are bringing forth a higher share of music in the period since Napster.
The new era may not stem the supply of music, but it may change the industrial
organization of the music industry. It appears that majors have traditionally cross subsidized
their exploratory activity – investing in new artists – with exploitative activities, selling
30

Pitchfork’s focus on artists they view as interesting likely explains the high share of independent label releases
among their most highly rated albums. According to Leeds (2005), independent labels’ collective share of recorded
music revenue rose to 18 percent (27 percent including indie albums distributed by majors) in 2005, its highest share
in 5 years.

27

predictably successful albums by already-popular artists. The independents appear able to
participate in exploratory activities without needing to find artists who will generate sufficient
revenue for cross-subsidization. And while major labels facing financial distress may be able to
invest less in new artists, it is also possible that these artists’ music can nevertheless find its way
to market via the less costly distribution channel that independent labels provide.
This still begs the question of why artists themselves would continue to produce works in
the face of the smaller payoffs promised even by a successful independent label release. Many
observers point to heightened roles of complements to recorded music in artists income.
Connolly and Krueger (2006) and Mortimer, Nosko, and Sorenson (2010) document that concert
revenue has increased since Napster, and Shapiro and Varian (1999) emphasized the possible
stimulating effect of widely available – and difficult-to-protect – recorded music on the sale of
other complements such as t-shirts.
File sharing has presented a great challenge to the recording industry. It is clear to most
observers that file sharing has undermined the effective copyright protection afforded to recorded
music. In spite of this, the supply of recorded music appears not to have fallen off much since
Napster, and there is at least suggestive evidence that independent music labels, which operate
with lower breakeven thresholds, are playing an increased role in bringing new works to market.
This is a relatively difficult topic to study, so more than the usual number of caveats is in
order. We lack a compelling counterfactual for the post-Napter musical world, so it is hard to
measure Napster’s effect on new music with great confidence. It is possible that, absent the
demand contraction, the cost reductions would have ushered in a substantial increase in new
high-quality works. Second, even if it is true that music supply remains forthcoming in the face
28

of weakened effective copyright protection, it is not clear what relevance these results have for
other media that differ in their creative processes. While new recording and distribution
technologies have put the means to make and distribute music in the reach of many more people,
it remains substantially more costly to create other types of works, such as movies. Even if one
takes the suggestive results of this study to mean that new music has continued to flow despite
weaker copyright protection, we have no evidence that these lessons carry over to other media.
It is often said – and is as true as ever in this context – that more research is needed.

29

References
Blackburn, David. “On-line Piracy and Recorded Music Sales.” Unpublished Manuscript,
Harvard University, December 2004.
Blashil, Pat (coordintator for Zagat Survey). Music Guide: 1000 Top Albums of All Time. 2003.
New York: Zagat Survey.
Boldrin, Michele and David K. Levine. Against Intellectual Monopoly. Cambridge University
Press. 2008.
Caves, Richard E. Creative Industries: Contracts between Art and Commerce. Harvard
University Press: Cambridge, MA. 2000.
Connolly, Marie & Krueger, Alan B., 2006. “Rockonomics: The Economics of Popular Music,”
Handbook of the Economics of Art and Culture, Elsevier.
Handke, Christian. “Plain Destruction or Creative Destruction? Copyright Erosion and the
Evolution of the Record Industry.” Review of Economic Research on Copyright Issues, 2006,
vol 3(2): 29-51.
Handke, Christian, “Digital Copying and the Supply of Sound Recordings.” Unpublished
Manuscript, 2010, available at http://www.acei2010.com/upload/acei/handke.pdf .
Kalmar, Veronika. Label Launch: A Guide to Record Recording, Promotion, and Distribution.
St. Martin’s Griffin: New York. 2002.
Knopper, Steve . Appetite for Self-Destruction: The Spectacular Crash of the Record Industry in
the Digital Age. Free Press: New York. 2009.
Larkin, Colin. “A Brief History of Pop Music.” In The Encyclopedia of Popular Music, 5th
edition, edited by Colin Larkin, Omnibus Press/MUZE: London and New York. 2007.
Leeds, Jeff. “The Net is a Boon for Indie Labels.” New York Times. December 27, 2005.
Levy, Joe and Editors of Rolling Stone, The 500 Greatest Albums of All Times. Wenner
Publishing. November 16, 2005
Liebowitz, Stan J. "File Sharing: Creative Destruction or Just Plain Destruction?”
Journal of Law and Economics, vol. 49, no. 1, April 2006, pp. 1-28.
Oberholzer‐Gee, Felix and Koleman Strumpf. “The Effect of File Sharing on Record Sales: An
Empirical Analysis.” Journal of Political Economy. Volume 115, Issue 1, Page 1–42, Feb 2007
Oberholzer‐Gee, Felix and Koleman Strumpf. File-Sharing and Copyright. NBER's Innovation
Policy and the Economy series, volume 10. ed. Joshua Lerner and Scott Stern. MIT Press. 2009.

30

Mortimer, Julie Holland, Chris Nosko, and Alan Sorenson. “Supply Responses to Digital
Distribution: Recorded Music and Live Performances.” NBER Working Paper No. 16507.
October 2010.
Rob, Rafael and Joel Waldfogel. “Piracy on the High C’s: Music Downloading, Sales
Displacement, and Social Welfare in a Sample of College Students.” Journal of Law &
Economics. Volume 49, Issue 1, Page 29-62, Apr 2006.
Rob, Rafael and Joel Waldfogel. “Piracy on the High C’s: Music Downloading, Sales
Displacement, and Social Welfare in a Sample of College Students.” NBER Working Paper
10874, October 2004.
Shapiro, Carl and Hal Varian. Information Rules. Harvard Business School Press. Cambridge,
MA. 1999.
Zentner, Alejandro, “Measuring the Effect of File Sharing on Music Purchases.” The Journal of
Law and Economics. Volume 49, Issue 1, Page 63–90, Apr 2006.

31

Figure 1
Rolling Stone Index

0

Rolling Stone
.02
.04

.06

from 2004 album list

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Year

Figure 2
Supply Indices

1960

1980

2000

1960

1980

2000

1960

Zagat

0

0

.02

.04

.05

Rolling Stone
.06

0

0

.05

Rate Your Music

.05

BestEver

.01 .015 .02 .025 .03

Acclaimed

1960 1970 1980 1990 2000

1960 1970 1980 1990 2000

Year
Graphs by source

32

1980

2000

Figure 3
A Few Albums Appear on Many Rankings

0

.2

share of entries
.4
.6

.8

1

North American and UK Rankings (1417 albums, 4202 entries)

0

100

250

500

1000

1500

albums

Figure 4
A Few Songs Appear on Many Rankings

0

.2

share of entries
.4
.6

.8

1

North American and UK Rankings (1045 songs, 2043 entries)

0

100

200

250

400

600

800

songs

33

1000

Figure 5

60

80

Index Availability

20

Index
40

Pitchfork 1990s (99)

Word, The
Virgin Media
Under the Radar
Uncut
Treble
Treble
Tiny Mix Tapes
Times, The
The Word
The Times
The Sunday Times
The Sun
The Guardian
The Boombox
Stylus Decade
Stylus
State
Spinner
Spinner
Slant
Slant
Rolling Stone
Rolling Stone
Rock's Back Pages
Rhapsody
Rhapsody
Resident Advisor
Resident Advisor
Popdose
Popdose
Pitchfork
Pitchfork
Paste
The Onion A.V. Club
onethirtybpm
OneThirtyBPM
NPR
National Public Radio
Noise Creep
NME
NME
musicOMH
Mixmag
Metromix Denver
Metacritic
Lost At Sea
LostAtSea
The Line of Best Fit
Kitsap Sun
Irish Times
HipHopDX
Guardian, The
Glide
Gigwise
Gigwise
Ghostly
FACT
Entertainment Weekly
eMusic
Delusions of Adequacy
Decibel
Daily Californian
Creative Loafing
Consequence of Sound
Consequence of Sound
Complex
Complex
CokeMachineGlow
Boot, The
Boom Box, The
Billboard
BetterPropaganda
Austin Town Hall
American Songwriter
Q
NOW
MSN.com
BET

0

Pitchfork 1990s (03)
Blender songs
Rate Your Music
Zagat
Rolling Stone
Best Ever
Acclaimed Songs
Acclaimed Albums

1960

1970

1980

1990
Year

2000

2010

Figure 6

Album Year Dummies and Napster

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

weighted

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

year
coef
bottom of 95% interval

top of 95% interval

34

2010

Figure 7

Song Year Dummies and Napster

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

weighted

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

year
coef
bottom of 95% interval

top of 95% interval

Figure 8

Do Album and Song Supply Move Together?

2.6

3.2

3.3

2.8

Albums
3

3.4
3.5
Songs

3.2

3.6

3.7

3.4

year effects from weighted regressions

1980

1990

2000

2010

year
Albums

Songs

35

Figure 9

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

1

Share of Years' Best from Artists New this Decade

1980

1990

2000

2010

year
new since 2000
new since 1980

new since 1990

Figure 10

.5

Indie Share
.55

.6

Independent Release Share among Pitchfork Top 100

1980

1990

2000

36

Table 1: The Most Listed Albums of the 2000s
rank

artist

album

year

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13

Arcade Fire
Radiohead
Strokes, The
OutKast
Wilco
LCD Soundsystem
Jay-Z
Radiohead
Flaming Lips, The
White Stripes, The
Bon Iver
Stevens, Sufjan
Arctic Monkeys

14
15
16
17

Daft Punk
West, Kanye
Winehouse, Amy
Harvey, PJ

18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37

Interpol
White Stripes, The
Eminem
Knife, The
Animal Collective
M.I.A.
Björk
TV on the Radio
Beck
Broken Social Scene
Modest Mouse
Streets, The
Fleet Foxes
Dylan, Bob
Burial
Newsom, Joanna
Yeah Yeah Yeahs
Dizzee Rascal
Antony and The Johnsons
Vampire Weekend

Funeral
Kid A
Is This It
Stankonia
Yankee Hotel Foxtrot
Sound of Silver
The Blueprint
In Rainbows
Yoshimi Battles the Pink Robots
Elephant
For Emma, Forever Ago
Illinois
Whatever People Say I Am, That's
What I'm Not
Discovery
The College Dropout
Back to Black
Stories from the City, Stories from the
Sea
Turn On the Bright Lights
White Blood Cells
The Marshall Mathers LP
Silent Shout
Merriweather Post Pavillon
Kala
Vespertine
Return to Cookie Mountain
Sea Change
You Forgot It in People
The Moon & Antarctica
Original Pirate Material
Fleet Foxes
Love and Theft
Untrue
Ys
Fever to Tell
Boy in da Corner
I Am a Bird Now
Vampire Weekend

37

RIAA
Certs

2004
2000
2001
2000
2002
2007
2001
2007
2002
2003
2007
2005
2006

Number
of lists
47
47
45
37
36
34
34
30
29
29
28
28
27

2001
2004
2006
2000

27
26
26
26

G
2xP
2xP

2002
2001
2000
2006
2009
2007
2001
2006
2002
2002
2000
2002
2008
2001
2007
2006
2003
2003
2005
2008

25
24
23
23
22
22
21
21
20
20
20
20
20
19
19
19
19
19
18
18

P
G
3xP
G
2xP
G
G
P

G
9xP

G

G
G

G

G

G

38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50

Adams, Ryan
M.I.A.
Panda Bear
OutKast
Queens of the Stone Age
Jay-Z
National, The
Bright Eyes
Madvillain
West, Kanye
At the Drive-In
Ghostface Killah
Postal Service, The

Heartbreaker
Arular
Person Pitch
Speakerboxxx/The Love Below
Songs for the Deaf
The Black Album
Boxer
I'm Wide Awake It's Morning
Madvillainy
Late Registration
Relationship of Command
Supreme Clientele
Give Up

2000
2005
2007
2003
2002
2003
2007
2005
2004
2005
2000
2000
2003

Based on 56 “best of the 2000s” album lists from North America and the UK.

38

18
17
17
17
16
16
16
16
16
15
15
15
15

11xP
G

3xP
G
G

Table 2: The Most Listed Songs of the 2000s
rank
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37

artist

song

year

M.I.A.
Jay-Z
Gnarls Barkley
The White Stripes
Beyoncé feat. Jay-Z
Yeah Yeah Yeahs
Franz Ferdinand
OutKast
The Flaming Lips
Missy Elliott
Daft Punk
OutKast
Kylie Minogue
Rihanna feat. Jay-Z
Justin Timberlake
OutKast
LCD Soundsystem
The Knife
Radiohead
The Rapture
R. Kelly
Kanye West
Amy Winehouse
Modest Mouse
The Shins
Britney Spears
Eminem
The Strokes
Arcade Fire
Peter Bjorn and John
Queens of the Stone Age
MGMT
Hot Chip
The White Stripes
Jay-Z
LCD Soundsystem
Kelly Clarkson

Paper Planes
99 Problems
Crazy
Seven Nation Army
Crazy in Love
Maps
Take Me Out
Hey Ya!
Do You Realize??
Get Ur Freak On
One More Time
B.O.B. (Bombs Over Baghdad)
Can't Get You Out of My Head
Umbrella
Cry Me a River
Ms. Jackson
Losing My Edge
Heartbeats
Idioteque
House of Jealous Lovers
Ignition (Remix)
Jesus Walks
Rehab
Float On
New Slang
Toxic
Lose Yourself
Last Nite
Wake Up
Young Folks
No One Knows
Kids
Over and Over
Fell in Love With a Girl
Izzo (H.O.V.A.)
All My Friends
Since U Been Gone

2007
2003
2006
2003
2003
2003
2004
2003
2002
2001
2000
2000
2001
2007
2002
2000
2002
2003
2000
2002
2003
2004
2006
2004
2001
2003
2002
2001
2004
2006
2002
2008
2006
2002
2001
2007
2004

39

On how
many of the
22 lists?
15
14
14
14
13
13
13
13
12
12
11
11
11
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
9
9
9
9
9
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8

38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45

Johnny Cash
The Killers
The Postal Service
Arcade Fire
Animal Collective
Radiohead
Eminem feat. Dido
Arctic Monkeys

46 The Walkmen
47 TV on the Radio
48 T.I.
49 Lil Wayne
50 The Strokes
Based on 22 North American and UK lists.

Hurt
Mr. Brightside
Such Great Heights
Rebellion (Lies)
My Girls
Pyramid Song
Stan
I Bet You Look Good on the
Dancefloor
The Rat
Wolf Like Me
What You Know
A Milli
Hard to Explain

40

2002
2003
2003
2004
2009
2001
2000
2005

8
7
7
7
7
7
7
7

2004
2006
2006
2008
2001

7
7
7
7
7

Table 3: Zagat Ratings and Album Sales
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
linear
linear
linear
interval
interval
Zagat Rated
1.084
1.224
2.146
1.078
1.227
(0.064)**
(0.066)**
(0.082)**
(0.066)**
(0.068)**
Year effects
No
yes
Yes
No
Yes
Individual FE
no
no
yes
no
no
Observations
8126
8126
8113
R-squared
0.03
0.06
Notes: Columns 1-3 report linear regressions. Uncertified albums are coded with 0 sales. The dependent variable for
other observations are the RIAA certification level. Columns (4) and (5) report normal interval regressions.
Uncertified albums are assumed to sell between 0 and 0.5 million, Gold albums are assumed to sell between 0.5 and
1 million, and N x multiplatinum albums are assumed to have sold between N and N+1 million copies. Standard
errors in parentheses.* significant at 5% level; ** significant at 1% level.

41

Table 4: Time Trends in Music Supply Following Napster
(albums)
(songs)
0.0071
-0.0104
(0.0063)
(0.0089)
Constant
-14.0067
20.9655
(12.5821)
(17.8453)
Observations
454
176
R-squared
0.88
0.93
Note: weighted regression of log index values following 1999 on index dummies (source fixed effects) and a linear
time trend (year). Standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 5% level; ** significant at 1% level.
Year

42

Table 5: Napster Effect on Albums Relative to Pre-Napster Trend
Year
Post-1999 Divergence
Constant
Observations
R-squared
Pre-period start

(1)
-0.0772
(0.0202)**
0.0835
(0.0225)**
154.5180
(40.3130)**
495
0.89
1995

(2)
-0.0238
(0.0076)**
0.0253
(0.0111)*
47.7673
(15.2735)**
535
0.89
1990

(3)
0.0000
(0.0032)
-0.0056
(0.0078)
0.2677
(6.3026)
590
0.90
1980

(4)
-0.0144
(0.0019)**
0.0153
(0.0074)*
29.0892
(3.8581)**
640
0.90
1970

Notes: Regressions of log album supply indices on a time trend (“year”) and a divergent post-1999 trend.
Regressions are weighted by the number of works included in each index, divided by the number of years it
covers. Standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 5% level; ** significant at 1% level

43

Table 6: Album Supply following Napster and iTunes Relative to Songs
album x post-1999

(1)
-0.0054
(0.0771)

(2)

album x post-2003
Constant
Observations
Number of indices

0.1008
(0.0564)
2.2957
(0.0888)**
923
88

2.2969
(0.0891)**
923
88

(3)
-0.0455
(0.0799)
0.1097
(0.0586)
2.2969
(0.0889)**
923
88

Notes: Regression of log supply indices on indicators for albums post 1999 and albums post-2003. Standard
errors in parentheses. All regressions include flexible time dummies that are common to albums and songs.
Regressions are weighted by the number of works included in each index, divided by the number of years it
covers. * significant at 5% level; ** significant at 1% level.

44

source

Era covered

Zagat 1000 Top
Albums of All
Time
Pitchfork “Top 200
Albums of the
2000s”
Pitchfork “Top 500
Tracks of the
2000s”
Pitchfork “Top 100
Albums of the
1990s”
Pitchfork “Top 100
Albums of the
1990s”
NME Top 100
Greatest Albums of
the Decade
Metacritic All Time
High Scores (top 50
pages)
Rolling Stone’s 500
Greatest Albums of
All Time
SPIN Magazine
“125 Best Albums
of the Past 25
Years”
A.V. Club Staff,
“The best music of
the decade.” (50
albums)
Paste Magazine,
“The 50 Best
Albums of the
Decade (2000-

-2003 (partial)

Date
released
Sep 2003

reference

origin

Zagatsurvey Music Guide: 1,000 Top Albums of All Time (Zagat Survey: Music
Guide) 2003

USA

songs?

0

2000-09 (partial)

Sep-09

http://pitchfork.com/features/staff-lists/7706-the-top-200-albums-of-the-2000s200-151/

USA

2000-09 (partial)

Aug-09

http://pitchfork.com/features/staff-lists/7685-the-top-500-tracks-of-the-2000s500-201/

USA

1990-1999

Nov-03

http://pitchfork.com/features/staff-lists/5923-top-100-albums-of-the-1990s/

USA

1990-1999

Oct-99

http://web.archive.org/web/20010616215501/http://pitchforkmedia.com/top/90s/

USA

2000-09 (partial)

Nov-09

http://www.nme.com/list/albums-of-the-decade/158049/page/1

UK

http://www.metacritic.com/browse/albums/score/metascore/all?sort=desc

USA

http://www.rollingstone.com/music/lists/5702/31963

USA

0
1
0
0
0

2001-2010 (partial)
-2004 (partial)

Downloaded
October 815, 2010
April 2004

0
0

1985-2010 (partial)

Jul-10

http://www.spin.com/spin25/125-best-albums-past-25-years

USA

2000-2009 (partial)

Nov-09

http://www.avclub.com/articles/the-best-music-of-the-decade,35540/

USA

2000-2009 (partial)

Nov-09

http://www.pastemagazine.com/blogs/lists/2009/11/the-best-albums-of-thedecade.html

USA

0

0

0

45

source

Era covered

Date
released

reference

origin

songs?

2009)”
BestEver

All time (top rated
albums)

As of
October 10,
2010
Feb-10

http://www.besteveralbums.com/topratedstats.php?o=album

One Thirty BPM
Top 100 albums of
the 2000s
Rate My Music top
1000 albums
Pitchfork “Top 100
Albums of the
1980s”
Acclaimed Music
Singles (top 3000)
Acclaimed Music
Albums (top 3000)
Spinner Top 50
Songs of the 2000s
One Thirty BPM
Top 100 Tracks of
the 2000s
NME Top 100
Tracks of the
Decade
Blender 500
Greatest Songs
Since You Were
Born

2000-2009

As of Oct
19, 2010
20-Nov-02

http://rateyourmusic.com/

Q

2000-2009

www.qthemusic.com

UK

0

FACT

2000-2009

factmag.co.uk

UK

0

Gigwise

2000-2009

gigwise.com

UK

0

Gigwise

2000-2009

gigwise.com

UK

1

Guardian, The

2000-2009

guardian.co.uk

UK

1

0
http://onethirtybpm.com/2010/02/15/the-top-100-albums-of-the-2000s/

USA
0

All time
1980-1989

0
http://pitchfork.com/features/staff-lists/5882-top-100-albums-of-the-1980s/

USA
0

-2008

Nov-08

http://www.acclaimedmusic.net/

-2009

Nov-09

http://www.acclaimedmusic.net/

1
0
2000-2009

24-Nov-09

http://www.spinner.com/2009/11/24/best-songs-2000s/

Canada

2000-2009

15-Feb-10

http://onethirtybpm.com/2010/02/15/the-top-100-tracks-of-the-2000s/

USA

2000-2009

Nov-09

http://www.nme.com/list/tracks-of-the-decade/158050

UK

1980-2005

Sept. 2005

http://www.blender.com/lists/68126/500-greatest-songs-since-you-wereborn.html

USA

1
1
1

1

46

source

Era covered

The Line of Best
Fit

2000-2009

Mixmag

2000-2009

musicOMH

2000-2009

Resident Advisor

2000-2009

Resident Advisor

2000-2009

Rock's Back Pages

2000-2009

The Guardian

2000-2009

The Sun

2000-2009

Date
released

reference

origin

songs?

lineofbestfit.com

UK

0

mixmag.net

UK

0

musicomh.com

UK

0

www.residentadvisor.net

UK

0

www.residentadvisor.net

UK

1

www.rocksbackpages.com

UK

0

guardian.co.uk

UK

0

www.thesun.co.uk

UK

0

The Sunday Times

2000-2009

sunday-times.co.uk

UK

0

The Times

2000-2009

timesonline.co.uk

UK

0

The Word

2000-2009

www.wordmagazine.co.uk

UK

0

Times, The

2000-2009

timesonline.co.uk

UK

1

Uncut

2000-2009

Uncut.co.uk

UK

0

Virgin Media

2000-2009

virginmedia.com

UK

0

Word, The

2000-2009

www.wordmagazine.co.uk

UK

1

BET

2000-2009

bet.com

USA

0

MSN.com
American
Songwriter

2000-2009

msn.com

USA

0

americansongwriter.com

USA

0

Austin Town Hall

2000-2009

austintownhall.com

USA

0

BetterPropaganda

2000-2009

betterpropaganda.com

USA

0

Billboard

2000-2009

billboard.com

USA

0

Boom Box, The

2000-2009

theboombox.com

USA

1

Boot, The

2000-2009

www.theboot.com

USA

1

CokeMachineGlow

2000-2009

Cokemachineglow.com

USA

0

Complex

2000-2009

complex.com

USA

0

Complex

2000-2009

complex.com

USA

1

2000-2009

47

source

Era covered

Consequence of
Sound
Consequence of
Sound

2000-2009

Creative Loafing

2000-2009

Daily Californian

2000-2009

Decibel
Delusions of
Adequacy

2000-2009

eMusic
Entertainment
Weekly

2000-2009

Ghostly

2000-2009

Glide

2000-2009

HipHopDX

2000-2009

Kitsap Sun

2000-2009

LostAtSea

2000-2009

Lost At Sea

2000-2009

Metromix Denver

2000-2009

Noise Creep
National Public
Radio

2000-2009

NPR

2000-2009

Popdose

2000-2009

Popdose

2000-2009

Rhapsody

2000-2009

Rhapsody

2000-2009

Rolling Stone

2000-2009

Rolling Stone

2000-2009

Date
released

reference

origin

songs?

consequenceofsound.net

USA

0

consequenceofsound.net

USA

1

creativeloafing.com

USA

0

dailycal.org

USA

0

decibelmagazine.com

USA

0

Delusionsofadequacy.com

USA

0

emusic.com

USA

0

ew.com

USA

0

ghostly.com

USA

0

glidemagazine.com

USA

0

hiphopdx.com

USA

0

kitsapsun.com

USA

0

www.lostatsea.net

USA

0

www.lostatsea.net

USA

1

2000-2009

2000-2009

2000-2009

USA

0

www.noisecreep.com

USA

1

npr.org

USA

0

npr.org

USA

1

popdose.com

USA

0

popdose.com

USA

1

rhapsody.com

USA

0

rhapsody.com

USA

1

rollingstone.com

USA

1

rollingstone.com

USA

0

2000-2009

48

source

Era covered

Slant

Date
released

reference

origin

2000-2009

slantmagazine.com

USA

0

Slant

2000-2009

slantmagazine.com

USA

1

Stylus

2000-2009

thestylusdecade.com

USA

1

Stylus Decade

2000-2009

thestylusdecade.com

USA

0

The Boombox

2000-2009

theboombox.com

USA

0

Tiny Mix Tapes

2000-2009

tinymixtapes.com

USA

0

Treble

2000-2009

Treblezine.com

USA

0

Treble

2000-2009

Treblezine.com

USA

1

Under the Radar

2000-2009

Undertheradarmag.com

USA

0

Irish Times

2000-2009

www.irishtimes.com

Ireland

0

State

2000-2009

www.state.ie

Ireland

0

NOW

2000-2009

nowmusicforums.com

Canada

0

Spinner

2000-2009

spinner.com

Canada

0

49

songs?

