NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MONETARY POLICY AS FINANCIAL-STABILITY REGULATION
Jeremy C. Stein
Working Paper 16883
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16883

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2011

Eduardo Davila and Fan Zhang provided outstanding research assistance. I am grateful for comments
from Robert Barro, Effi Benmelech, Ricardo Caballero, Mark Gertler, Marvin Goodfriend, Robin
Greenwood, Sam Hanson, Larry Katz, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Jamie McAndrews, David Scharfstein,
Andrei Shleifer, Robert Vishny, the referees, and seminar participants at numerous institutions. Thanks
also to Mary Goodman, Sam Hanson, Matt Kabaker, Andrew Metrick, Charlie Nathanson, Larry Summers
and Adi Sunderam for a series of early conversations that helped to shape the ideas in this paper. The
views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Jeremy C. Stein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Monetary Policy as Financial-Stability Regulation
Jeremy C. Stein
NBER Working Paper No. 16883
March 2011
JEL No. E58,G01
ABSTRACT
This paper develops a model that speaks to the goals and methods of financial-stability policies. There
are three main points. First, from a normative perspective, the model defines the fundamental market
failure to be addressed, namely that unregulated private money creation can lead to an externality in
which intermediaries issue too much short-term debt and leave the system excessively vulnerable to
costly financial crises. Second, it shows how in a simple economy where commercial banks are the
only lenders, conventional monetary-policy tools such as open-market operations can be used to regulate
this externality, while in more advanced economies it may be helpful to supplement monetary policy
with other measures. Third, from a positive perspective, the model provides an account of how monetary
policy can influence bank lending and real activity, even in a world where prices adjust frictionlessly
and there are other transactions media besides bank-created money that are outside the control of the
central bank.

Jeremy C. Stein
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer 209
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
jeremy_stein@harvard.edu

I. Introduction
The modern literature on monetary policy emphasizes the central bank’s role in
fostering price stability.1 Historically, however, a dominant concern for central bankers
has been not just price stability, but also financial stability. Goodhart (1988) argues that
the original motivation for creating central banks in many countries was to temper the
financial crises associated with unregulated “free banking” regimes:
“In the nineteenth century, the advocates of free banking argued that the banking
system could be trusted to operate effectively without external constraints or
regulation….[But] experience suggested that competitive pressures in a milieu of limited
information (and, thence, contagion risks) would lead to procyclical fluctuations
punctuated by banking panics. It was this experience that led to the formation of
noncompetitive, non-profit maximizing Central Banks.” (p. 77).
A related emphasis on crisis mitigation is evident in Bagehot’s (1873) famous discussion
of the lender-of-last-resort function.2

And certainly, recent events have served to

underscore the importance of the central bank’s role in preserving financial stability.
In this paper, I develop a model that speaks to the goals and methods of centralbank financial-stability policies. The first step is to define the fundamental market failure
that needs to be addressed. I begin with an unregulated banking system in which banks
raise financing from households to invest in projects. Banks can raise this financing in
the form of either short-term or long-term debt. Households are risk-neutral with respect
to fluctuations in their consumption, but derive additional monetary services from
holding any claim that is entirely riskless—with the notion being that riskless claims are
easy to value and hence facilitate exchange among households. I show that banks can
manufacture some amount of riskless private “money” of this sort, thereby lowering their
1

See, e.g., Goodfriend (2007) for a recent articulation of this view.

2

Tucker (2009) paraphrases Bagehot’s (1873) dictum as follows: “to avert panic, central banks should lend
early and freely (i.e., without limit) to solvent firms, against good collateral, and at ‘high rates’”.

1

financing costs. Moreover, they can do so in greater quantity by issuing short-term debt,
since it is harder for long-term bank debt to be made risk-free.
The role for financial-stability policy arises because the private choices of
unregulated banks with respect to money creation are not in general socially optimal.
When banks issue cheaper short-term debt, they capture its social benefits, namely the
monetary services it generates for households.

However, they do not always fully

internalize its costs. In an adverse “financial crisis” state of the world, the only way for
banks to honor their short-term debts is by selling assets at fire-sale prices. I show that in
equilibrium, the potential for such fire sales may give rise to a negative externality. Thus
left to their own devices, unregulated banks may engage in excessive money creation,
and may leave the financial system overly vulnerable to costly crises.
There are a variety of ways for a regulator to address this externality. One
possibility is the use of conventional monetary-policy tools, i.e. open-market operations.
To see how monetary policy might be of value, note that a crude approach to dealing with
the externality would be for the regulator to just impose a cap on each bank’s total money
creation. However, when the regulator is imperfectly informed about banks’ investment
opportunities, he will not know where to set the cap, since it is desirable for banks with
stronger investment opportunities to do more money creation.

In this setting, the

regulator can do better with a flexible “cap-and-trade” system in which banks are granted
tradable permits, each of which allows them to do some amount of money creation.3 The
market price of the permits reveals information about banks’ investment opportunities to
the regulator, who can then adjust the cap accordingly—when the price of the permits
3

Kashyap and Stein (2004) suggest using an analogous cap-and-trade approach to implement time-varying
bank capital requirements.

2

goes up, this suggests that banks in the aggregate have strong investment opportunities,
and so the regulator should loosen the cap by putting more permits into the system.
All of this may sound a bit like science fiction; we don’t observe cap-and-trade
regulation of banks in the real world. However if banks’ short-term liabilities are subject
to reserve requirements, it turns out that monetary policy can be used as a mechanism for
implementing the cap-and-trade approach. When the central bank injects reserves into
the system, it effectively increases the number of permits for private money creation.
And the nominal interest rate, which captures the cost of holding reserves, functions as
the permit price. Thus open-market operations that adjust aggregate reserves in response
to changes in short-term nominal rates can be use to achieve the cap-and-trade solution.
An interesting benchmark case is where reserve requirements apply to the moneylike liabilities of all lenders in the economy. This allows the central bank to precisely
control private money creation with monetary policy alone. While this case may roughly
capture the situation facing central banks at an earlier period in history, it is less realistic
as a description of modern advanced economies. Nowadays there are a range of shortterm financial-intermediary liabilities that are not subject to reserve requirements, and yet
may both: i) provide monetary services; and ii) create fire-sale externalities. For example,
Gorton and Metrick (2010), and Gorton (2010) argue that an important fraction of private
money creation now takes place entirely outside of the formal banking sector, via the
large volume of overnight repo finance in the “shadow banking” sector.
In this richer environment, monetary policy as it is conventionally practiced is
generally not sufficient to rein in excessive money creation. Continuing with the above
example, it may in addition be necessary to regulate the volume of repo activity in the

3

shadow-banking sector, either by expanding the reach of reserve requirements, or by
some other means. Thus the model helps to make clear the circumstances under which
monetary policy needs to be supplemented with other measures. Moreover, it suggests
that these other measures lie squarely in the central bank’s traditional domain, to the
extent that they are also targeted at the fundamental externality associated with excessive
private money creation. This is of interest in light of the ongoing debate over the
appropriate mix of central-bank tools for achieving financial stability.4
In addition to its normative implications, the model is also relevant from a
positive perspective. It provides a coherent account of how monetary policy “works”—
i.e., of how open-market operations lead to changes in bank lending and output—in an
environment that is arguably more realistic on some key dimensions than that found in
other theories. In contrast to the usual model, all prices are perfectly flexible. Moreover,
I do not need to assume that the central bank has monopoly control over all forms of
transactions media used by households. My model is unchanged if, for example, one
introduces a set of non-reservable money-market-funds that provide the same monetary
services to households as bank-created money.5 Indeed, I consider the limiting case
where the interest-rate spread between money and bonds is fixed and unresponsive to
their relative supplies. Monetary policy works in this case not by changing real interest
rates, but through a pure quantity effect: a loosening of policy allows banks to finance
themselves with more of the cheaper money, which encourages them to do more lending.
4

See, e.g. Adrian and Shin (2008), and Ashcraft, Garleanu and Pedersen (2010).

5

To be clear on the distinction: my model assumes that the central bank acts as a regulator, controlling
those forms of private money creation that lead to negative externalities—in particular, short-term bank
debt that finances risky long-term assets. However, it does not require the central bank to control other,
more benign forms of money creation, e.g., money-market-fund accounts backed by Treasury bills.

4

The ideas in this paper connect to several strands of previous work. First, the
basic model of fire sales that creates the rationale for policy intervention draws on
Shleifer and Vishny (1992, 1997).6 Second, the insight that banks create a valuable
transactions medium by issuing low-risk claims is formalized in Gorton and Pennacchi
(1990). Third, the notion that central bank reserves can be thought of as permits that
allow banks to do more of a particular kind of cheap financing appears in Stein’s (1998)
elaboration of the bank lending channel of monetary policy transmission.7
And finally, in order to focus on the financial-stability consequences of monetary
policy, it helps to set aside its effects on price stability. I do so by appealing to the fiscal
theory of the price level, according to which the price level is determined not by the
monetary base, but by total outstanding nominal government liabilities—i.e., by the sum
of Treasury securities and the monetary base.8 This enables open-market operations that
change the mix of Treasuries and bank reserves (while keeping their sum constant) to
have real effects on bank investment and financing behavior, even in a world where all
prices are perfectly flexible. However, I also discuss how the model’s conclusions carry
over to an alternative New-Keynesian setting with sticky prices, where price stability is
governed by a version of the “Taylor rule” (Taylor, 1993, 1999).
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II develops the basic model
of private money creation by banks. Section III compares banks’ financing choices to the
6

On fire sales, see also Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), Allen and Gale (2005), Brunnermeier and Pedersen
(2009), Fostel and Geanakoplos (2008), Geanakoplos (2010), Gromb and Vayanos (2002), Morris and Shin
(2004), Caballero and Simsek (2010), and Stein (2009).

7

For early work on the bank lending channel see also Bernanke and Blinder (1988, 1992), Kashyap, Stein
and Wilcox (1993), and Kashyap and Stein (2000).

8

The fiscal theory is developed in Leeper (1991), Sims (1994), Woodford (1995), and Cochrane (1998).
My own adaptation of the theory is particularly indebted to Cochrane’s exposition.

5

social planner’s solution, and clarifies the conditions under which banks engage in
excessive money creation. It also shows that a cap-and-trade approach to regulation can
be useful when the social planner has imperfect information. Section IV demonstrates
how the cap-and-trade approach can be implemented with open-market operations.
Section V explores a number of other complementary policy tools; these include liquidity
regulation, deposit insurance and a lender-of-last-resort function, as well as regulation of
the shadow-banking sector. Section VI discusses how the model differs from other
accounts of the monetary transmission mechanism. Conclusions are in Section VII.

II. A Model of Private Money Creation
The model features three sets of actors: households, banks, and “patient
investors”. I begin by describing each of these groups, and then turn to the optimization
problem faced by the banks.
A. Households
There are three dates, 0, 1, and 2. At time 0, households have an initial
endowment of the one good in the economy. They can either consume this endowment at
time 0, or invest some of it in financial assets and consume the proceeds from investment
at time 2. They have linear preferences over consumption at these two dates. In addition
to consumption, households also derive utility from monetary services.

The key

assumption is that monetary services can be provided by any privately-created claim on
time-2 consumption, so long as that claim is completely riskless.9 Thus the utility of a
representative household is given by:

9

This assumption is meant to capture, in a reduced-form way, the spirit of Gorton and Pennacchi (1990),
and Dang, Gorton and Holmstrom (2009). These papers argue that information-insensitive securities are an

6

U = C0 + β E (C2 ) + γ M ,

(1)

where M represents the household’s time-0 holdings of privately-created “money”.10 To
be clear on the notational convention, when a household has M units of money at time 0,
this means that it holds claims guaranteed to deliver M units of time-2 consumption.
Given their linear form, household preferences pin down two real rates. The first
is the (gross) real return on risky “bonds” that pay off at time 2, given by R B = 1/ β .
The second is the (gross) real return on riskless “money”, given by R M = 1/ ( β + γ ) ,
where β + γ < 1 . The latter follows from the observation that a household is always
indifferent between having: i) β + γ units of time-0 consumption; or ii) a riskless claim
that promises one unit of time-2 consumption, since such a claim delivers β of utility
from expected future consumption, along with an additional γ of utility in monetary
services. The bottom line is that because riskless money offers households a convenience
yield that risky bonds do not, in equilibrium it must have a lower rate of return.
The idea that money has a lower return in equilibrium than bonds is standard in
textbook models. But here, the return spread is fixed and independent of the quantities of
money and bonds, thanks to the linear preferences on the part of households. This feature

is not necessary for anything that follows, and is easily relaxed. However, it serves to
highlight a key novelty of my model: here changes in central bank policy work not by
altering the real rates on either type of claim, but rather by varying the proportions of
attractive medium of exchange, because they eliminate the potential for adverse selection between
transacting parties. Riskless securities are, by definition, information-insensitive.
10

In a similar formulation, Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2010) put the stock of Treasury
securities directly into the representative agent’s utility function. As one rationale for doing so, they cite
the “surety” of Treasuries—i.e., the fact that Treasuries are riskless. Like I do, they posit that surety has an
extra value above and beyond that which is captured in a standard asset-pricing model. See also Sidrauski
(1967) for an early model with money in the utility function.

7

each that banks use. In other words, looser policy encourages banks to lend more by
enabling them to tilt their capital structure towards cheap money financing, thereby
lowering their weighted average cost of funds.
B. Banks

Households cannot invest their time-0 endowments directly in physical projects,
because they do not have the monitoring expertise to do so. This investment must be
undertaken by banks, who in turn issue financial claims—in the form of either riskless
money or risky bonds—to households. There is a continuum of such banks, with total
mass of one. Each bank faces the following investment opportunities. If an amount I is
invested at time 0, and the good state prevails, which happens with probability p, total
output at time 2 is given by the concave function f ( I ) > I . If instead the bad state
prevails, total expected output at time 2 is λ I ≤ I , and there is a positive probability that
output collapses all the way to zero. In particular, in the bad state, output is either λI/q
with probability q, or zero with probability (1 – q).
At time 1, there is a public signal that reveals whether the good or bad state will
be realized at time 2. At time 1 it is also possible for a bank to sell any fraction of its
existing physical assets to a patient investor.11 If a fraction Δ of the assets are sold, total
proceeds to the bank are given by Δk λ I , where 0≤ k ≤ 1, and the remaining unsold assets
yield output at time 2 to the bank of (1 − Δ)λ I . Thus k is a measure of the discount to
expected value associated with a time-1 asset sale. A central feature of the model is that
k is endogenous, and depends on total asset sales by all banks in the economy. The
equilibrium determination of k will be discussed shortly.
11

Since households only consume at time 0 and time 2, they do not consume the proceeds of any time-1
asset sales until time 2. One can think of them as simply sitting on these proceeds in the interim.

8

Other than their access to investment opportunities, banks have no initial
endowments, and hence must raise the entire amount I externally. They can do so by
issuing either short-term (maturing at time 1) or long-term (maturing at time 2) debt
claims to households. Note that if they finance with long-term debt, no amount of this
debt can ever be riskless, since there is a positive probability of the assets yielding zero
output at time 2. By contrast, short-term debt can be made riskless, if not too much is
issued. This is because by forcing an asset sale upon seeing a bad signal at time 1, shortterm creditors can escape early with a sure value equal to the proceeds from the sale.
These assumptions are starker than they need to be. In a more general model
where the lowest possible value of output at time 2 is greater than zero, banks can issue
some riskless long-term debt—so there is no longer a one-to-one mapping between debt
maturity and the ability for debt to be made risk-free. Nevertheless, it will always be the
case that banks can create a larger quantity of riskless claims by issuing short-maturity
debt; the early-escape intuition still holds. Since there is a fixed premium on riskless
claims, banks will continue to be tempted to issue short-term debt in this more general
version of the model, and all the qualitative results below will continue to apply.
The model can also be extended so that monetary services are provided not only
by entirely riskless assets, but by any claims that are sufficiently low risk—i.e., by any
claims whose worst-case payoff is at least x cents on the dollar. What is critical is that
there still be a violation of the Modigliani-Miller (1958) conditions, so that as a bank
manufactures more of these low-risk money-like claims, it does not have to pay more for
its remaining long-term debt, which becomes riskier. This M-M violation is captured
here in the assumption that the return on non-monetary claims, R B , is a constant.

9

In any of these formulations, the key tradeoff is this: on the one hand, banks have
an incentive to issue some short-term debt, because more of this debt can be made lowrisk—and hence by virtue of its money-ness, represents a cheap form of finance.12 On
the other hand, what keeps short-term debt safe is the bank’s ability to sell assets in the
bad state. As will become clear below, these sales of existing assets can lead to social
costs that are not always fully internalized by individual banks when they pick their
capital structures. As a result, there may be excessive private money creation by banks.
Suppose that a bank raises a fraction m of its total investment of I by issuing
short-term debt. If this short-term debt can be made riskless, it will carry a rate of return
of R M , and the bank will owe its short-term creditors a repayment of mIR M ≡ M . Can
it meet this promise in the bad state by selling assets if necessary? From above, if it sells
a fraction Δ of its assets, total proceeds are Δk λ I , so we require that:
Δk λ I = mIR M , or Δ =

mR M
.
kλ

(2)

Since Δ ≤ 1 , there is an upper bound on private money creation given by:

m max =

kλ
.
RM

(3)

Thus the potential for asset sales makes it possible for a bank to create riskless private
money, by issuing short-term debt—so long as the amount issued is not too large.
Is it also the case that asset sales are an unavoidable consequence of money
creation? One might think that since holding on to assets is positive-NPV relative to
selling them at time 1, it might be possible for a bank to raise new funding at time 1 to

12

Other theories of short-term financing include Flannery (1986), Diamond (1991), and Stein (2005), who
stress its signaling properties, and Diamond and Rajan (2001) who argue that short-term debt is a valuable
disciplining device, particularly for financial intermediaries.

10

pay off the departing short-term creditors, and thereby avoid forced sales. However, if
one assumes that any new funding must be subordinated to existing long-term debt, such
new funding may be blockaded by a severe debt overhang problem (Myers (1977)), given
the low value of the assets in the bad state relative to the total face amount of alreadyissued debt.13 Thus under plausible circumstances, private money creation inevitably
leads to some amount of asset sales.14
Before moving on, it is worth fleshing out an issue of interpretation about the
banks in the model. In the real world, banks do not invest in physical projects directly,
but rather lend to firms who in turn do the project selection. Abstracting away from this
extra layer of activity, as I do here, is tantamount to assuming that there are no
contracting frictions between operating firms and banks, i.e. that firms can costlessly
pledge all of their output to the banks. This then raises the question of whether it is
appropriate to interpret what I label “banks” as really being financial intermediaries, as
opposed to operating firms that borrow directly from households in the securities market.
To create a meaningful distinction, suppose that any individual operating firm,
once funded, always has some probability of immediate (i.e., before time 1) idiosyncratic
failure, in which case it becomes public knowledge that its output will be zero in both the

13

In particular, denoting the face value of the existing long-term debt by B, it must be that M + B > I, in
order for the bank to have raised I at time 0 by issuing money and bonds. If the bank now wants to raise an
amount M to pay off the short-term creditors in the bad state at time 1, it must do so by issuing new claims
that are junior to the existing long-term debt. But given that they are junior, the value of these claims in the
bad state is only q(λI/q – B). For q large enough (certainly for q > λ) the value of the new claims is
necessarily less than M, so refinancing the short-term debt is impossible.
14

This line of argument leaves open the question of why the original long-term financing for the bank is in
the form of senior debt, as opposed to say equity, or some other junior security that allows for new
financing to come in on top of it. Following Hart and Moore (1995), it may be that this seniority of the
long-term debt represents a valuable pre-commitment in the more likely good state of the world. For
example, it may prevent managers from using assets in place as collateral for empire-building investments.
Thus, as in Hart and Moore, senior long-term debt is a double-edged sword: it serves to discipline wayward
managers in the good state, but forces underinvestment (here, in the form of asset sales) in the bad state.

11

good and bad states. This risk of failure makes it impossible for an operating firm to ever
issue riskless claims in any amount.

Banks, on the other hand, represent highly

diversified portfolios of such firm-level projects, and therefore their assets always have
positive expected value as of time 1, as assumed above. The diversification associated
with banks is thus a necessary condition for them to create riskless claims.15

C. Patient Investors
Patient investors (PIs) are another type of intermediary, and as such, any output
that they produce reverts to the household sector at time 2. As a group, PIs are endowed
with resources of W at time 1. For simplicity, I treat this endowment as exogenous for
now, but it can be endogenized by allowing the PIs to raise the W from the household
sector at time 0 by issuing risky long-term claims. In this case, the PIs choose an optimal
level of W at time 0 that equates the expected return on their time-1 investments to the
cost of capital R B .

Imposing this ex-ante breakeven condition does not affect the

qualitative results of the model, so I ignore it for the time being, and return to it later.
What is crucial is that when time 1 rolls around and the state of the world is
realized, W is fixed. Thus while it is fine to think of PIs as having full access to financial
markets at time 0, they cannot go back and raise more at time 1 once they know the state
of the world. In other words, W is an unconditional war chest, with the same amount
available to PIs in the good and bad states.
PIs can do one of two things with their resources at time 1. First, they can invest
in new, late-arriving real investment projects. Irrespective of the state of the world, an

15

Thus, as in other models of intermediation, both pooling (i.e., diversification) and tranching (i.e., the
issuance of properly structured senior securities) have roles to play in creating low-risk claims. See, e.g.,
Gorton and Pennacchi (1990), DeMarzo and Duffie (1999), and DeMarzo (2005). Diamond (1984) also
emphasizes the importance of diversification to the process of intermediation.

12

investment of K in such new projects at time 1 yields expected gross output of g(K) at
time 2, where g( ) is a concave function. Alternatively, PIs can absorb assets being sold
by banks at time 1. In the good state, there are no asset sales, so the PIs invest all of W in
new projects, yielding g(W). In the bad state, banks have to sell enough assets to repay
short-term creditors the M they have promised them. Thus in equilibrium, PIs spend M
on asset purchases, and invest only (W – M) in new projects, yielding g(W – M). For the
PIs to be willing to allocate their endowment in this way, it must be that the marginal
return on new projects is the same as the marginal return from buying existing assets
from banks. This is what pins down the fire-sale discount k. In particular, we have that:
1
= g ′(W − M )
k

(4)

Equation (4) makes clear the real costs of fire sales, and hence of short-term debt
financing by banks. The greater is M, and hence the more bank assets that the PIs have to
absorb in the bad state at time 1, the less they have left over for investment in new
projects. With scarce PI capital, the return on secondary-market arbitrage opportunities
(buying up fire-sold assets) also becomes the hurdle rate for new investment, a point
emphasized by Diamond and Rajan (2009a) and Shleifer and Vishny (2010).
For expositional purposes, I am treating the PIs and the banks as two distinct
categories of intermediaries. This is not necessary; one could alternatively merge them
into a single entity that has investment opportunities at both time 0 and time 1, that issues
some short-term debt at time 0, and that also holds liquidity W in reserve at time 0. This
re-interpretation of the model is innocuous, subject to one caveat: it is crucial that the
merged entities behave not as autarkic islands, but rather as price-takers who can transact
in the asset market at time 1. Thus even if a bank satisfies most of its departing creditors

13

by drawing down on its own stock of liquidity at time 1, it must continue to consider the
possibility of asset sales to another bank. This feature emerges naturally if we move
away from the knife-edge case where the scales of time-0 and time-1 investment are in
identical proportions across all banks. If so, those that have relatively bigger time-1 scale
will tend to stockpile more W relative to their short-term debts, and hence will be buyers
of assets from those who have bigger time-0 scale. My two-categories formulation can
be thought of as capturing an extreme case of this heterogeneity.
D. The Bank’s Optimization Problem
Let us now formulate the optimization problem for a bank that invests an amount
I and finances it with some fraction m ≤ m max of money. The bank’s expected net profits
at time 2 are given by:
Π = { pf ( I ) + (1 − p )λ I − IR B } + mI ( R B − R M ) − (1 − p) zmIR M
where I have defined z =

(5)

(1 − k )
as the net rate of return on fire-sold assets. (Note that
k

higher values of z correspond to larger fire-sale discounts, and z = 0 is the case where
there is no discount.)

The three terms in (5) are easily interpreted.

The first,

{ pf ( I ) + (1 − p)λ I − IR B } , is the NPV of investment assuming that it is entirely financed
at the higher bond-market rate—and hence that there is no need to ever sell assets. The
second term, mI ( R B − R M ) , is the financing cost savings associated with using a fraction
m of money in the capital structure. And the last term, (1 − p ) zmIR M , captures the
expected fire sale losses associated with this riskier short-term capital structure.
Each bank picks m and I to maximize (5), subject to the collateral constraint that
m ≤ m max =

kλ
. I assume that each bank treats the fire-sale discount k as a fixed
RM
14

constant—i.e., they do not internalize the incremental impact of their choices on the firesale outcome. By contrast, when I examine the social planner’s problem below, the key
difference will be that the planner takes into account the dependence of k on the capital
structure of the banks. The Lagrangian for the bank’s problem is thus:
LB = { pf ( I ) + (1 − p)λ I − IR B } + mI ( R B − R M ) − (1 − p) zmIR M − η (m −

kλ
)
RM

(6)

where η is the shadow value of the collateral constraint. Taking the first-order condition
with respect to m, we have:
I {( R B − R M ) − (1 − p ) zR M } = η

(7)

It follows that the collateral constraint binds, and the bank is at a corner, setting
m = m max , if ( R B − R M ) > (1 − p) zR M , i.e., if the equilibrium spread between bonds and
money is sufficiently large. Alternatively, if the spread is smaller in equilibrium (that is,
if ( R B − R M ) = (1 − p) zR M ), then the bank chooses an interior value of m, and η = 0 .
The first-order condition with respect to I yields:
pf ′( I ) + (1 − p )λ − R B + m( R B − R M ) − (1 − p ) zmR M = 0.

(8)

Using (7), we can re-write (8) as follows:
pf ′( I ) + (1 − p)λ − R B =

−η m
I

(9)

There are two ways that (9) can be satisfied. First, the bank can be at an interior
solution with respect to m, in which case η = 0 , and therefore pf ′( I ) + (1 − p)λ = R B .
Alternatively, the bank can be at a corner with m = m max , and η > 0 , in which case it
follows that pf ′( I ) + (1 − p)λ < R B . This reasoning leads to the following proposition.

15

Proposition 1: Define IB as the optimal level of investment for a bank that

finances itself exclusively in the long-term bond market: pf ′( I B ) + (1 − p)λ − R B = 0 .
The solution to the bank’s problem involves two regions. In the low-spread region (for
( R B − R M ) relatively small) the bank chooses m < m max and I*= IB. In the high-spread
region (for ( R B − R M ) relatively large) the bank chooses m = m max and I*> IB.

The point to take away from the proposition is that in the low-spread region, a
bank’s investment and financing choices are decoupled, while in the high-spread region
they are interdependent. This is because when m < m max , a bank’s ability to tap low-cost
money financing is not constrained by the amount of investment it does. By contrast, in
the high-spread region in which m = m max , a bank faces a binding collateral constraint—it
can only issue more money if it increases the quantity of physical assets backing its debts.
This is what ties investment and financing decisions together. If money financing is
cheap enough that banks want to do a lot of it, and they begin to bump up against the
collateral constraint, they will be induced to invest more so as to loosen the constraint.

III. Socially Excessive Money Creation: A Role for Regulation

The next step in the analysis is to identify the circumstances in which the process
of private money creation described above involves an externality—i.e., when the level
of money creation chosen by banks exceeds that preferred by a benevolent social planner.
A. The Social Planner’s Problem
Given that all output of the banks and the PIs ultimately accrues to the household
sector, the social planner seeks to maximize the utility of a representative household, as

16

given by equation (1).

It is easily shown that, disregarding constants, this utility,

expressed in units of time-2 consumption, is equivalent to:16
(RB − RM )
+
RM
pg (W ) + (1 − p ){g (W − M ) + M } − WR B

U = { pf ( I ) + (1 − p)λ I − IR B } + M

(10)

Comparing this to the bank’s expected profits in (5), we can see that the first two
terms coincide. The difference is in the latter three terms: the planner does not care about
expected fire sale losses per se, because these only represent a transfer from the banks to
the PIs. However, the planner does care about the net expected returns to investment by
the PIs, as captured by: pg (W ) + (1 − p){g (W − M ) + M } − WR B .
The planner faces the same collateral constraint as the banks, namely that
m ≤ m max =

kλ
. Denoting the shadow value of the constraint in this case by η P , and
RM

recalling that M = mIR M , the Lagrangian for the planner’s problem is given by:
LP = { pf ( I ) + (1 − p)λ I − IR B } + mI ( R B − R M ) +
pg (W ) + (1 − p ){g (W − mIR M ) + mIR M } − WR B − η P (m −

kλ
)
RM

(11)

In taking the first-order conditions for this problem, it is important to note that,
unlike an individual bank, the planner recognizes the dependence of k on the average
behavior of all banks—he understands that, as per equation (4) k =

1
.
g ′(W − mIR M )

Using this fact, the first-order condition with respect to m can be written as:

16

In particular, suppose households have a fixed time-0 endowment of Y, and that they invest I of this
endowment with the banks and W with the PIs at time 0. It follows that C0 = Y – I – W, and that C2 = f(I) +
g(W) with probability p, and C2 = λI + g(W – M) + M with probability (1 – p). The expression in (10) then
follows from also including the monetary services γM in the utility function, and multiplying time-0 values
by RB to put everything in common units of time-2 consumption.

17

I {( R B − R M ) − (1 − p ) zR M } = η P (1 −

g ′′(⋅)
λI )
( g ′(⋅)) 2

(12)

Similarly, the first-order condition with respect to I can be expressed as:
pf ′( I ) + (1 − p )λ − R B + m( R B − R M ) − (1 − p) zmR M = −η P

g ′′(⋅)
λ m.
( g ′(⋅)) 2

(13)

Comparing equations (7) and (12), and equations (8) and (13), we can see that the
bank’s private solution coincides exactly with the social planner’s solution in the lowspread region where ( R B − R M ) = (1 − p ) zR M , and where the collateral constraint is nonbinding, i.e. where η = η P = 0 . In this case, equation (13) reduces to equation (8),
meaning that the planner chooses the same level of I as the bank.
By contrast, in the high-spread region where the constraint binds, so that η P > 0 ,
the term on the right-hand side of (13), −η P

g ′′(⋅)
λ m , describes the wedge between the
( g ′(⋅)) 2

bank’s solution and the planner’s solution. Since g ′′(⋅) < 0 , this term is positive, which
implies that the marginal product of investment is higher in the social planner’s solution,
or alternatively that I is lower. In other words, in this region, the social planner would
like to restrain investment, and hence money creation, relative to the private outcome.
The following proposition summarizes the analysis.

Proposition 2: Denote the private and socially optimal values of investment I by

I* and I** respectively, and similarly for the private and socially optimal values of money
creation M. In the low-spread region, I* = I**, and M* = M**. In the high-spread region,
I* > I**, and M* > M**.

18

Thus banks may create a socially excessive amount of money, but this happens
only if the spread between money and bonds ( R B − R M ) is high enough. If the spread is
so low that any individual bank choose an interior value of money creation m < m max ,
there is no divergence between private and social incentives.

Example 1: Pick these functional forms and parameter values: f(I) = ψlog(I) + I,

g(K) = θlog(K), RB = 1.04; RM = 1.01; ψ = 3.5; θ = 150; λ = 1; W = 140; and p = 0.98.
For these values, the private optimum is in the high-spread region, and involves banks
choosing M*= 57.6 and I*=104.9 , with an associated rate of return on fire-sale assets of z
= 82.1% (k = 0.549). By contrast, in the social optimum, the planner chooses M**= 55.2
and I**= 97.7, leading to a rate of return on fire-sale assets of z = 77.0% (k = 0.565).

Figure 1 expands on Example 1, keeping all of the other parameter values the
same as above, but allowing RM to vary between 1.00 and 1.035, thereby causing the
bond-money spread ( R B − R M ) to vary between 50 and 400 basis points. As can be seen,
for low values of the spread, the private and socially optimal values of M and I coincide.
But as the spread widens, these values diverge further and further from one another.
B. Understanding the Nature of the Externality
At first glance, it may not be clear why fire sales create a divergence between
private and socially optimal outcomes. After all, the price impact of liquidations is a
pecuniary externality, and pecuniary externalities by themselves need not lead to
violations of the standard welfare theorems. The result in Proposition 2 is a specific case
of the generic inefficiency result in economies with incomplete markets (Geanakoplos

19

and Polemarchakis (1986), Greenwald and Stiglitz (1986)). Perhaps the closest analog is
Lorenzoni (2008), who also shows how there can be socially excessive borrowing in an
economy with financial frictions. In the current setting, the key friction is the presence of
a binding collateral constraint. This can be seen in the expression for the wedge between
the bank’s first-order condition and that of the planner; as noted above, this wedge is
given by: −η P

g ′′(⋅)
λ m . Thus when the collateral constraint does not bind, i.e. when
( g ′(⋅)) 2

η P = 0 , there is no wedge, and the private and social solutions coincide. By contrast,
when the collateral constraint binds, there is a wedge to the extent that

g ′′(⋅)
< 0 , i.e.,
( g ′(⋅)) 2

to the extent that an increase in the quantity of liquidations widens the fire-sale discount,
or equivalently, raises the marginal product of time-1 investment by the PIs.
The intuition behind this result can be understood as follows. When the constraint
does not bind, equation (7) tells us that, in deciding how much money to create, each
bank trades off the lower financing cost ( R B − R M ) associated with money against the
potential for greater fire-sales discounts (1 − p ) zR M . But according to equation (12), this
is exactly the same tradeoff that the planner faces in attempting to balance the marginal
value of monetary services to households against the marginal cost of underinvestment by
the PIs. Hence in this case, everything is well-internalized.
By contrast, when the constraint binds, and each bank is setting m = m max , an
incremental increase in money creation by any one bank has an added effect: by reducing
the equilibrium value of k, it effectively lowers the collateral value of all other bank’s
assets, thereby tightening their collateral constraints and impinging on their ability to
create money. Thus when any one bank creates an additional unit of money, and captures
20

the private benefit for doing so, the social benefit is less than that one unit of money,
since other banks can no longer produce as much M for a given level of I.17
The result that there is no externality in the low-spread region when m < m max is
dependent on the strong assumption that, when the PIs invest in real projects, they
capture all the social surplus associated with these projects. If one adds another financial
friction to the model, and makes this surplus only partially pledgeable, private money
creation is always socially excessive, irrespective of parameter values. In particular,
suppose that the social return to an investment project financed by a PI is still given by
g(K), but that only φg(K) can be pledged to the PI, with φ < 1. In this case, the
equilibrium determination of k in (4) is altered so that

1
= ϕ g ′(W − M ) . That is, a given
k

amount of underinvestment by the PIs is now associated with a smaller fire-sale discount.
Hence a bank’s aversion to fire sales no longer leads it to fully internalize the social costs
of underinvestment.
This imperfect-pledgeability variant of the model is briefly explored in the
appendix. Since it is possible to make many of the key normative points that follow
without introducing imperfect pledgeability, there is a certain minimalist appeal to
focusing on the perfect-pledgeability limit of φ = 1, as I do in the remainder of the text.
However, if one is interested in generating more realistic comparative statics along some
dimensions, the augmented version of the model that allows for φ < 1 may be better
suited to doing so. For example, I show in the appendix that the perfect-pledgeability
version of the model yields the somewhat counter-intuitive implication that the central
17

Think of two Banks A and B as factories that each have a technology for producing money out of
physical assets. When the collateral constraint binds, an incremental increase in money production by A is
equivalent to a form of pollution that gums up B’s production technology, since it reduces the amount of
money that B can manufacture out of a given stock of physical assets.

21

bank should lower nominal interest rates when the risk of a financial crisis is greater. If
instead we posit that φ < 1, this result can easily be reversed.
C. A “Cap-and-Trade” Approach to Bank Liquidity Regulation
The analysis thus far makes clear that in some cases banks will choose to create
more money than is socially optimal, thereby inflicting inefficiently high levels of fire
sales on the economy. This suggests a role for regulation. In the full-information case, in
which the regulator observes all the relevant parameters of the model, the social optimum
can be easily implemented with a cap on money creation: each bank can simply be
prohibited from issuing more short-term claims than the desired level of M**, which the
regulator can directly compute from equations (12) and (13).
However, if the regulator is imperfectly informed, it becomes more challenging to
set the cap appropriately.18 Consider a situation in which banks know the productivity of
their investment opportunities—i.e., they know what the function f(I) looks like—but the
regulator does not. As can be seen from equation (13), the value of I**, and hence the
value of M**, depends on the marginal product of investment f ′( I ) . Intuitively, it
makes sense to allow banks to create more cheap money financing when they have better
investment opportunities. Thus without knowledge of the value of f ′( I ) , it is impossible
for the regulator to target the socially optimal level of money creation with a simple cap.
One way for the regulator to generate the required information is through a
system of cap-and-trade. In particular, each bank can be granted permits that allow it to
issue some amount of money; by picking the aggregate quantity of permits, the regulator
can, as before, effectively target the total amount of money M in the economy.
18

Weitzman (1974) is the seminal paper on regulation in the face of parameter uncertainty.

22

Moreover, if the permits can be traded among banks, their market-clearing price P(M)
(per unit of money creation allowed) will equal the shadow value of the M-constraint to
the banks: P =

dΠ
1 d Π 19
. And conditional on the regulator knowing the other
=
dM mR M dI

parameters of the model, observing

dΠ
allows him to infer the value of f ′( I ) .
dI

It follows from this reasoning that the regulator can implement the M** solution
by making the permits tradable, and then targeting the appropriate price for these permits
by varying the available quantity. That is, the regulator adjusts the quantity of permits,
looking for a fixed point where the market-clearing price P(M) equals a target value
PT(M) that itself depends on the quantity of permits. To calculate this target value, recall
that, in the high-spread region when m = m max , the social optimum involves
−η P λ g ′′(⋅)
dΠ
g ′′(⋅)
1 dI
T
=
=
P
(
M
)
.
λ
.
m
= −η P
,
which
would
imply
setting
mR M dM
R M ( g ′(⋅)) 2
( g ′(⋅)) 2
dI

Using equation (12), we can substitute for η P to obtain the following result:

Proposition 3: A regulator who is imperfectly informed about the nature of bank

lending opportunities can implement the desired level of money M** with a system of
tradable permits for money creation. This involves adjusting the number of permits such
that their observed market-clearing price P(M) equals the following target price PT(M):
g ′′(⋅)
(R − R )
( g ′(⋅)) 2
(1
)
}{
}.
−
−
PT ( M ) = {
p
z
g ′′(⋅)
RM
(1 − λ I
)
( g ′(⋅)) 2
B

M

−λ I

19

(14)

Note that since the banks in the model are all identical, the volume of trade in the permits is zero.
Nevertheless, there is a unique equilibrium price, given by the common shadow value of the M-constraint.

23

To be clear on the implementation, suppose the regulator picks an initial trial
value of M. At this value, the regulator can calculate the target price of permits PT(M)
from (14), based on his knowledge of M and the other observable parameters of the
model—as can be seen from (14), he does not need to know anything about the value of
f ′( I ) to evaluate PT(M). If the market price of permits P(M) turns out to be higher than
PT(M), the regulator increases M, and vice-versa. The optimum M** is that value of M
where the target price in (14) coincides with the market price.

Example 2: Keep everything the same as in Example 1: f(I) = ψlog(I) + I, g(K) =

θlog(K), RB = 1.04; RM = 1.01; ψ = 3.5; θ = 150; λ = 1; W = 140; and p = 0.98. At the
social optimum of M** = 55.2, the price of permits is P = 0.0056. Now suppose there is
a positive productivity shock, and ψ rises to 4.0. If the cap is not adjusted, the price of
permits spikes to P = 0.0146. However, this price increase reveals the new value of ψ to
the regulator, who can increase the number of permits in the system, raising the quantity
of money in the system to its new optimal value of M** = 58.9. At this new optimum,
the price of permits is given by P = 0.0054.

The example suggests that, in the face of productivity shocks, it is optimal for the
regulator to actively lean against incipient changes in the price of permits. When a
positive shock pushes the price of permits up, the regulator should increase the supply of
permits, thereby driving their price back down. In fact, optimality in this setting requires
the supply response to be sufficiently strong that the equilibrium price of permits actually
falls slightly as productivity rises.

24

D. Relationship to Pigouvian Taxation
A handful of recent papers have suggested that a system of Pigouvian taxes might
be used to force banks to properly internalize any systemic externalities they create (e.g.,
Jeanne and Korinek (2010), Kocherlakota (2010), Perotti and Suarez (2010)). In the
current context, this would amount to imposing a tax τ on each unit of money created by
banks. A couple of points about such taxes are worth noting.
First, in the full-information case where the planner observes everything needed
to compute the socially-optimal level of money creation M**, this outcome can be
achieved equally well either with a regulatory cap on money creation, or by picking the
correct value of the tax τ. Indeed, given full information, the regulator can implement
M** simply by setting τ = PT(M**), i.e., the target price of permits given by (14),
calculated at the desired value of M**. So Pigouvian taxes can be used, but in this setting
they don’t add any value relative to more conventional quantity-based regulation.
Second, in the incomplete-information case where the planner does not know
enough to pick the right level of the cap, he also does not know enough to set the correct
value of the tax τ, since the optimal tax depends on M**. Thus an optimal system of
Pigouvian taxation still requires a mechanism to elicit the private information. So the
cap-and-trade design remains useful, for the same reasons as before. Indeed, one can
interpret the cap-and-trade approach as a “smart” system of Pigouvian taxation, since for
any individual bank the permit price is identical to the optimal tax on money creation.20

20

This is not to say that cap-and-trade is the unique way of implementing the optimal scheme. An
alternative would be an iterative form of taxation: the regulator announces a trial value of the tax rate. He
then observes the quantity of M chosen by banks, and uses this to infer the productivity of their investment
opportunities. With this data, he can then set the optimal tax rate. Thus rather than setting quantities and
learning from market prices, the regulator sets prices (taxes) and learns from market-determined quantities.

25

IV. Implementing the Cap-and-Trade Approach with Monetary Policy

The cap-and-trade approach to bank regulation outlined above may seem alien—it
does not have any direct counterpart in the real world. However, I now argue that the
cap-and-trade approach can be implemented with something that looks very much like
conventional monetary policy—with open-market operations in which the central bank
adjusts the quantity of nominal reserves in the banking system. In this setting, reserves
play the role of permits for money creation, given the existence of a binding reserve
requirement. And the nominal interest rate corresponds to the price of the permits.
In drawing this analogy, one wrinkle is that I have so far been working in an
entirely real economy. To introduce a central bank and a role for monetary policy, I need
to bring in a set of nominally-denominated government liabilities, and then pin down the
price level. To do so, I rely on the fiscal theory of the price level (Leeper (1991), Sims
(1994), Woodford (1995), Cochrane (1998)). In particular, the government is assumed to
issue two types of nominal liabilities: Treasury bills, and bank reserves. According to the
fiscal theory, the sum of these two nominal liabilities is what is relevant for determining
the price level. And given the sum, the composition of these liabilities is a real variable,
since only reserves can be used to satisfy reserve requirements. Thus holding fixed total
government liabilities, when there are more reserves, banks are able to create more
money, i.e. to finance a greater fraction of their operations with short-term debt. Hence
reserves correspond exactly to the concept of regulatory permits in the real model.21 By
contrast, if Treasury bills could also be used to satisfy reserve requirements, there would
be nothing special about reserves, and open-market operations would have no effect.

21

Since the price level is pinned down by fiscal considerations, the goal of achieving price stability cannot
be the central bank’s job. Rather, the central bank is left with just the role of financial-stability regulator.

26

To operationalize the fiscal theory, I assume that the government anticipates real
tax revenues of T at time 2, and that the value of T is exogenously fixed. At time 0, the
government has total nominal liabilities outstanding of l0, composed of Treasury bills b0,
and bank reserves r0. Thus l0 = b0 + r0. The time-0 price level Λ0, is then determined by
the requirement that the real value of the government’s obligations must equal the present
value of its future tax revenues:

l0
T
= M
Λ0 R

(15)

Two points are worth noting here. First, the relevant real discount rate for the
government is R M , given that its obligations are riskless in this setting. In other words,
when households own Treasury bills, they derive the same monetary services from these
bills that they do from privately-created bank money, so the return on Treasury bills is
equal to R M . Second, in order to keep real tax revenues fixed at T as the composition of
government liabilities varies, I assume that the government rebates any seignorage
revenues derived from the issuance of non-interest bearing reserves in a lump-sum
fashion to the household sector.22
Again, the key distinction between Treasury bills and bank reserves is that only
the latter can be used to satisfy reserve requirements. In particular, any bank wishing to
issue a dollar of short-term debt must hold ρ dollars of reserves, where ρ is the fractional
reserve requirement. Hence the net amount of short-term debt financing made possible

22

Without this assumption, the composition of government liabilities would influence real tax revenues. In
particular, as the government issued more non-interest-bearing reserves and fewer interest-bearing bills, its
effective tax revenues would go up through a seignorage mechanism. The assumption can be loosely
motivated by the idea that the government has some kind of social compact with its citizens that prevent it
from letting total tax revenues—no matter how they are raised—go above T.

27

by one dollar of reserves is (1 – ρ)/ρ dollars.23 It follows that in real terms, the total
amount of M that can be created by the banking sector is now given by:

M=

(1 − ρ )r0 (1 − ρ )T r0
=
ρΛ 0
ρ R M l0

(16)

This expression makes it clear that the ratio of r0 to l0—namely, the composition
of the government’s nominal liabilities—is a real variable, and is the means by which the
government can target total real money creation by banks. An open-market operation
that increases the supply of reserves relative to T-bills is isomorphic to an increase in the
regulatory limit on M in the all-real cap-and-trade version of the model.
Moreover, as noted above, the analog to the price of permits is the current setting
is the nominal interest rate. This is because when banks want to create money, they are
forced to hold non-interest bearing reserves, and the nominal interest rate represents the
opportunity cost of doing so.
Denoting the nominal interest rate by i, one can express the time-2 price level as:
Λ2 =

Λ 0 (1 + i )
.
RM

(17)

Now suppose a bank wishes to increase its net issuance of real M by one unit at
time 0, thereby increasing its real time-2 profits by

dΠ
. To do so, it must increase net
dM

nominal M by Λ0 units, which requires it to hold ρΛ0/(1 – ρ) of nominal reserves. To
finance these reserve holdings, it must pay ρiΛ0/(1 – ρ) of nominal financing costs at time
2. The real time-2 value of these financing costs is therefore ρiΛ0/(1 – ρ)Λ2 or, using

As an example, suppose ρ = .10. In this case, with one dollar of reserves, a bank is allowed to raise 10
dollars of short-term debt. But given that it must hold the reserves as an asset, only 9 of these dollars
represent net financing that is available to fund new loans.
23

28

equation (17), ρiRM/(1 – ρ)(1 + i). For a bank to be indifferent, it must be that these real
costs are equal to

dΠ
. Thus it follows that the nominal interest rate is given by:
dM

i
(1 − ρ ) d Π
=
.
(1 + i ) ρ R M dM

(18)

Example 3: Keep everything the same as in Example 1: f(I) = ψlog(I) + I, g(K) =

θlog(K), RB = 1.04; RM = 1.01; ψ = 3.5; θ = 150; λ = 1; W = 140; and p = 0.98. At the
social optimum of M** = 55.2, we had that

dΠ
= 0.0056. With a reserve requirement
dM

of ρ = 0.10, if this optimum is implemented with monetary policy, the nominal interest
rate is given by i = 5.25%. (Since the nominal rate exceeds the riskless real rate of 1.0%,
the implied rate of inflation between time 0 and time 2 is 4.25%.) If we keep all else the
same but set RM = 1.02, the new optimum involves M** = 52.5, which is implemented
with a nominal rate of i = 1.81%. Intuitively, as the spread between money and bonds
shrinks, banks have a weaker desire to create private money. So the nominal interest rate,
which is equivalent to the value of a permit for money creation, falls as well.

V. Other Policy Tools

A. Liquidity Regulation
I have thus far taken the time-0 liquidity stockpile W of the PIs to be exogenous.
This does not affect any of the conclusions in the foregoing analysis regarding the
socially optimal quantity of money, since these conclusions hold for any value of W such
that there is a scarcity of PI resources in the bad state at time 1. However, I now pose
two related questions about W. First, if the PIs are allowed to choose W optimally, what
29

value will they pick? And second, if the social planner is allowed to choose W, will his
choice differ from that of the PIs? In other words, is there a case for regulation of
liquidity holdings, in addition to regulation of money creation?
The privately-optimal choice of W, denoted by W*, is determined by the
following first-order condition:
pg ′(W ) + (1 − p) g ′(W − M ) = R B

(19)

The logic is straightforward. PIs raise W at time 0, paying a gross interest rate of R B .
With probability p, the good state ensues, and the marginal return on their investment is
g ′(W ) . With probability (1 – p), the bad state ensues, and the marginal return on
investment is g ′(W − M ) . One interesting feature of this solution is that the more
unlikely the bad state, the lower is the equilibrium value of W*, and hence the deeper is
the fire-sale discount when the bad state does in fact occur.
To solve for the socially optimal value of W, denoted by W**, we can return to
the planner’s Lagrangian from equation (11), and take the first-order condition with
respect to W, which yields:
pg ′(W ) + (1 − p) g ′(W − M ) = R B + η P

λ g ′′(⋅)

(20)

R ( g ′(⋅)) 2
M

Comparing (19) and (20), we can see that the private and social solutions once
again diverge only when η P > 0 , i.e., when the collateral constraint binds. Moreover,
when this does happen, the additional term in (20), η P

λ g ′′(⋅)
R ( g ′(⋅)) 2
M

, is negative, meaning

that the planner prefers a lower marginal product of W, or alternatively, a higher level of
W. Thus the optimal regulation takes the form of a floor on liquidity holdings by the PIs.

30

This result connects to Farhi, Golosov and Tsyvinski (2007), who also develop a
rationale for liquidity regulation. However, the mechanism in FGT is very different.
Following Diamond and Dybvig (1983), Jacklin (1987), Bhattacharya and Gale (1987),
and Allen and Gale (2004), they model banks as providers of insurance to consumers
with unpredictable liquidity needs. As this literature has shown, incentive-compatible
insurance can be frustrated by the existence of securities markets, since “late” consumers
may be tempted to mimic “early” consumers by withdrawing their money from the bank
prematurely, and reinvesting it at the market rate of interest. The insight of FGT is that
liquidity requirements can be used to depress the security-market rate, thereby reducing
the temptation for late consumers to withdraw early. By contrast, in my model, real rates
are pinned down by the linear preferences of households, and thus unaffected by liquidity
requirements. Instead, the rationale for a liquidity requirement reflects a wholly different
motivation, namely a desire to lessen the equilibrium fire-sale discount.
While liquidity requirements arise naturally in my framework, there are a couple
of caveats. First, the liquidity requirements envisioned by the theory may be difficult to
enforce. To implement them efficiently, they have to be imposed on PIs at time 0, in
proportion to the scale of each PI’s time-1 investment opportunities.24 But a regulator
may not know at time 0 what the distribution of time-1 projects across PIs looks like. By
contrast, the monetary regulation described above does not face this enforcement
problem, since short-term debt issuance is contemporaneously observable, at time 0.
Second, in the limited set of numerical experiments that I have tried, the planner’s
utility gain from imposing liquidity regulation turns out to be much smaller than that
24

Alternatively, in the interpretation of the model where the banks and the PIs are merged into a single
entity, optimal liquidity regulation would involve requiring larger holdings of W by those entities with
larger-scale investment opportunities at time 1. Again, this information may be hard to ascertain at time 0.

31

from regulating the creation of private money. Combined with the enforcement problem
just above, this helps explain why the primary focus of the analysis in this paper has been
on the latter. The following example is illustrative of the magnitudes that arise.

Example 4: Keep everything the same as in Example 1, except allow W to be

chosen endogenously: f(I) = ψlog(I) + I, g(K) = θlog(K), RB = 1.04; RM = 1.01; ψ = 3.5; θ
= 150; λ = 1; and p = 0.98. The PIs’ optimal choice of W is given by W* = 146.31,
whereas the social optimum is given by W** = 147.04. Compared to a benchmark case
with no regulation at all, the following regulatory configurations produce these increases
in the planner’s utility: i) regulation only of money creation: +0.0148; ii) regulation of
both money creation and liquidity: +0.0167; and iii) regulation of just liquidity: +0.0014.
Thus in this example, the benefit of liquidity regulation is approximately one-tenth that
which comes from regulating money creation.

B. Deposit Insurance and Lender of Last Resort
In the baseline version of the model, the only way for banks to pay off their shortterm creditors in the crisis state is by fire-selling their assets, and the only role for policy
is to control the amount of short-term debt that is created ex ante. An alternative approach
would be for the government to try to stem the amount of socially costly fire sales that
occur for a given amount of short-term bank debt. This could be done either with either
deposit insurance, or a lender-of-last resort policy.
Unlike in the classic framework of Diamond and Dybvig (1983), such policies are
not costless to the government in equilibrium, because here, in the crisis state, there is a

32

probability (1 – q) that the banks’ assets will turn out to be entirely worthless. So there is
always a chance that taxpayers will be left on the hook. If taxpayer-financed bailouts
create deadweight losses, the overall optimum set of policies may have the realistic
feature that: i) some fraction of banks’ money-like claims are insured by the government;
ii) the remainder are uninsured, and hence still subject to fire-sale risk; and iii) as before,
it makes sense for the regulator to control the total quantity of bank-created money.
To see this explicitly, consider a case where the deadweight costs of taxation take
the following form: there is no cost to raising any amount less than L to pay for a bailout,
but it is infinitely costly to raise anything more than L.

It follows that the amount of

government-insured money that can be created, MI, is bounded by MI ≤ L, and it will in
fact always be optimal to set MI = L. Note too that if the government offers insurance on
some amount of bank deposits, it will have to put in place a rule to prevent banks from
selling all of their assets in a crisis state to satisfy the demands of uninsured depositors;
otherwise banks will create just as much uninsured money as before, and the deposit
insurer will always be left holding an empty shell in the crisis state. A simple version of
such a rule—which can effectively be thought of as a ban on fraudulent conveyance—is a
requirement that the fraction of assets sold in a crisis, Δ, not exceed the relative
proportion of uninsured deposits. Thus the requirement that goes along with insurance is
that Δ ≤

MU
, where MU is the quantity of uninsured money created by the bank.
MU + M I

It follows that the total amount of money—insured plus uninsured—that can be
created must satisfy the same collateral constraint as before: M = M U + M I ≤ k λ I . The
only thing that is changed is the determination of the fire-sale discount k. Since insured

33

depositors are protected and do not need to demand repayment at time 1, only uninsured
deposits give rise to fire sales. Thus k is now given by:
1
= g ′(W − M U ) = g ′(W − M + L)
k

(21)

In other words, the outcome in a world with limited deposit insurance is
equivalent to that in a world with no deposit insurance, but where the wealth of the PIs is
augmented from W to (W + L). A given amount of total money creation now causes less
fire-sale damage, and as a result, more money can be created in equilibrium.
Equation (21) also makes clear the close connection between deposit insurance
and a lender-of-last-resort function. Given that the government can never put itself in a
position to lose more than L, an alternative to deposit insurance would be for it to leave
all deposits uninsured, but to commit to step in and invest L alongside the PIs in the event
of a fire sale. This would have exactly the same effect—it would reduce the fire-sale
discount per equation (21), and thereby allow for more total money creation.
The bottom line is that one can add deposit insurance to the model in such a way
as to make it more realistic, without changing any of its qualitative properties. The
optimal policy mix will involve limited use of deposit insurance or equivalently, limited
use of a lender-of-last-resort function.

Banks will continue to issue uninsured money-

like claims alongside insured deposits, and hence will continue to create some degree of
fire-sale risk. Thus as before, there will continue to be a motive for regulating the
creation of these uninsured short-term claims.
C. Regulating the Shadow Banking System
The model also assumes that all private money is manufactured by commercial
banks that are subject to reserve requirements. Hence private money creation can be

34

completely controlled by conventional open-market operations. While this may be an
adequate representation of an earlier period in history, it omits an important form of
money creation in the modern economy. As Gorton and Metrick (2010) and Gorton
(2010) emphasize, private money—in precisely the sense meant here—is also created by
the unregulated shadow banking system, via the large volume of repo finance that is
collateralized by securitized loan pools of one form or another.
This observation suggests that commercial banks and shadow banks should be
regulated in a symmetric fashion. According to the logic of the model, the ideal way to
do this would be to broaden the reach of reserve requirements, so that the cap-and-trade
regime covers all the short-term liabilities of both commercial banks and shadow banks.
If, due to some political constraint outside the model, the liabilities of shadow banks
cannot be subjected to reserve requirements, an alternative approach might be to impose a
regime of “haircut” requirements on their investments. In particular, the central bank
could specify the maximum fraction of private money—that is, repo financing—that
could be issued against a given amount of collateralizable assets. Moreover, just as the
optimal quantity of bank-created money M** varies with economic conditions, optimal
haircuts would respond to these conditions as well. The appendix provides a brief
analysis of haircut regulation. It turns out that while such regulation is indeed useful, it is
strictly less efficient than direct control of the quantity of privately-created money via,
e.g., the sort of reserve-requirements-based mechanism outlined above.
D. Government Debt Maturity
As we have seen, the magnitude of the externality associated with private money
creation is related to the bond-money spread ( R B − R M ) : when the spread widens, the

35

wedge between the social and private returns to money creation goes up. Thus an
alternative way to moderate the externality would be to compress the spread. In the
current version of the model this is impossible—given the assumption of linear
preferences, the spread is exogenously fixed and insensitive to asset supplies.
However, if one changes the model so that the monetary services enjoyed by
households are a concave function of the supply of money—i.e., there is diminishing
marginal utility of money—then it becomes possible for the government to act on the
bond-money spread. For example, since short-term Treasury bills are riskless, they can
provide the same monetary services as short-term bank debt. Hence an increase in the
supply of Treasury bills will, in this modified setting, reduce the bond-money spread.
One appeal of dealing with the externality in this fashion is that unlike some other
regulatory approaches, it does not invite evasion. For example, if the scope of reserve
requirements were broadened, private actors might try to get around limits on their ability
to use short-term debt by using various forms of hidden borrowing, e.g., by embedding
the borrowing in an opaque derivative contract. In contrast, when the relative cost of
short-term borrowing goes up—because the market has been saturated with riskless
short-term claims—the incentive to create private money is blunted.
In Greenwood, Hanson and Stein (2010), we use this observation as the point of
departure for a normative theory of government debt maturity.

We argue that the

government should choose a shorter debt maturity—and in particular, should issue more
riskless T-bills—than it otherwise might, in an active effort to crowd out the short-term
debt of financial intermediaries. The argument is based on a principle of comparative
advantage. On the one hand, tilting its issuance towards short-term debt is not without

36

cost for the government, since with stochastic interest rates this increases the variability
of future interest payments and ultimately disrupts efforts to smooth tax rates over time.
On the other hand, short-term government debt, unlike the short-term debt of financial
intermediaries, does not create fire-sale risk. To the extent that the fire-sale externality is
more costly to the economy at the margin than the disruption of tax smoothing, it can
make sense for the government to take on a bigger role in providing the short-term
riskless claims that the economy demands.25
Of course, precisely because of tax-smoothing considerations, it will not generally
be optimal for the government to tilt so strongly towards short-maturity issuance as to
entirely eliminate the bond-money spread in equilibrium. Rather, optimal behavior by
the government on this dimension will typically involve leaving the spread only partially
compressed. So while government debt maturity may be one helpful tool in addressing
the problem of excessive private money creation, it is not a panacea, and it is unlikely to
eliminate the usefulness of the other tools discussed above.
E. Interest on Reserves
I have thus far assumed that the price level is determined outside the central bank,
by the fiscal-theory mechanism. While this is a convenient modeling device, it is not an
essential piece of the story. An alternative approach, in the New-Keynesian spirit, would
be to model prices as being anchored by the central bank’s adherence to a “Taylor rule”
(Taylor 1993, 1999) which dictates its path for the short-term nominal rate.

25

To the extent that monetary services reflect an ability to transact between time 0 and 1 without threat of
adverse selection, the relevant notion of risk is short-horizon risk—i.e., the potential for loss between time
0 and time 1. While long-term Treasuries offer certain ultimate payoffs, they are not riskless over short
horizons if interest rates are stochastic. Hence they can create adverse-selection problems in trade if one
party to a transaction has a better ability to forecast changes in rates than the other.

37

However, this raises a potential problem of there being more objectives than tools.
If the short-term nominal rate must satisfy a Taylor rule in order to maintain price
stability, how can it also satisfy equation (18), which specifies its optimal value from a
regulatory perspective? One way out of this box is via the payment of interest on
reserves (IOR), which many central banks around the world have been doing for years,
and which the U.S. Federal Reserve first took up in October of 2008. As Goodfriend
(2002) points out, with IOR, there are two distinct methods for raising short-term
nominal rates: either by increasing the interest paid on reserve balances, or by draining
reserves from the system, thereby increasing their scarcity value. These methods are not
equivalent, since only the latter scarcity-based approach increases the effective “reserves
tax” paid by banks, which has been the focus of the analysis above.
Building on this observation, Kashyap and Stein (2011) argue that IOR allows the
central bank to simultaneously accomplish two goals: i) set the short-term nominal rate in
accordance with a Taylor rule; and ii) implement an optimal regulatory scheme of the sort
described in this paper. They note that in a regime with IOR, one can decompose the
nominal federal funds rate f as follows:

f = rIOR + ySVR

(22)

where rIOR is the level of interest paid on reserves, and the ySVR is the quantity-mediated
scarcity value of reserves. The latter term corresponds exactly to the variable i in
equation (18), as it reflects the opportunity cost to a bank of holding reserves.
For example, suppose that an analysis of the sort suggested by (18) yields the
conclusion that, for regulatory purposes, the optimal value of i (or equivalently, of ySVR )
is 2.0%, while an application of the Taylor rule implies that the optimal value of f is

38

5.0%. In this case, the central bank should set rIOR to 3.0%, and then adjust the quantity
of reserves in the system until f equilibrates at 5.0%.

VI. A Distinctive Account of the Monetary Transmission Mechanism

Much of the discussion above has focused on the normative implications of the
model.

But the model is also of interest as a positive account of the monetary

transmission mechanism. Three of its properties are particularly noteworthy in this
regard. First, monetary policy has real effects even though all prices are perfectly
flexible. Second, monetary policy works entirely through a quantitative effect on bank
lending. That is, the real rates on both money and bonds are fixed and independent of the
stance of policy; an easing of policy impacts bank lending only because it enables banks
to use more of the former, relatively cheaper, funding source. This is a pure version of
the bank lending channel, and as such helps to explain how monetary policy can have
important real effects even when it does not move long-term open-market interest rates
by much, or when firm investment is not very responsive to such open-market rates.
Third, the model has the property that the central bank does not lose control of
monetary policy when other, non-reservable forms of money are introduced. Consider
what happens if there is, in addition to the risky production technology already in the
model, a safe storage technology. Claims to this technology are riskless, and hence
circulate as an alternative transactions medium alongside bank-created money, bearing
the same gross interest rate of R M . They are also not subject to reserve requirements.
(To be more concrete, one can interpret these claims as money-market-fund deposits
backed by Treasury bills.) Even if the volume of these claims is large, nothing in the

39

model changes. All real rates are already pinned down by the linearity of household
preferences, and are therefore unaffected by the total quantity of money in circulation.
The distinctive feature of the model in this regard is that the central bank’s ability
to influence real outcomes derives not from its control over the total quantity of
transactions-facilitating claims available to households, but rather from the fact that it is
the unique provider of permits that allow banks to issue short-term debt and hence
finance themselves more cheaply. Simply put, only central-bank-provided reserves can
be used to satisfy the reserve requirements that constrain short-term debt issuance by
banks. This “permits” aspect of monetary policy is also emphasized in Stein (1998),
though the model in that paper differs significantly on other dimensions.26

VII. Conclusions

The basic message of this paper can be summarized as follows. Banks and other
financial intermediaries like to fund themselves with short-term debt. With sufficient
collateral backing it, this short-term debt can be made into riskless money, which,
because of the transactions services it generates, represents a cheap source of finance for
banks. While society benefits from this private money creation, banks’ private incentives
lead them to overdo it, since they do not fully internalize the fire-sales costs that are a
byproduct of their maturity-transformation activities. The externality associated with
excessive private money creation provides the fundamental rationale for financialstability regulation, and arguably, for the existence of central banks.

26

In Stein (1998), reserves are effectively permits that allow banks to access the deposit insurance fund.
Since banks face an adverse-selection problem in raising uninsured finance, an increase in the quantity of
reserves can move lending closer to the first-best level.

40

In a sufficiently simple institutional environment, the externality can be addressed
with conventional monetary policy, complemented by either deposit insurance or a
lender-of-last-resort facility. Indeed, this is one interpretation of what central banks have
done for much of their history. In a more realistic modern-day setting, where a substantial
shadow-banking sector exists alongside traditional commercial banks, other tools, such as
expanded reserve requirements, or haircut regulation, may also be necessary. If so,
central banks should not be reluctant to deploy these tools—to the extent that they do so
in an effort to contain excessive private money creation, they can be said to be pursuing
one of their traditional core missions in a more comprehensive and effective manner.

41

Appendix

A. A Variant of the Model With Imperfect Pledgeability
As noted in the text, the result that there is no externality in the low-M region
when m < m max is dependent on the assumption that, when the PIs invest in real projects,
they capture all the social surplus associated with these projects. An alternative approach
is to assume that the social return to a project financed by a PI is still given by g(K), but
that only φg(K) can be pledged to the PI. In this case, the equilibrium determination of k
in (4) is altered so that

1
= ϕ g ′(W − M ) .
k

Equation (7), the bank’s first-order condition with respect to m, still holds as
stated. If the collateral constraint is not binding, so that η = 0 , this condition reduces to:
( R B − R M ) − (1 − p) zR M = 0.

(A.1)

However, the planner’s first-order condition for m in (12) is now modified, since we can
no longer substitute

1
= g ′(W − M ) . Instead, if η P = 0 this condition can be written as:
k

( R B − R M ) − (1 − p ) zR M − (1 − p )(1 − ϕ ) g ′(W − M ) R M = 0

(A.2)

Thus even in the low-spread region where m < m max and I = IB, there is now a
wedge of (1 − p )(1 − ϕ ) g ′(W − M ) R M

between the private and social first-order

conditions. This implies that the optimal price of permits will now be strictly positive in
this region. Alternatively, in the monetary-policy implementation of the optimum, the
nominal interest rate will now be strictly positive for all parameter values.
Another noteworthy feature of this version of the model is that it implies different
comparative statics than the baseline model with respect to the ex ante probability of a
financial crisis, as captured by (1 – p). Here, if we are in the low-spread region, an
42

increase in (1 – p) increases the wedge, and hence raises the optimal value of the permit
price P, or equivalently, the nominal interest rate. By contrast, in the baseline model with
perfect pledgeability, equation (14) says that an increase in (1 – p) lowers the desired
permit price. Intuitively, the difference is that in the baseline version of the model, banks
do a better job of internalizing the social costs of fire sales. Indeed, when the risk of a
fire sale goes up, banks become sufficiently more cautious about using short-term debt
that they become better aligned with the social planner, which in turn implies that there is
less need to rein them in by raising permit prices/interest rates. However, with imperfect
pledgeability, there is an effect in the opposite direction, since banks tend to underweight
the social costs of fire sales even when the collateral constraint is not binding.
B. Haircut Regulation

To see the effects of haircut regulation most transparently, consider the imperfectpledgeability version of the model described just above. Suppose that we are in a
“shadow-banking” economy where all else is the same as before, with one exception: it is
impossible to regulate the absolute quantity of privately-created money M directly—say
because shadow banks cannot be subjected to reserve requirements—but it is possible to
impose a cap mcap < m max on the fraction of investment that is money-financed.
It turns out that this form of haircut regulation, while useful, is a second-best
means of intervention as compared to controlling the aggregate quantity of money. This
is because the social costs of fire sales are a function of M, so this is the item that the
planner would ideally like to control. And trying to do this indirectly, by picking a value
of mcap , will now have the undesired side-effect of encouraging shadow banks to raise
their investment above the optimal level of I B . (I am assuming that we are in the low-

43

spread region of the parameter space, so that absent haircut regulation, shadow banks
would choose I = I B .) Intuitively, haircut regulation always gives shadow banks the
option to create more cheap money financing at the margin, so long as they are willing to
raise the level of investment.
This can be seen formally by considering the first-order condition with respect to
I for a shadow bank facing binding haircut regulation:
dΠ
= pf ′( I ) + (1 − p)λ − R B + mcap {( R B − R M ) − (1 − p) zR M } = 0
dI

(A.3)

It follows that it is impossible to use haircut regulation to implement the social
optimum described in (A.2). For if (A.2) is satisfied with I = IB, it must be that
( R B − R M ) − (1 − p ) zR M = (1 − p )(1 − ϕ ) g ′(W − M ) R M > 0 .

But then for (A.3) to be

satisfied, i.e., for the shadow bank to be optimizing given the haircut constraint, we
require pf ′( I ) + (1 − p)λ − R B < 0 , which means that I > IB.

44

References

Adrian, Tobias, and Hyun Song Shin, 2008, Financial intermediaries, financial stability
and monetary policy, in Maintaining Stability in a Changing Financial System,
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 287-334.
Allen, Franklin, and Douglas Gale, 2004, Financial intermediaries and markets,
Econometrica 72, 1023-1061.
Allen, Franklin, and Douglas Gale, 2005, From cash-in-the-market pricing to financial
fragility, Journal of the European Economic Association 3, 535-546.
Ashcraft, Adam, Nicolae Garleanu, and Lasse Heje Pedersen, 2010, Two monetary tools:
Interest rates and haircuts, working paper.
Bagehot, Walter, 1873, Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market (Charles
Scribner’s Sons, New York).
Bernanke, Ben S., and Alan Blinder, 1988, Credit, money, and aggregate demand,
American Economic Review 78, 435-39.
Bernanke, Ben S., and Alan Blinder, 1992, The federal funds rate and the channels of
monetary transmission, American Economic Review 82, 901-21.
Bhattacharya, Sudipto, and Douglas Gale, 1987, Preference shocks, liquidity and central
bank policy, in New Approaches to Monetary Economics, edited by W. Barnett
and K. Singleton (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge).
Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Lasse H. Pedersen, 2009, Market liquidity and funding
liquidity, Review of Financial Studies, 22, 2201-2238.
Caballero, Ricardo J., and Alp Simsek, 2010, Fire sales in a model of complexity,
working paper.
Cochrane, John, 1998, A frictionless model of U.S. inflation, NBER Macro Annual 13,
323-384.
Dang, Tri Vi, Gary B. Gorton, and Bengt Holmstrom, 2009, Opacity and the optimality
of debt for liquidity provision, working paper.
DeMarzo, Peter M., 2005, The pooling and tranching of securities: A model of informed
intermediation, Review of Financial Studies 18, 1-35.
DeMarzo, Peter M., and Darrell Duffie, 1999, A liquidity-based model of security design,
Econometrica 67, 65-99.

45

Diamond, Douglas W., 1984, Financial intermediation and delegated monitoring, Review
of Economic Studies 51, 393-414.
Diamond, Douglas W., 1991, Debt maturity structure and liquidity risk, Quarterly
Journal of Economics 106, 709-737.
Diamond, Douglas W. and Philip Dybvig, 1983, Bank runs, deposit insurance and
liquidity, Journal of Political Economy 91, 401-419.
Diamond, Douglas W., and Raghuram G. Rajan, 2001, Liquidity risk, liquidity creation,
and financial fragility: A theory of banking, Journal of Political Economy 109,
287-327.
Diamond, Douglas W., and Raghuram G. Rajan, 2009a, Fear of fire sales and the credit
freeze, working paper.
Diamond, Douglas W., and Raghuram G. Rajan, 2009b, Illiquidity and interest rate
policy, working paper.
Farhi, Emmanuel, Mikhail Golosov, and Aleh Tsyvinski, 2009, A theory of liquidity and
regulation of financial intermediation, Review of Economic Studies 76, 973-992.
Flannery, Mark J., 1986, Asymmetric information and risky debt maturity choice,
Journal of Finance 41, 19-37.
Fostel, Ana, and John Geanakoplos, 2008, Leverage cycles and the anxious economy,
American Economic Review 98, 1211-1244.
Geanakoplos, John, 2009, The leverage cycle, NBER Macro Annual 24, 1-65.
Geanakoplos, John, and Heraklis Polemarchakis, 1986, Existence, regularity and
constrained suboptimality of competitive allocations when the asset market is
incomplete, in Essays in Honor of Kenneth Arrow, Volume III, edited by W.
Heller, R. Starr, and D. Starrett (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge), 65-95.
Goodfriend, Marvin, 2002, Interest on reserves and monetary policy, Federal Reserve Bank
of New York Economic Policy Review 8 (1), 13-29.
Goodfriend, Marvin, 2007, How the world achieved consensus on monetary policy, Journal
of Economic Perspectives 21, 47-68.
Goodhart, Charles, 1988, The Evolution of Central Banks (MIT Press, Cambridge MA).
Gorton, Gary B., 2010, Slapped by the Invisible Hand: The Panic of 2007 (Oxford
University Press).

46

Gorton, Gary B., and Andrew Metrick, 2010, Securitized banking and the run on repo,
Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Gorton, Gary B., and George Pennacchi, 1990, Financial intermediaries and liquidity
creation, Journal of Finance 45, 49-72.
Greenwald, Bruce, and Joseph E. Stiglitz, 1986, Externalities in economies with imperfect
information and incomplete markets, Quarterly Journal of Economics 101, 229-264.
Greenwood, Robin, Samuel Hanson, and Jeremy C. Stein, 2010, A comparative advantage
approach to government debt maturity, working paper.
Gromb, Denis, and Dimitri Vayanos, 2002, Equilibrium and welfare in markets with
financially constrained arbitrageurs, Journal of Financial Economics 66, 361-407.
Hart, Oliver, and John Moore, 1995, Debt and seniority: An analysis of the role of hard
claims in constraining management, American Economic Review 85, 567-585.
Jacklin, Charles J., 1987, Demand deposits, trading restrictions, and risk sharing, in
Contractual Arrangements for Intertemporal Trade, edited by E. Prescott and N.
Wallace (University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis), 26-47.
Jeanne, Olivier, and Anton Korinek, 2010, Managing credit booms and busts: A
Pigouvian taxation approach, working paper.
Kashyap, Anil K, and Jeremy C. Stein, 2000, What do a million observations on banks
say about the transmission of monetary policy?, American Economic Review 90,
407-28.
Kashyap, Anil K, and Jeremy C. Stein 2004, Cyclical implications of the Basel-II capital
standards, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Economic Perspectives 28 Q1, 1831.
Kashyap, Anil K, and Jeremy C. Stein 2011, The optimal conduct of monetary policy
with interest on reserves, working paper.
Kashyap, Anil K, Jeremy C. Stein, and David Wilcox, 1993, Monetary policy and credit
conditions: Evidence from the composition of external finance, American
Economic Review 83, 78-98.
Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore, 1997, Credit cycles, Journal of Political Economy
105, 211-248.
Kocherlakota, Narayana, 2010, Taxing risk and the optimal regulation of financial
institutions, Economic Policy Paper 10-3, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

47

Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, 2010, The aggregate demand for
Treasury debt, working paper.
Leeper, Eric, 1991, Equilibria under active and passive monetary policies, Journal of
Monetary Economics 27, 129-147.
Lorenzoni, Guido, 2008, Inefficient credit booms, Review of Economic Studies 75, 809833.
Modigliani, Franco and Merton H. Miller, 1958, The cost of capital, corporation finance
and the theory of investment, American Economic Review 48, 261-297.
Morris, Stephen, and Hyun Song Shin, 2004, Liquidity black holes, Review of Finance 8,
1-18.
Myers, Stewart C., 1977, Determinants of corporate borrowing, Journal of Financial
Economics 5, 147-175.
Perotti, Enrico, and Javier Suarez, 2010, Regulation of liquidity risk, working paper.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 1992, Liquidation values and debt capacity: A
market equilibrium approach, Journal of Finance 47.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 1997, The limits of arbitrage, Journal of
Finance 52, 35-55.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 2010, Unstable banking, Journal of Financial
Economics, forthcoming.
Sidrauski, Miguel, 1967, Rational choice and patterns of growth in a monetary economy,
American Economic Review 57, 534-544.
Sims, Christopher A., 1994, A simple model for the determination of the price level and
the interaction of monetary and fiscal policy, Economic Theory 4, 381-399.
Stein, Jeremy C., 1998, An adverse-selection model of bank asset and liability
management with implications for the transmission of monetary policy, RAND
Journal of Economics 29, 466-86.
Stein, Jeremy C., 2005, Why are most funds open-end? Competition and the limits of
arbitrage, Quarterly Journal of Economics 120, 247-272.
Stein, Jeremy C., 2009, Presidential address: Sophisticated investors and market
efficiency, Journal of Finance 64, 1517-1548.
Taylor, John B., 1993, Discretion versus policy rules in practice, Carnegie-Rochester
Series on Public Policy 39, 195-214.
48

Taylor, John B., 1999, An historical analysis of monetary policy Rules, in Monetary
Policy Rules, edited by John B. Taylor (University of Chicago Press).
Tucker, Paul, 2009, The repertoire of official sector interventions in the financial system:
Last resort lending, market-making, and capital, remarks at the Bank of Japan
2009 International Conference, May 27-28.
Weitzman, Martin L., 1974, Prices vs. quantities, Review of Economic Studies 41, 477491.
Woodford, Michael, 1995, Price level determinacy without control of a monetary
aggregate, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 43, 1-46.

49

Figure 1
Private and Socially Optimal Outcomes Versus the Money-Bond Spread

The figure plots private and socially optimal values of money creation M and investment
I as a function of RM. Functional forms and parameter values are as follows: f(I) =
ψlog(I) + I; g(K) = θlog(K); RB = 1.04; ψ = 3.5; θ = 150; λ = 1; W = 140; and p = 0.98.
RM varies between 1.0 and 1.035.

50

