                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 FIRM EXPORTS AND MULTINATIONAL ACTIVITY UNDER CREDIT CONSTRAINTS

                                           Kalina Manova
                                           Shang-Jin Wei
                                           Zhiwei Zhang

                                        Working Paper 16905
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16905


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2011




We thank Pol Antràs, Doireann Fitzgerald, Robert Feenstra, Fritz Foley, Linda Goldberg, Penny Goldberg,
Gordon Hanson, Nathan Nunn, Katheryn Russ, Ana Maria Santacreu, Robert Staiger, and two anonymous
referees for their comments, as well as seminar participants at Columbia, Johns Hopkins SAIS, London
School of Economics, LMU Munich, New York Fed, Oxford, Paris School of Economics, Philadelphia
Fed, Princeton, Stanford, UC Berkeley, Wisconsin, 2010 NBER ITI spring meeting, 2010 NBER IFM
spring meeting, 2010 AEA annual meeting, 2010 ERWIT meeting, 2010 UCSC SCIIE conference,
2010 CEPR St. Gallen conference, 2010 Beijing UIBE conference, and 2011 GEP-ifo Nottingham
conference. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Kalina Manova, Shang-Jin Wei, and Zhiwei Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Firm Exports and Multinational Activity Under Credit Constraints
Kalina Manova, Shang-Jin Wei, and Zhiwei Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 16905
March 2011, Revised May 2014
JEL No. F10,F14,F23,F36,G32

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper provides firm-level evidence that credit constraints restrict international trade flows and
affect the sectoral pattern of multinational activity. Using detailed customs data from China, we show
that foreign affiliates and joint ventures have better export performance than private domestic firms
in financially more vulnerable sectors. These results are stronger for destinations with higher trade
costs and not driven by variation in firm size or by other sector determinants of FDI. Our findings
are consistent with multinational subsidiaries being less liquidity constrained because they can tap
additional funding from their parent company and/or access foreign capital markets. More broadly,
they suggest that FDI can alleviate the impact of domestic financial market imperfections on aggregate
growth, trade and private sector development.


Kalina Manova                                     Zhiwei Zhang
Department of Economics                           Nomura Securities
Stanford University                               Hong Kong
579 Serra Mall                                    zhiweiz@hotmail.com
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
manova@stanford.edu

Shang-Jin Wei
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
Uris Hall 619
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027-6902
and NBER
shangjin.wei@columbia.edu
1 Introduction
Growing evidence suggests that financial underdevelopment severely impedes countries' participation in
international trade. Given the challenges of reforming financial institutions, this has raised the question
whether cross-border capital flows can offset these detrimental consequences. The 2007-2009 financial
crisis has renewed interest in these issues, with recent studies affirming that credit tightening was an
important factor in the collapse of global trade.1 However, firm-level evidence remains limited and elusive.
Moreover, the finance and trade literature has evolved largely independently of that on the optimal
production and organizational decisions of multinational corporations (MNCs).
           We fill this void by providing an integrated analysis of the impact of credit constraints both on
firms’ export activity and on the pattern of foreign direct investment (FDI). Using rich customs data from
China, we show that foreign affiliates and joint ventures have better export performance than private
domestic firms in financially more vulnerable sectors. This is consistent with MNC subsidiaries being less
credit constrained because they can tap additional funding from their parent company and/or access foreign
capital markets. Our results imply that financial frictions hinder firms' trade flows and shape the sectoral
composition of MNC activity. More broadly, they suggest that FDI can be a powerful export engine in
financially underdeveloped economies, and offer new insights on the extraordinary rise of China's trade.
           While it might be intuitive that multinational firms should have a comparative advantage over local
producers in financially vulnerable industries, we present the first direct evidence of this phenomenon and
quantify its economic significance. We estimate that foreign affiliates (joint ventures) export 62% (50%)
more than domestic firms in sectors highly dependent on the financial system relative to financially less
sensitive sectors. This is on par with or greater than the impact of other known determinants of MNC
operations, such as factor cost minimization, contractual imperfections, and property rights protection.
These large magnitudes have important policy implications for developing countries that aspire to attract
foreign investment in order to bring in financial resources and enable technological spillovers.
           We use data on the universe of China’s international transactions in 2005 to assess the impact of
credit conditions on different trade margins. We find that financial frictions restrict firm selection into
exporting and limit exporters’ global sales, product scope, number of destinations, and sales within each
destination-product market. Foreign ownership, however, mitigates these distortions and allows firms (and
presumably the country as a whole) to expand along all of these margins. These results indicate that
companies face binding liquidity constraints in the financing of both fixed and variable trade costs, since
the former affect market entry while the latter influence the scale of foreign sales. This informs how
constrained exporters would respond to trade reforms, exchange rate movements, and other cost or demand


1
    See Chor and Manova (2012), Freund and Klapper (2009), and (on past crises) Iacovone and Zavacka (2009).

                                                                                                               1
shocks. The evidence for firms’ extensive margin also validates priors that exporting entails market-
specific fixed costs of entry, and that it is more sensitive to financial frictions than domestic operations.2
        We identify the effects of credit constraints at the firm level by including firm fixed effects and
exploiting the exogenous variation in financial vulnerability across sectors within multi-sector exporters.
We thus evaluate how profit-maximizing companies allocate their limited capital across industries with
different credit sensitivities. As we discuss in Section 2.2, this empirical strategy circumvents endogeneity
concerns that have posed an important challenge in the prior literature: Our conclusions do not require that
foreign ownership be exogenous to financial frictions, and would in fact be reinforced by a likely form of
endogeneity (that more FDI systematically goes into financially more vulnerable sectors). We examine the
distortions to firm selection into exporting by removing the firm fixed effects from the regression.
        We perform a series of robustness checks to guard against sample selection and omitted variable
biases. First, while bigger firms export more in financially more vulnerable industries, the role of foreign
ownership is independent from that of firm size. Second, our results are not driven by other industry
determinants of FDI such as R&D, contract, physical capital or human capital intensity. Third, MNCs’
comparative advantage in financially sensitive sectors is greater for destinations with higher trade costs
(bilateral distance; bureaucratic export costs), but does not vary with non-finance related market features
(rule of law; natural resources). Finally, our findings survive various perturbations to the firm sample.
        We make three contributions to the literature. First, we provide new firm-level evidence that credit
constraints hinder international trade. Prior work has shown that countries with stronger financial
institutions have a comparative advantage in financially more vulnerable sectors.3 Early studies at the micro
level have used credit-worthiness scores, balance-sheet variables, and credit-rationing surveys to link
liquidity constraints to firms’ export capacity.4 A challenge for this approach has been the endogeneity of
such measures of financial health to companies’ export activity.5 More recently, scholars have explored
exogenous shocks to firms’ availability of external finance to establish a causal effect of credit conditions
on trade.6 We offer consistent support for these findings using a novel source of identification (foreign




2
  For example, Manova (2013) shows that only 20%-25% of the total effect of financial market imperfections on
aggregate trade is due to general disruption to production, while 75%-80% is trade specific.
3
  See Kletzer and Bardhan (1987), Beck (2002), Matsuyama (2005), Manova (2013), Chaney (2013), Ju and Wei
(2005, 2010 and 2011) and Becker et al. (2013) for theoretical models; and Beck (2002, 2003), Svaleryd and Vlachos
(2005), Hur et al. (2006), Manova (2013) and Becker et al. (2013) for empirical evidence.
4
  See Muûls (2008) and Minetti and Zhu (2011) for evidence on Belgium and Italy respectively, and Berman and
Héricourt (2010) for a study of 5,000 firms in 9 developing and emerging economies.
5
  For example, Greenaway et al. (2007) find that the financial health of UK firms improves after they start exporting,
but at the time of entry into exporting, future exporters do not appear financially healthier than non-exporters.
6
  For instance, Amiti and Weinstein (2011) and Paravisini et al. (2012) use matched firm-bank data and identify
shocks to banks’ financial health during the systemic crises in 1990s Japan and during the recent global crisis,
respectively. Bricongne et al. (2012) study the effect of the latter on French firms.

                                                                                                                    2
ownership status) combined with the variation in financial dependence across sectors. We also highlight the
importance of foreign direct investment, rather than of local financial institutions.
        Our second and primary contribution is to the literature on the determinants of FDI activity, and the
role of finance in particular. Evidence suggests that MNC subsidiaries use internal capital markets to
overcome liquidity constraints and react to profitable opportunities.7 After large real exchange rate
devaluations, the affiliates of US multinationals abroad expand sales and investment more than domestic
companies (Desai et al. 2008). Foreign-owned firms also fared better during the recent financial crisis
relative to local establishments (Alfaro and Chen 2012). Separately, MNCs can arise endogenously in
response to credit market imperfections to relax constraints faced by input suppliers (Antràs et al. 2009). To
this line of work we add the first direct evidence and estimate of the effect of financial frictions on the
sectoral composition of MNC activity. Implicitly, we also corroborate that foreign affiliates are less capital
constrained than domestic enterprises using export success as a different dimension of firm performance.
        Since we examine Chinese exports, we effectively study the behavior of multinational companies
pursuing vertical or export-platform FDI. This complements work on the impact of credit conditions on the
choice between exporting and horizontal FDI, as well as on the trade-offs between horizontal, vertical and
export-platform FDI (Buch et al. 2009, Bilir et al. 2013).
        Finally, our third contribution is to the large literature on the role of international financial
integration in promoting growth, trade, investment and entrepreneurship in host countries. While financial
openness can bring much needed foreign capital to emerging markets with weak financial systems, it can
also generate two-way capital flows and flight to quality (Antràs and Caballero 2009, Ju and Wei 2010).
For example, the 2007-2009 crisis resulted in milder liquidity shocks for firms in economies that had
previously relied more on FDI than on international bank borrowing (Tong and Wei 2010). Foreign capital
inflows are generally associated with a reduction in domestic firms’ credit constraints (Harrison et al. 2004,
Héricourt and Poncet 2009). At the same time, the growth effects of FDI appear stronger in financially
developed nations due to their greater absorptive capacity and ability to allocate resources (Alfaro and
Charlton 2007, Alfaro et al. 2010). With regards to international trade, equity market liberalizations
increase countries’ exports disproportionately more in financially more vulnerable sectors, especially when
stock markets were less active prior to reform (Manova 2008). We show that not only foreign equity flows,
but also foreign direct investment can lessen the damaging effects of financial underdevelopment on trade.
This offers concrete empirical support for the theoretical notion that openness to FDI allows countries to
partially bypass the constraints of weak local financial institutions (Ju and Wei 2010).

7
  Desai et al. (2004a) and Feinberg and Phillips (2004) find that MNC affiliates employ internal capital markets
opportunistically to overcome frictions in external capital markets: they raise less outside finance in financially
underdeveloped countries, and compensate by borrowing more from the parent company. Bertrand et al. (2002),
however, highlight the “dark side” of internal capital markets, i.e. the inefficient tunneling of resources between
connected firms and within conglomerates.

                                                                                                                 3
           The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The next section discusses the mechanisms
through which financial frictions can affect international trade and MNC activity. We introduce the data in
Section 3 and present our empirical results in Section 4. The last section concludes.


2 Motivation and Theoretical Background
2.1 Financial frictions and international trade
Domestic producers and exporters routinely rely on external capital because they have to incur large
upfront costs that cannot be financed out of retained earnings or internal cash flows from operations. These
costs may be sunk or recur each period. They are mostly fixed in nature, such as expenditures on product
R&D, market research, advertising, and fixed capital equipment. Some variable outlays such as
intermediate input purchases, advance payments to salaried workers, and land or equipment rental fees are
also typically sustained before production and sales take place.
           All manufacturers have to incur these costs, whether they sell domestically or abroad. However,
exporting is even more dependent on external financing than serving the home country for three reasons.8
First, entering foreign markets is associated with additional upfront expenses. Sunk and fixed trade costs
include studying the profitability of potential markets; making market-specific investments in capacity,
product customization and regulatory compliance; and setting up and maintaining foreign distribution
networks. Variable trade costs comprise shipping, duties and freight insurance. As with production costs,
most of these expenditures have to be incurred before export revenues are realized. Second, cross-border
shipping and delivery typically take 60 days longer than domestic orders. This further aggravates exporters’
working capital needs relative to those of domestic producers. Finally, the greater risk inherent in
transnational operations requires exporters to obtain trade insurance. For these three reasons, a very active
market exists for the financing and insurance of international transactions, reportedly worth $10-$12 trillion
in 2008. Up to 90% of world trade has been estimated to rely on some form of trade finance (Auboin 2009).
           While access to external finance is important in all industries, some sectors depend considerably
more on the financial system. This variation will be an important source of identification in our empirical
analysis. The literature has identified two key determinants of sectors’ financial vulnerability that are
technologically driven, exogenous from the perspective of individual firms, and innate to the manufacturing
process. First, firms in some sectors require substantially more outside capital because they face higher
upfront costs for long-term investments (Rajan and Zingales 1998). Industries also differ in the length of
their production cycles and therefore in their reliance on external finance for meeting liquidity needs in the
short-run (Raddatz 2006). Second, sectors vary in their endowment of tangible assets that can be pledged as
collateral to raise external finance (Braun 2003, Claessens and Laeven 2003).
8
    See Feenstra et al. (2011) for a model incorporating these three mechanisms and related evidence for China.

                                                                                                                  4
        Given these realities, a number of theoretical papers have examined how credit market
imperfections affect international trade. Here we summarize the predictions of a model that incorporates
financial frictions and firm heterogeneity in the spirit of Melitz (2003) and Manova (2013). For now, we
take firms' foreign ownership status as exogenously given and discuss its endogeneity in Section 2.2.
        Assume that exporters require external capital, which they can obtain in the financial market by
pledging collateral. Contracts between firms and investors are imperfectly enforced and depend on the
strength of financial institutions. When a financial contract is honored, the borrower repays the investor;
otherwise, the firm defaults and the creditor takes possession of the collateral. Industries, however, differ in
their intrinsic reliance on outside finance and in their availability of collateralizable assets.
        In the absence of liquidity constraints, all firms with productivity above a certain cut-off become
exporters. Financial frictions, however, raise this threshold: Because more efficient companies earn bigger
revenues, they can offer creditors a higher return in case of repayment, and are thus more likely to secure
the necessary outside capital. Importantly, the export cut-off is systematically higher in financially more
vulnerable industries. Credit constraints thus preclude potentially profitable firms from engaging in
international trade and result in inefficiently low aggregate trade flows.
        When companies rely on outside funds only for their fixed costs, credit conditions affect selection
into exporting but not the value of firm sales abroad. If variable costs are also subject to liquidity
constraints, limited access to capital restricts exporters’ operation scale as well. While the most productive
(and thus least constrained) firms can still export at first-best levels, less productive firms are unable to
obtain enough credit to do so. Instead, they export lower quantities than in the first-best to reduce their
variable costs. Once again, the extent of this distortion is greater in financially more vulnerable industries.
        If exporters pay a fixed cost in every market they enter, credit frictions will also affect the number
of firms’ export destinations. In the absence of liquidity constraints, firms’ decision to sell in a particular
country is independent of the decision to service other markets. By contrast, when firms have limited
access to financing, they optimally add export destinations in decreasing order of profitability until they hit
their budget constraint and use up their resources. Conditional on firm productivity, exporters in financially
more vulnerable sectors therefore transact with fewer trade-partner countries.
        Credit constraints similarly influence the range of products exporters trade. The literature on multi-
product firms suggests that profitability varies across goods within a firm based on production efficiency,
product quality and consumer demand (Bernard et al. 2011, Manova and Zhang 2012). With good-specific
fixed export costs and limited access to capital, firms must rationalize their product scope. While the
number of goods a firm ships will differ across destinations depending on importer characteristics,
exporters will offer a narrower set of products overall and sell fewer goods to any given market when they
face tighter credit conditions. These effects will be magnified in financially more sensitive sectors.



                                                                                                                  5
         Firms’ organizational structure can importantly affect their financing practices and need for outside
credit. Unlike domestic enterprises, foreign-owned companies are not restricted to borrowing externally in
China, but can also tap deeper internal capital markets and obtain funds from their parent company. They
can potentially raise external finance abroad as well.9 To the extent that foreign affiliates are less credit
constrained than domestic firms, they should have higher export sales, more destinations, and broader
product scope. This advantage should moreover be greater in financially more dependent industries.
         MNC headquarters plausibly have greater monitoring rights or managerial control over affiliate
activities, and the allocation of financial resources in particular, at higher levels of foreign ownership. If so,
headquarters would arguably be more willing to extend financing to wholly-owned parties relative to
partially-controlled subsidiaries. This suggests that fully-integrated affiliates of multinational corporations
should outperform domestic firms in financially vulnerable sectors by more than joint ventures.
         If a firm operates in multiple industries, financial considerations would affect how it allocates
resources across industries. Ceteris paribus, producers with limited access to external finance would
concentrate on sectors with lower requirements for outside capital and on sectors with more collateralizable
assets. They would add sectors in increasing order of financial vulnerability until they exhaust their funds.
This is not only optimal for a given level of external credit, but can also increase the financing lenders are
willing to offer. We thus expect that foreign-invested enterprises will export relatively more than domestic
companies in financially more sensitive sectors even controlling for firm fixed effects.
         The discussion so far has assumed that firm productivity is fixed and set by an exogenous draw.
However, companies might be able to improve their productivity by investing in superior technologies.
Firms might also choose to upgrade product quality by employing more expensive inputs of higher quality,
better skilled workers, or novel production processes. Credit constraints can curb such investments in
productivity10 and quality, especially in financially vulnerable sectors. Since export demand increases in
firm productivity and product quality, financial frictions can therefore not only restrict firms’ production
capacity for given export potential, but also directly limit firms' export potential.
         These predictions continue to hold if firms require external finance for both their domestic and
foreign operations. As Manova (2013) and Feenstra et al. (2011) show, credit market imperfections then
raise the productivity cut-offs both for domestic production and for exporting. In addition, constrained
producers sell less locally and constrained exporters sell less abroad. Although we focus on firms’ export
performance, our results will suggest that financial frictions have a disproportionately large effect on
international trade above and beyond that on domestic output.



9
   This is of course a sufficient but not a necessary assumption. All that is required is that multinationals are better
equipped to raise finance in foreign capital markets or to tap internal capital markets than domestic producers.
10
   Girma et al. (2008) find that Chinese firms with foreign capital participation innovate more than domestic firms.

                                                                                                                      6
        To summarize, we expect credit constraints to impede both the extensive margin (firm selection
into exporting, firms’ number of export products and destinations) and the intensive margin of trade (firm
exports of a given product to a specific market). These effects should be magnified in financially more
vulnerable sectors, but mitigated by foreign ownership. With some abuse of terminology, MNC affiliates
can be said to have a comparative advantage in financially dependent industries relative to domestic firms.

2.2 Financial frictions and multinational activity
Firms offshore (parts of) their production activities for various reasons, such as seeking market access and
saving on manufacturing costs.11 Multinational companies emerge when this location decision is
accompanied by the decision to integrate the production facility abroad within the boundaries of the firm.
The trade-off between arms’ length and intra-firm outsourcing has been studied in the context of imperfect
contractibility and relationship-specific investments; limited property rights protection and imitation risk;
or tax incentives and profit shifting.12 We emphasize that financial frictions can also influence companies'
choice to become multinational. We discuss three possible mechanisms for this effect, all based on the
assumption that domestic firms have more limited access to capital than foreign subsidiaries.
        First, when financial institutions in the host country are weak, MNCs could have an incentive to
enter financially more vulnerable industries that attract fewer local enterprises. Foreign affiliates would
then face less competition in the host and export markets for their final products, and/or in the local market
for sector-specific inputs. Both of these forces would generate relatively higher profits for multinational
corporations in financially more sensitive sectors. This argument takes foreign ownership as given and is
consistent with theory and evidence in Bilir et al. (2013).
        Second, firms' ownership status can be endogenous to financial frictions. Consider foreign
headquarters that would like to move the production of an input to China. If this input requires relationship-
specific investments that cannot be funded internally, the Chinese supplier would face greater credit
constraints if it is active in a financially more vulnerable sector. To ensure production takes place, the
foreign company can integrate the Chinese supplier to help finance its activities. As Antràs et al. (2009)
argue, MNC headquarters then either directly fund the affiliate or monitor its operations so that host-
country banks are willing to finance it. They show theoretically and empirically that foreign integration is
more likely to occur when the supplier is located in a financially less developed economy. Their model
could, however, be reformulated to predict that integration will be more prevalent in financially more
dependent industries. Extending this line of reasoning, wholly-owned affiliates might be favored by foreign



11
   See Markusen (1984), Brainard (1997), Markusen and Venables (2000), and Helpman et al. (2004) on horizontal
FDI, and Helpman (1984) and Yeaple (2003) on vertical FDI.
12
   See for example Antràs (2003), Branstetter et al. (2006), and Desai et al. (2004b).

                                                                                                              7
headquarters in such sectors relative to joint ventures. This could occur, for example, if control over
managerial decisions and the use of financial resources increases with the degree of foreign ownership.
         Third, enterprises can become multinational by acquiring an existing foreign firm. The literature on
mergers and acquisitions suggests that companies look for arbitrage opportunities in choosing targets, and
that such opportunities reside in the synergies from the partnership. Given their comparative advantage in
overcoming credit constraints, foreign parents might be more interested in becoming stake-holders in
Chinese firms in financially more sensitive industries. While this mechanism may amplify the effect of
other non-finance factors, it is separate from them. For example, multinationals might be more likely to buy
companies with stronger export potential (“cherry-picking”). Alternatively, Chinese exporters with greater
presence abroad might be better at attracting foreign investors. By themselves, these forces would not affect
the incidence of foreign ownership differentially across sectors. If MNC headquarters target better Chinese
firms (or stronger Chinese exporters solicit foreign investment) specifically in financially more vulnerable
sectors, this would be consistent with the idea that the best arbitrage opportunities combine the strengths of
both parties: the export capacity of the target and the financial resources of the acquirer.13 In practice, while
joint ventures in China sometimes arise through partial foreign acquisitions, most wholly-owned
subsidiaries are set up as de novo MNC affiliates through greenfield investment.14
         These three mechanisms have important implications for our analysis. While one might normally
worry about the endogeneity of the regressors, in our case the potential endogeneity of firms' ownership
status in fact reinforces the prediction of Section 2.1: Foreign enterprises should have a comparative
advantage in financially more vulnerable sectors relative to domestic companies. Moreover, fully-
integrated subsidiaries should outperform local producers by more than joint ventures. By comparing firms
with different organizational structures and sectors with different degrees of financial dependence, we can
thus simultaneously analyze the impact of financial frictions on international trade and on MNC activity.


3 Data
We use detailed customs data on the universe of China's international trade transactions in 2005 from the
Chinese Customs Office.15 They report the free-on-board value of firm exports (in US dollars) by product
and country for 231 destinations and 6,908 products in the 8-digit Harmonized System. The records
explicitly distinguish between state-owned enterprises (SOEs), private domestic firms (including

13
   Huang et al. (2007), Manova and Yu (2012), and Javorcik and Spatareanu (2009) show respectively that more credit
constrained firms are more likely to be acquired by foreign firms (China) and to conduct processing trade for foreign
buyers (China), but less likely to become arms-length suppliers for MNCs (Czech Republic). Bustos (2007) finds that
FDI in Argentina is more likely in financially dependent sectors. See also Poncet et al. (2010).
14
   Note that if credit-constrained Chinese firms could completely overcome their credit constraint by soliciting foreign
ownership, the firms that choose to remain domestic would not be constrained and we would not observe a differential
performance between domestic and foreign firms in financially vulnerable sectors.
15
   Manova and Zhang (2009) describe the data and present stylized facts about firm heterogeneity in Chinese trade.

                                                                                                                      8
collectively-owned firms), fully foreign-owned affiliates of multinational firms, and joint ventures (foreign
ownership under 100%).16 We drop SOEs from our baseline sample because we are interested in the export
decisions of profit-maximizing firms that operate in a financially constrained environment. Since the
Chinese government exerts considerable control over the activities of state-owned enterprises, especially
with regards to which industries they are allowed to operate in, SOEs are not necessarily profit-maximizing
entities. Despite their preferential access to financing from state-owned banks, they also appear less
efficiently managed than private companies (Dollar and Wei 2007, Song et al. 2011, Khandelwal et al.
2013). We also exclude export-import companies that do not engage in manufacturing but serve exclusively
as intermediaries between domestic producers (buyers) and foreign buyers (suppliers).17

3.1 Measuring sectors’ financial vulnerability
Our estimation approach requires a measure of sectors’ financial vulnerability                         . We employ a
number of proxies to capture different factors that affect firms’ sensitivity to the availability of outside
capital. These variables are meant to reflect technologically determined characteristics of each sector that
are inherent to the manufacturing process and beyond the control of individual firms. They are available for
36 ISIC 3-digit sectors, which we match to the Chinese HS 8-digit product codes.
         Our first two measures quantify firms’ reliance on external finance. Industries differ greatly in the
importance of up-front costs and the lag between the time when various expenses are incurred and the time
when revenues are realized. We gauge these differences with sectors’ external finance dependence
(ExtFini), defined as the share of capital expenditures not financed with cash flows from operations. ExtFini
captures the outside funding firms require for long-term investment projects and thus relates mostly to fixed
costs. We also exploit the ratio of inventories to sales (Inventi) to proxy the duration of the production
process and the liquidity necessary to maintain inventories and meet demand. Inventi signals producers’
working capital needs in the short run, associated mainly with variable costs.
         Our third measure of financial vulnerability recognizes the fact that sectors vary in the endowment
of collateralizable assets that enable firms to raise outside finance. We assess the availability of tangible
assets (Tangi) with the share of net plant, property and equipment in total book-value assets.
         Our last indicator of financial vulnerability distinguishes between different sources of external
capital. On the one hand, when companies can more easily access buyer or supplier trade credit, they may
be less dependent on the formal financial market. On the other hand, trade credit may be complementary to
formal credit, for example if both formal lenders and buyers/suppliers prefer more trustworthy borrowers.


16
   Product classification is consistent across countries at the 6-digit HS level. The number of distinct product codes in
the Chinese 8-digit HS classification is comparable to that in the 10-digit HS trade data for the United States.
17
   Since the data do not directly flag trade intermediaries, we follow standard practice and use keywords in firm names
to identify them (Ahn et al. 2011). We drop 23,073 wholesalers that mediate a quarter of China’s trade.

                                                                                                                       9
We remain agnostic about the net effect of these two forces, although evidence suggests that the former one
dominates (Chor and Manova 2012). We use the ratio of the change in accounts payable to the change in
total assets (TrCrediti) to characterize the availability and frequency of trade credit in an industry.
        Consistently with the idea that these sector measures capture conceptually distinct dimensions of
financial vulnerability, they are not highly correlated with each other (Appendix Table 2). It is thus
informative to explore all of them in order to shed light on the mechanisms through which credit constraints
operate. Having said that, ExtFini and Tangi are the most common and standard measures in the literature
because their interpretation can most directly and naturally be linked to firms’ exposure to and ability to
overcome financial frictions. By contrast, the role of TrCrediti is ex ante ambiguous. As for Inventi, some
companies might flourish in an inventory-intensive sector not because they are less liquidity constrained,
but because they have superior inventory management practices for reasons unconnected to finance.
        Given these considerations, we also compute three summary measures to aggregate the information
contained in the individual proxies and thus the various aspects of sectors’ financial vulnerability. Our
preferred one is the first principal component of external finance dependence and asset tangibility, FPC2i.
It intuitively increases with ExtFini and falls with Tangi, such that industries are more financially sensitive
if they require more outside funds but dispose of less collateralizable assets. We also obtain the first
principal component of all four indicators, FPC4i. Since statistical and not economics principles govern the
construction of FPC4i, we cannot control the sign of its loadings on the constituent measures. In practice, it
meaningfully places a positive weight on Inventi and negative weights on Tangi and TrCrediti, but it also
assigns an unexpected negative weight on ExtFini that is difficult to rationalize or interpret. We therefore
also calculate the standardized average of the four measures, AVG4i, where we impose the economically
intelligible sign on each component. In particular, we first standardize each variable by subtracting its
cross-sector mean and dividing by its cross-sector standard deviation. We then take the unweighted average
of the standardized values of +ExtFini, +Inventi, - Tangi and -TrCrediti. Reassuringly, our results turn out to
be not sensitive to the exact choice of               measure.
        Our                measures are based on data for all publicly traded U.S. companies from Compustat’s
                           18
annual industrial files.        This approach is motivated by three considerations. First, the United States have
one of the most advanced and sophisticated financial systems. The behavior of U.S. firms thus plausibly
reflects their optimal asset structure and use of external capital in the absence of binding credit constraints.
Second, choosing a reference country ensures that sectors’ financial vulnerability is not measured
endogenously to China’s financial development. In fact, if financially more dependent industries in the U.S.
employ more internal finance and tangible assets in China because of the worse financial conditions there,

18
   ExtFini, Inventi and Tangi come directly from Kroszner et al. (2007), who follow the methodology of Rajan and
Zingales (1998) and Claessens and Laeven (2003). They are averages over the 1980-1999 period for the median U.S.
firm in each sector. TrCrediti is from Fisman and Love (2003), who base it on the same data for 1980-1989.

                                                                                                              10
our results would be biased downwards. Finally, identification does not require that sectors have the same
financial sensitivity in the U.S. and China, but rather that their ranking remain relatively stable across
countries. Rajan and Zingales (1998), Claessens and Laeven (2003) and Kroszner et al. (2007), among
others, argue that the               indicators capture a large technological component that is innate to a sector
and therefore a good proxy for ranking industries in all countries. Consistent with this argument, the
measures vary substantially more across sectors than across firms within a sector, and the hierarchy of
sectors is quite stable over time.
        We aim to assess the impact of credit constraints on (1) firm exports and (2) MNC activity. For the
purposes of (1), we would ideally observe how much firms rely on external finance for their export
expenses (of both producing and trading the exported goods). By contrast, studying (2) in principle does
not require that the             measures be trade specific: While we explore the sectoral composition of
foreign affiliates’ trade flows relative to that of domestic firms, the same predictions would apply to their
total output as well. For both (1) and (2), however, it is important to keep in mind that money is fungible
within a firm. It is thus not obvious conceptually whether the use of external funds for domestic production
can be separated from the use of external funds for export activities.
        In practice, our sector measures reflect firms' overall reliance on the financial system, whether they
produce for home or abroad. Since firms report consolidated balance sheets, it is not possible to compute
           separately for domestic and export operations. No systematic data on the funding of international
transactions is available from sources other than firms' balance sheets either. This is primarily because a
wide range of financial institutions provide such financing, including regular commercial banks,
specialized export-import banks, and credit agencies.
        Given these data limitations, our industry indicators have been considered appropriate proxies and
widely used in the prior literature on trade, growth and finance.19 Firms need to incur the same production
costs and use the same tangible assets in manufacturing for the foreign market as in manufacturing for the
home country. In addition, products that entail a lot of R&D, marketing research and distribution costs at
home plausibly require similarly large trade costs of product customization, marketing and distribution
abroad. Both of these factors suggest that whatever forces a firm in a particular industry to fund its
domestic operations with outside capital will likely also force it to use external funds for its foreign sales.
Finally, the sector measures are based on large US companies that are typically big exporters. They thus
reflect firms' overall financing practices and not just those for their domestic activities.
        In sum, we exploit a number of standard, best-practice measures of sectors’ financial vulnerability.
To the extent that they are imperfect proxies, measurement error would tend to bias our results downwards.


19
  For example, see Beck (2003), Manova (2008, 2013), Iacovone and Zavacka (2009), Carluccio and Fally (2012),
Tong and Wei (2010), Bricongne et al. (2012), and Chor and Manova (2012) for applications to trade.

                                                                                                               11
The same argument applies if the production practices of domestic and multinational firms differ. In other
words, we can identify the effects of financial frictions on exports and MNC activity only if sectors'
financial dependence for international activities is correlated with their financial dependence for domestic
operations. Our empirical results thus also provide indirect evidence supporting this assumption.

3.2 A first glance at the data
Table 1 overviews the distribution of Chinese trade flows across firms with different ownership structure.
Two patterns in particular stand out. First, the lion’s share of Chinese trade is conducted by firms with
partial or full foreign ownership. Private domestic firms were responsible for 13% of China’s $531.4 billion
exports in 2005. Joint ventures accounted for slightly over a quarter, while foreign affiliates contributed
more than half of China’s exports. These statistics speak volumes about the importance of multinational
companies and foreign direct investment for China’s tremendous export success in the recent past.
        The second pattern that emerges from Table 1 is that foreign-owned firms capture a systematically
bigger fraction of Chinese trade in financially more vulnerable industries. MNC affiliates channel 60.1% of
exports in sectors with external finance dependence above the median, compared to 32.3% in sectors below
the median. On the other hand, private domestic firms mediate almost thrice as big a share of exports in
sectors with limited need for outside finance, relative to sectors that rely more heavily on external capital.
The contribution of joint ventures to China’s trade is more equally balanced across industries, and its
distribution falls between that for fully foreign-owned and fully domestic firms.
        We observe analogous sorting behaviors when we group industries according to our other measure
of firms’ requirement for external funds, the inventories to sales ratio. Foreign affiliates account for 55.7%
of exports in sectors with high liquidity needs, compared to only 29.2% in sectors with limited liquidity
needs. By contrast, private domestic firms carry 11.6% of trade flows in industries with high inventories
ratio and 18.8% in industries with laxer credit constraints, while joint ventures contribute about a quarter of
Chinese exports in all sectors. Similar patterns obtain when we distinguish among sectors with low and
high levels of asset tangibility or trade credit intensity, with a greater proportion of trade conducted by
foreign firms relative to domestic firms in financially more vulnerable sectors.
        These summary statistics are broadly consistent with our credit-constraints view of international
trade and investment, and anticipate the results from the econometric analysis in the next section.


4 Empirical Analysis
4.1 Empirical design
Our goal is twofold: to assess the effect of financial frictions (1) on firm exports and (2) on the pattern of
MNC activity. We design an estimation strategy that allows us to simultaneously address both questions. It


                                                                                                            12
is based on the prior that (3) foreign affiliates are less credit constrained than domestic companies, and
hence the impact of sectors’ financial vulnerability on firm decisions will vary across ownership types.
Implicitly, this estimation approach thus also tests the validity of (3).
           We study the variation in trade flows across sectors and firm types with the following specification:

           log                        ·            ·          ·              ·                                        (1)

Here                 give the exports of firm f in industry i, pooled across all of f’s export destinations.          and

          are indicator variables set to 1 for joint ventures and fully foreign-owned affiliates respectively, such
that the omitted category is domestic firms.                      reflects sector i’s level of financial vulnerability. We
proxy the latter alternatively with i’s external finance dependence, inventories-to-sales ratio, asset
tangibility, trade credit intensity, or first principal components of these measures. At this level of
aggregation, our sample comprises 221,801 observations spanning 88,004 companies and 36 sectors.
           We employ industry fixed effects            to control for systematic differences in trade activity across
sectors that do not depend on companies’ organizational structure. If China has a comparative advantage in
textiles for example, all textile makers might earn higher export revenues than manufacturers of electrical
machinery, regardless of whether they are domestic or foreign owned. Similarly, within each multi-sector
firm, global textile sales might exceed exports of electrical machines, irrespectively of its ownership status.
The       ’s account for various determinants of China’s comparative advantage, as well as for sector-specific
demand and cost shocks that affect all firms. They also absorb the level effect of                     .
           Our regression specification further includes firm fixed effects                  . These capture all firm
characteristics that affect a company’s export performance equally across sectors. These may include its
size, productivity, managerial competence, labor skill composition, or access to foreign distribution
networks. The         ’s also subsume the ownership dummies. They thus account for any distinction in average
export performance between firms of different ownership types that are invariant across industries. For
instance, MNC affiliates may use their parent companies' distribution network, enjoy preferential tax
treatment, be more productive, have better management practices, employ more skilled workers, or offer
higher-quality products relative to domestic companies.
           The main coefficients of interest are those on the two interaction terms. They are identified purely
from the variation across sectors within multi-sector exporters.20 Note that the firm fixed effects implicitly
condition on firms' total availability of financial capital, be it from banks in China, banks abroad,
buyer/supplier relationships, or a foreign parent company. Hence,                  and    reflect the profit-maximizing




20
     49% of the firms in our sample export in multiple sectors and account for 80% of the firm-sector level observations.

                                                                                                                       13
way in which companies allocate their limited financial resources across industries: by adding industries in
increasing order of financial vulnerability until they exhaust their liquid capital.
           Importantly,       and     lend themselves to two closely related yet distinct interpretations which
correspond to our two hypotheses. On the one hand,                and      quantify the effect of credit constraints on
firm exports (goal 1). Conceptually, we want to show that firms' access to finance affects their trade
activity. The former might however be endogenous to the latter. Exploiting the variation in financial
conditions across sectors (which is exogenous to individual firms) helps establish causality. To this end,
specification (1) interacts a firm measure of financial health (ownership status) with a sector measure of
financial dependence. This is in the spirit of earlier papers that have interacted other proxies for firms'
financial health with sectors' financial vulnerability. If credit frictions restrict trade, we anticipate lower
exports in financially more sensitive sectors, but this distortion would be smaller for foreign subsidiaries
than for domestic firms. We thus expect that                     0, where the first inequality reflects the notion that
fully integrated MNC affiliates may benefit from deeper internal capital markets than joint ventures.
           At the same time,          and      also indicate how financial considerations affect the pattern of
multinational activity (goal 2). The interaction terms compare the sectoral composition of MNCs' sales to
that of domestic firms. This gauges MNCs’ proclivity to operate in different industries. It is in the tradition
of prior studies that interact ownership dummies with other sector characteristics. As discussed in Section
2, multiple mechanisms can make financially vulnerable sectors relatively more attractive for foreign
affiliates. Conditional on their ownership status, they might have a comparative advantage in such sectors
due to their superior access to finance. In addition, foreign ownership could endogenously arise in response
to credit market imperfections. Both mechanisms would be consistent with                            0 and we do not
distinguish between them.
           The theoretical framework in Section 2 implies that firm size would reflect firms' access to external
finance if it is correlated with firm productivity and financiers favor more productive firms. A strict
interpretation of the Manova (2013) model in fact predicts a one-to-one mapping between firm
productivity, size, and financial health. This aligns with evidence in the finance literature that smaller firms
tend to be more credit constrained than larger companies.21 In view of goal (1), the size dispersion across
firms thus provides another source of variation in the data that we can exploit to identify the effect of credit
frictions on firm exports. In particular, we can use firm size as an additional proxy for financial health and
include its interaction with sectors’ financial vulnerability in the regression, FinVulni·Sizef.
           As for goal (2), there are two countervailing forces to consider. On the one hand, MNC affiliates
might be larger than domestic exporters for reasons unrelated to financial concerns. If bigger firms have a
comparative advantage in financially sensitive sectors,              and     might thus capture the role of firm size

21
     See for example Gertler and Gilchrist (1994), Beck et al. (2008), and Guiso et al. (2004).

                                                                                                                    14
rather than that of foreign ownership per se. While still consistent with goal (1), this would run counter
goal (2). Controlling for the size interaction would then ensure that we isolate the response of foreign-
owned firms to the variation in financial vulnerability across sectors, instead of the response of bigger
firms. On the other hand, MNC affiliates might be larger than domestic firms precisely because the former
are less financially constrained. If so, adding size interactions to the regression would be over-controlling
and underestimate the economic mechanism behind goal (2).
         Given these considerations, we opt to include FinVulni·Sizef in specification (1) in order to be
comprehensive with respect to goal (1) and conservative with respect to goal (2). To do so, we would
ideally use information on firms' total output. As standard with customs data, however, we do not observe
firms' sales in China. As a proxy for firm size, we take firms' log global exports summed across all
destinations and sectors. While imperfect, this measure is arguably appropriate given the prior literature on
firm heterogeneity and the strong correlation between firm size and firm exports in the data.22
         As common with our difference-in-differences estimation technique, the covariance matrix of the
error term      can be quite complex. From an economics perspective, the                ’s are likely correlated across
sectors within firms due to unobserved firm characteristics. If these affect activity uniformly in all sectors,
they would be captured with the firm fixed effects. Otherwise, Bertrand et al. (2004) advocate clustering
errors by firm. In our case, this is complicated by the fact that the regression also includes industry fixed
effects, and errors might also be correlated across firms within sectors due to sector-level unobservables.
From an econometric perspective, Moulton (1990) argues that errors should be clustered at the most
aggregate level at which the relevant explanatory variable varies in the data. We study the interaction of a
firm attribute with a sector characteristic, where the latter is arguably the exogenous one. To remain
conservative and consistent, we cluster standard errors by sector throughout the paper. We have confirmed
that all our results become significantly stronger when we instead cluster by firm or use Hubert-White
heteroskedasticity-robust errors. These approaches typically deliver t-statistics that are 3-4 times as big.

4.2 Baseline results
Our empirical analysis proceeds in four steps. We first estimate equation (1) and document evidence
consistent with our hypotheses. We then establish that our results are not driven by confounding factors
such as sample selection or other sector characteristics that might affect MNC activity. We next examine
the impact of financial frictions on the extensive and intensive margins of firms' exports to shed light on the

22
   In standard heterogeneous-firm trade models (e.g. Melitz 2003), firm size and total exports are perfectly correlated
as both are driven by a single firm attribute (often interpreted as productivity). In reality, firms differ along multiple
dimensions, but numerous empirical papers have documented very high correlations among productivity, size and
total exports for a wide range of developed and developing countries (c.f. Bernard et al. 2007 for the US). We thank
Zhihong Yu at Nottingham University for confirming that, in a matched sample of customs and balance-sheet data for
China, the correlation between firm sales and exports is 0.62 (significant at 1%) in logs and higher yet in levels.

                                                                                                                      15
underlying economic mechanisms. Finally, we show that our findings are stronger for export destinations
with higher trade costs, but do not vary with other destination characteristics in placebo tests.
        Table 2 presents our baseline results for specification (1). Foreign enterprises export significantly
more than domestic firms in financially more sensitive sectors, relative to financially less sensitive sectors.
In particular, MNC affiliates have a bigger comparative advantage over Chinese-held companies in
industries with greater dependence on external finance and in industries with higher inventories-to-sales
ratios (columns 1-2). Conversely, foreign subsidiaries outperform local firms by more in industries with
fewer tangible assets and in industries with scarcer trade credit (columns 3-4). As expected, the interactions
in columns 3-4 enter with the opposite sign to those in columns 1-2. This is consistent with the idea that
financially more vulnerable sectors require more outside capital due to more severe liquidity needs, but
dispose of less buyer-supplier trade credit and collateralizable assets.
        We corroborate these conclusions when we use the three summary measures that aggregate the
information contained in the various industry indicators of financial vulnerability: the first principal
component of external finance dependence and asset tangibility FPC2i, the first principal component of all
four indices FPC4i, and the standardized average of these four indices AVG4i (columns 5-7). To streamline
the exposition and in view of the discussion in Section 3.1, we report results only for FPC2i in the
remainder of the paper. Qualitatively similar patterns however obtain for our other sector measures.
        Of note, we systematically find that                0. In other words, fully integrated MNC affiliates
enjoy a greater advantage over domestic companies in financially dependent industries than joint ventures.
This ranking also emerges in all other regressions below: we either observe statistically higher point
estimates for the         interaction than for the        interaction, or cannot reject their equality at standard
levels of confidence (10%). This accords with the prior that a greater degree of foreign ownership increases
access to internal capital markets and/or capital markets outside of China.
        These results are highly significant both statistically and economically, with the exception of those
for trade credit intensity which are less precisely estimated.23 The export advantage of firms with full
(partial) foreign ownership over domestic companies is 31% (29%) larger in sectors with high requirements
for external capital relative to sectors with low dependence on outside finance. The corresponding estimates
reach 84% and 59% when comparing sectors with few collateralizable assets to sectors with high asset
tangibility. Using FPC2i as a summary measure, MNC subsidiaries and joint ventures export 62% and 50%
more than local firms in financially vulnerable sectors relative to financially less sensitive sectors.
        Separately, Table 2 also confirms that bigger exporters trade relatively more in financially more
dependent industries. This pattern suggests that firm size is indeed associated with laxer credit constraints.


23
  We report estimates based on columns 1, 3 and 5 in Table 2 that compare sectors at the 25th and 75th percentiles of
the distribution of the relevant measure of financial vulnerability.

                                                                                                                  16
To gauge the extent to which controlling for it might lead us to underestimate                   and   , we re-run
specification (1) without the size interactions (columns 1 vs. 2 in Appendix Table 3). The point estimates of
interest increase slightly by 9% and 15% respectively. This indicates that foreign ownership plays an
important and independent role that is not subsumed by firm size. Moreover, the effects of full and partial
foreign ownership are on average 65% and 8% bigger than that of firm size in Table 2.24
        Specification (1) includes firm fixed effects and identifies the impact of financial frictions on trade
and MNC activity at the firm level. Per Section 2, credit constraints can also distort the selection of firms
into exporting. To shed light on this mechanism, we re-estimate (1) without firm fixed effects, adding the
main effects of the ownership dummies. This perturbation lowers           and    by 46% and 19% (columns 2 vs.
3 in Appendix Table 3). This validates our predictions: Now              and    are identified from the variation
across firms of different ownership types within sectors, and the variation across sectors among firms of a
given ownership type. They reflect the gap between the exports of the average foreign affiliate and the
average domestic firm in a sector, and how this gap varies across sectors. These estimates therefore capture
the combined effect of credit constraints on firm-level exports and on firm selection into exporting. Since
foreign subsidiaries are less credit constrained than domestic firms, they face a lower productivity cut-off
for exporting, especially in financially more vulnerable sectors. This implies that a MNC affiliate might be
able to sell abroad when a domestic manufacturer of the same productivity level cannot. Because less
productive firms export less, this effect tends to reduce the average trade value of foreign-owned firms
relative to local companies in financially more dependent industries. This selection mechanism explains
why the regressions without firm fixed effects produce lower point estimates.
        To summarize, our results strongly suggest that financial frictions hamper companies’ export
performance but foreign ownership alleviates this effect. Our analysis thus serves three purposes. First, it
corroborates prior evidence on the detrimental consequences of capital market imperfections for firms’
participation in international trade. Second, it indicates that financial considerations are an important
determinant of the sectoral composition of MNC activity abroad. Third, it provides indirect evidence that
multinational subsidiaries and joint ventures are less credit constrained than domestic enterprises.

4.3 Sensitivity analysis
Our baseline results survive a series of sensitivity checks that alleviate concerns with potential omitted
variable or sample selection biases (all available on request). While the regressions in Table 2 include
single-sector firms, identical point estimates of higher statistical significance obtain if we omit them from
the sample. This is because with firm fixed effects, all coefficients are identified from the variation across
industries within multi-sector manufacturers. The same holds for all other specifications below when the

24
  We compute comparative statics for each FinVulni measure by comparing sectors and firm sizes at the 25th and 75th
percentile of their respective distributions. We report the average comparative static across all columns in Table 2.

                                                                                                                  17
unit of observation is the firm-sector pair. When the outcome of interest varies by firm-sector-destination or
firm-product-destination triplet, removing the single-sector sellers leads to virtually identical results of
higher significance.25,26 Our findings are also robust to adding state-owned enterprises to the sample, who
do not appear systematically different from private domestic firms (column 4 of Appendix Table 3).
         The prior literature has identified a number of factors unrelated to financial frictions that affect
MNC incentives. Our estimates might thus spuriously capture the role of industry characteristics other than
financial vulnerability. For example, cross-country differences in factor costs and sectors’ factor intensity
shape headquarters’ decision to offshore manufacturing within the boundaries of the firm (Helpman 1984,
Yeaple 2003, Antràs 2003). In the presence of imperfect contractibility and relationship-specific
investments, multinational activity is also more likely than arms-length outsourcing in R&D- and contract
intensive sectors (Antràs 2003). R&D intensive companies might similarly prefer to offshore production in-
house if they are concerned about the expropriation of their intellectual property (Javorcik and Wei 2009).
         Appendix Table 3 indicates that these alternative determinants of MNC activity are orthogonal to
credit frictions. We expand specification (1) to include the interactions of firm size and the ownership
dummies with sectors’ physical and human capital intensity (column 5), R&D intensity (column 6), or
contract intensity (column 7).27,28 Our results for       and    remain unchanged. Moreover, the economic effect
of financial vulnerability is on par with that of human capital intensity, about three times that of physical
capital intensity, and as much as ten times that of contract sensitivity.29 These comparative statics illustrate
the importance of financial factors to the operations of multinational companies.
         Separately, foreign-owned firms could face either more or less severe agency problems than
Chinese domestic exporters. On the one hand, if MNCs come from countries with stronger corporate
governance institutions than China, they may better handle conflicts among shareholders or between
shareholders, managers and other stakeholders. On the other hand, if MNCs are larger on average and have
more dispersed shareholders, they may suffer more severe agency problems. Our results could reflect an
effect other than financial frictions if both multinationals better manage corporate governance issues and
such issues are more prevalent in financially more dependent sectors.
         We perform three checks for this possibility and find no support for this alternative governance
explanation. First, we construct an index of industries' corporate governance intensity and confirm that it is


25
   When we estimate column 3 of Appendix Table 3 separately for single- and multi-sector exporters, we obtain lower
point estimates for the former. This implies that the effect of financial frictions on selection into exporting is stronger
for single-sector (and presumably most constrained) firms close to the export cut-off, consistent with Section 2.1.
26
   Separately, we have also found qualitatively similar patterns for new and continuing exporters.
27
   Data on sectors’ factor, R&D and contract intensity from Braun (2003), Kroszner et al. (2007) and Nunn (2007).
28
   Since most R&D expenses are incurred up front, high R&D intensity may generate greater needs for external
finance. Controlling for R&D intensity might thus be over-controlling and underestimate the effect of credit frictions.
29
   For each sector measure, we calculate the advantage that foreign affiliates enjoy over domestic firms in a sector at
the 75th percentile relative to a sector at the 25th percentile. We then compare this static across sector measures.

                                                                                                                       18
not significantly correlated with industries' financial vulnerability FPC2i (correlation coefficient -0.13, p-
value 0.60).30 Second, we add interactions of firm size and ownership with sectors’ governance intensity to
regression (1). This not only does not affect       and , but also reveals no differential performance of foreign
and domestic firms in governance intensive sectors. Finally, we see no evidence that financially more
vulnerable sectors attract more MNCs from countries with superior corporate governance institutions, nor
that MNCs from such countries enjoy a comparative advantage in financially sensitive sectors.31

4.4 Intensive vs. extensive margin
We next explore the mechanisms through which credit constraints affect firms’ export performance and
multinational activity by examining their effect on different margins of trade. As described in Section 2.1,
frictions in the financing of variable costs would distort the intensive margin by reducing the value of firm
sales to individual export markets. By contrast, frictions in the financing of fixed trade costs would act on
the extensive margin by restricting the number of markets that firms enter.
        We first analyze the impact of financial frictions on the intensive margin. Defining export markets
at the country-sector level, we consider firm f’s exports to destination d in industry i,               :

        log                         ·           ·           ·          ·                                       (2)

In addition to sector and firm fixed effects, this specification allows us to now also control for unobserved
market characteristics with country fixed effects, to more cleanly isolate the impact of credit constraints.
For example, the      ’s account for the cross-country variation in market size, consumer income, exchange
rates, and trade costs (such as tariff and non-tariff barriers, quality of ports and other infrastructures, etc.).
With this exhaustive set of fixed effects, the coefficients on the interaction terms are identified from the
variation in financial vulnerability across sectors and in ownership types across firms within destination
markets, and from the variation across sectors and destinations within firms. At this level of disaggregation,
978,140 observations span 88,004 companies, 231 importing countries and 36 sectors.
        As Table 3 indicates, MNC affiliates and joint ventures have systematically higher bilateral exports
in financially more vulnerable industries than private domestic firms (column 1). These results are highly
statistically and economically significant, with point estimates about 90% as large as those for firms’ global
exports in Table 2. Bigger sellers also conduct more bilateral trade in financially more sensitive sectors,
and the magnitude of this effect is 86% of that in Table 2. Similar patterns obtain when we explore the full

30
   We measure sector i’s natural dependence on effective corporate governance with the average governance index
across all US firms in sector i using data from Gompers et al. (2003). We are able to do this for 20 industries.
31
   We conducted online searches to manually identify the parent country for the largest 4,557 MNC affiliates in our
data based on firm names, location in China, and industry affiliation. We follow La Porta et al. (1998, 2002) in
measuring the strength of countries' corporate governance institutions with a dummy for common-law legal origin or a
continuous index of anti-director rights.

                                                                                                                 19
dimensionality of the data and identify the intensive margin as firms’ bilateral exports by HS 8-digit
product, for a sample of 1,824,950 observations (column 2).32
         We next evaluate the consequences of financial market imperfections for the extensive margin of
firm exports. The granularity of the data allows us to define this margin in different ways. This has the
advantage that we do not have to take a stance on the specific level at which firms incur fixed trade costs or
the potential cost synergies across destinations within a product or across products within a destination.
         We first consider three measures of the extensive margin at the firm-sector level, and re-estimate
specification (1) using each of them as the outcome variable. Exporters’ product scope (log #
counts the number of HS-8 products that firm f sells (to at least one market) in industry i. The number of
destinations (log #            gives the number of countries that firm f serves (with at least one product) in
sector i. The total number of destination-product markets (log #                        represents the overall number
of trading relationships that f maintains in industry i. It sums the number of bilaterally traded products to
country d across all destinations d, i.e. log #                    log ∑ #                   . As a fourth indicator of
firms' extensive margin, we finally study log #                         itself and use it in place of the outcome
variable in equation (2). This allows us to include destination fixed effects               to control for unobserved
importer characteristics that might affect exporters’ optimal product scope in d.
         The evidence in Table 3 suggests that in financially more vulnerable sectors, bigger and foreign-
owned firms tend to serve more destinations than domestic enterprises (column 4). They usually also export
a broader range of products in the markets they enter (column 6). As a result, they establish more trading
relationships in total (column 3). On the other hand, exporters’ overall product scope appears less
responsive to the variation in financial conditions across sectors (column 5).33 These regressions impose a
specific functional form by applying OLS to logged dependent variables. If we instead adopt the negative
binomial model, or if we cluster by firm, very significant coefficients obtain for all extensive margins.34
         Together, these patterns imply that credit constraints restrict firms’ ability to enter more markets, to
widen their product scope, and to expand their trade volumes. This has three implications in view of the
model in Section 2.1. First, our results are consistent with firms facing constraints in the financing of both


32
   Decomposing bilateral sales by product into unit values and quantities traded, we have found that foreign firms
export bigger quantities than domestic firms in financially more sensitive sectors. This suggests that financial frictions
prevent firms from operating at their full export potential. The evidence for export prices is mixed, indicating that
credit constraints curtail companies' export potential by limiting both productivity and quality improvements.
33
   The results for the extensive margin depend on the measure of                . They hold when we consider the reliance
on external finance for fixed costs (external finance dependence), but only the size interaction enters significantly
when we focus on the financing of variable costs (inventories ratio). This is consistent with the idea that fixed costs
are more relevant to firms’ extensive-margin decisions than variable costs.
34
   NBM allows the dispersion parameter for the distribution of the outcome variable to vary across firms. However, it
is not a linear estimator and does not permit firm fixed effects. In OLS, these act as slope-preserving shifts in the
intercept and allow us to estimate and naturally interpret the effect of credit constraints across sectors within firms.

                                                                                                                      20
fixed and variable export costs, as reflected in the distortions to the extensive and the intensive margins,
respectively. Financial frictions appear to operate mainly through the intensive margin (bilateral exports by
product, 80%), with a more moderate effect on the extensive margin (number of destination-product
markets, 20%): the point estimates for #                         are about 20% of those for total exports in Table 2.
        Second, our findings indirectly confirm priors that firms face a fixed export entry cost in each
destination-product market. If these costs were instead market specific but independent of product scope, or
were constant at the product level regardless of the number of destinations, credit constraints would have
affected either only #        or #                     , but not both #                 and #           .
        Finally, the results for firms' export product scope and trade-partner intensity suggest that credit
market imperfections distort trade flows above and beyond their effect on firms' domestic production. If
cross-border sales were only as sensitive to financial frictions as domestic activities, distortions to trade
volumes would be proportional to distortions to total production but there would be no adjustments along
the extensive margin of trade. Our findings are thus aligned with earlier evidence that exporters are more
reliant on external finance than domestic producers.

4.5 Additional evidence
Trade costs across destinations
We have argued that financial frictions restrict cross-border trade because firms are unable to cover up-
front expenses associated with exporting. Were these expenses negligible or not borne up-front, access to
finance would be irrelevant and credit constraints not binding. As further evidence for the credit
mechanism, we now show that foreign affiliates outperform domestic companies not just in financially
more vulnerable sectors in general, but specifically when firms face higher export costs.
        We exploit the fact that some destinations are costlier to serve than others. The availability of
financial capital will be more important to exporters when both a market entails higher trade costs and they
rely more on the financial system for meeting these costs. We therefore construct a finer indicator of the
credit conditions pertinent to firms in sector i selling to country d as the product of two variables,
               ·         . Using this measure in place of                         , we estimate a modified version of
specification (2) for firms' bilateral exports by industry:

         log                             ·                  ·             ·         ·              ·            ·
                                     ·                     ·                                                            (3)

As before, we include firm, sector and destination fixed effects. These still subsume the main effects of the
ownership dummies          and               , but not that of                ·           .



                                                                                                                        21
        We employ four common proxies for                      . Log bilateral distance to China reflects the
variable transportation costs associated with trade transactions. It might also correlate with taste similarity
across borders and hence the cost of product customization. For the fixed costs of shipping, setting up and
maintaining foreign distribution networks, we use three estimates from the World Bank’s Doing Business
Report: the log nominal cost (per shipping container), the log number of days, and the log number of
documents required to export to destination d. These four variables deliver very sharp results consistent
with our conclusion that financial frictions distort international trade flows and affect the sectoral
composition of MNC activity (Table 4). In financially more vulnerable industries, bigger and foreign-
owned firms export more than smaller domestic companies to countries associated with higher trade costs.


Placebo: other variation across destinations
We next perform a falsification exercise: We confirm that MNCs are not differentially sensitive to financial
vulnerability when it comes to outcomes for which finance shouldn't matter. To this end, we explore the
variation in destination characteristics Placebod that cannot influence exporters’ decisions through the
credit channel. This requires that Placebod do not affect export revenues, trade costs and/or the financial
burden of these trade costs, since these would all enter the profit maximization problem of credit
constrained firms. We consider countries’ endowment of natural resources and general rule of law, and
expand specification (2) to include triple interactions (the main effect of Placebod is subsumed by     ):


     log                        ·           ·           ·            ·                                       (4)

               ·            ·       ·               ·            ·        ·

Reassuringly, in Table 5 we find that the sensitivity of foreign affiliates to sectors’ financial vulnerability
(relative to that of domestic enterprises) indeed does not vary with the placebo measures (Columns 1-2).


Financial development across Chinese provinces
The banking sector in China is known to be geographically segmented (as in most other countries), with
firms typically borrowing from banks in their home province (Boyreau-Debray et al. 2005), at least until
recently. At the same time, there is substantial variation in financial development across Chinese provinces
in terms of access to credit. We now explore this variation to shed light on the financing practices of
foreign and domestic companies and on their interaction in the local capital market.
        One might be tempted to think that domestic firms face less credit constraints in regions with a
higher level of financial development. However, it is in principle ambiguous how the relative export
performance of foreign and local firms will differ between financially more and less advanced provinces.
This ambiguity arises because MNC affiliates can potentially raise capital from multiple sources: from


                                                                                                             22
banks in China, from banks in other countries, and from their parent companies. By contrast, most domestic
enterprises can only borrow locally. It is thus instructive to distinguish between a few possible cases.
         (Case 1) If foreign subsidiaries do not borrow in China at all, provincial credit conditions would
affect the financial health of local companies only. In financially more advanced regions, we would then
expect MNCs to enjoy less of an advantage over domestic firms in financially more dependent sectors.
         (Case 2) Evidence however suggests that multinationals use financial markets opportunistically:
Affiliates typically obtain capital locally if they can, normally in host economies with strong financial
systems, and rely on parent financing otherwise (Desai et al. 2004a). If MNCs’ bank borrowing in China is
a perfect substitute for funding obtained elsewhere, then MNC subsidiaries would be financially
unconstrained regardless of the province in which they operate. We would then again predict that their
performance relative to domestic firms would be stronger in financially less developed provinces.
         (Case 3) In practice, this is not guaranteed as MNC affiliates are not completely immune to credit
constraints (Feinberg and Phillips 2004). In other words, finance raised in China may not be just a
substitute for other funding sources, but an additional source of capital for MNC subsidiaries. (Case 3a) If
foreign and domestic firms are equally less credit constrained in financially more advanced parts of China,
the effects we have identified would not vary across provinces. (Case 3b) They might even be stronger in
financially more developed regions if banks favor multinational affiliates, because they are more profitable,
more trustworthy, or less likely to default since their parent can bail them out. Anecdotal evidence in the
media suggests that this is in fact happening. (Case 3c) Conversely, state-owned local banks might treat
domestic enterprises preferentially for political reasons, or if they have relatively less information about
and monitoring power over foreign entities. If so, the patterns we have found would be weaker in provinces
with superior financial systems.
         We explore these questions empirically by expanding our baseline equation (1) to include triple
interactions with provincial financial development, FinDevtp.35 We measure FinDevtp with the ratio of total
bank loans to GDP, available from the Almanac of China’s Finance and Banking. In Table 5, we find some
suggestive but inconclusive evidence that MNC affiliates export relatively more than domestic firms in
financially more vulnerable sectors when they are based in financially less developed provinces (Column
3). We have found similar patterns for firms’ exports by sector, as well as for firms’ exports by destination-
sector (intensive margin) and number of destinations (extensive margin). While the sign of the triple




35
   We have found similar results when conducting this exercise in two different ways. One option is to adopt a variant
of equation (4) where Placebod is replaced by FinDevtp; the main effect of FinDevtp is then subsumed by the firm
fixed effects. An alternative is to fully saturate the model by including all pair-wise double interactions between the
ownership dummies, provinces’ financial development, and sectors’ financial vulnerability; the interaction between
the first two is then subsumed by the firm fixed effects. To be conservative, we report the latter in Table 5.

                                                                                                                   23
interactions is stable across these outcomes for fully foreign-owned affiliates, however, the coefficients are
not always precisely estimated. We also observe no significant results for joint ventures.36,37
        Although we use a conventional measure of FinDevtp, a caveat is in order. Provinces with a higher
measured level of financial development may also offer more business opportunities and higher returns.
Private firms’ demand for loans may thus also be bigger in such regions. In addition, large banks have
started to systematically re-channel funding from lower-return to higher-return areas. Therefore, the true
extent of financial constraints may no longer be well captured by the traditional loan-to-local GDP ratio.
        Without direct information on firms’ financing practices, our results do not cleanly distinguish
between the cases summarized above. We therefore leave a more thorough inspection of the mechanisms
through which regional financial development affects firm behavior in China to future work. What we can,
however, conclude is that local financial development does not fully compensate for domestic firms’ worse
access to banks abroad and to deeper internal capital markets relative to foreign affiliates. Were that the
case, we would not find our baseline results that MNCs have a comparative advantage in financially
vulnerable sectors. Also, comparing the point estimates on the double and triple interactions in Table 5, this
pattern holds even in Chinese regions with very high levels of financial development.


5 Conclusion
This paper provides micro-level evidence on the harmful consequences of financial market imperfections
for firms’ ability to engage in international trade. We show that credit constraints severely restrict
companies’ total exports, prevent them from entering more markets, and limit their export product range.
        We also demonstrate that MNC subsidiaries and joint ventures in China have superior export
performance compared to private domestic firms, and that this advantage is systematically higher in
financially more vulnerable sectors. This is consistent with foreign affiliates accessing internal capital
markets in order to overcome binding credit constraints, and thereby enjoying a comparative advantage in
financially sensitive industries. Our findings thus highlight the importance of credit conditions in
determining the organizational and production activities of multinational corporations.
        A broader implication of our results is that FDI can alleviate the effects of credit frictions on
growth, trade and private sector development in financially immature economies. Yet the 2007-2009 global
crisis raises concerns about the spread of financial shocks via MNCs’ network of affiliates. Whether




36
   Similar patterns emerge if we aggregate the data and study total exports by province, sector and ownership type.
This is consistent with subsequent evidence in Jarreau and Poncet (2012).
37
   We have also found that provincial financial development supports more SOEs relative to private domestic firms in
financially more vulnerable sectors, but not higher SOE firm-level exports. This suggests that state-owned banks
might favor SOEs, but SOEs do not optimally allocate resources in response to sectors’ financial vulnerability.

                                                                                                                 24
multinational activity and foreign capital flows improve steady-state credit conditions in host countries at
the expense of greater volatility and exposure to world crises presents a fruitful area for future research.


References
Ahn, J.B., Khandelwal, A. and S.-J. Wei (2011). “The Role of Intermediaries in Facilitating Trade.”
   Journal of International Economics 84(1), p.73-85.
Alfaro, L., Chanda, A., Kalemli-Ozcan, S. and S. Sayek (2010). “Does Foreign Direct Investment Promote
    Growth? Exploring the Role of Financial Markets on Linkages.” Journal of Development Economics
    91(2), p.242-56.
Alfaro, L. and A. Charlton (2007). “International Financial Integration and Entrepreneurial Firm Activity.”
    NBER Working Paper 13118.
Alfaro, L. and M. Chen (2012). “Surviving the Global Financial Crisis: Foreign Ownership and
    Establishment Performance.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4(3), p.30-55.
Amiti, M. and D. Weinstein (2011). “Exports and Financial Shocks.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
   126(4), p.1841-77.
Antràs, P. (2003). “Firms, Contracts, and Trade Structure.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(4),
   p.1375-418.
Antràs, P. and R. Caballero (2009). “Trade and Capital Flows: A Financial Frictions Perspective.” Journal
   of Political Economy 117(4), p.701-44.
Antràs, P., Desai, M. and F. Foley (2009). “Multinational Firms, FDI Flows and Imperfect Capital
   Markets.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(3), p.1171-219.
Auboin, M. (2009). “Boosting the Availability of Trade Finance in the Current Crisis: Background
   Analysis for a Substantial G20 Package.” CEPR Working Paper 35.
Beck, T. (2002). “Financial Development and International Trade: Is There a Link?” Journal of
   International Economics 57(1), p.107-31.
Beck, T. (2003). “Financial Dependence and International Trade.” Review of International Economics
   11(2), p.296-316.
Beck, T., Demirgüç-Kunt, A., Laeven L. and R. Levine (2008). “Finance, Firm Size, and Growth.” Journal
   of Money, Credit and Banking 40(7), p.1379-405.
Becker, B., Chen, J. and D. Greenberg (2013). “Financial Development, Fixed Costs, and International
   Trade.” Review of Corporate Finance Studies 2(1), p.1-28.
Berman, N. and J. Héricourt (2010). “Financial Factors and the Margins of Trade: Evidence from Cross-
   Country Firm-Level Data.” Journal of Development Economics 93(2), p.206-17.
Bernard, A., Jensen, J., Redding, S. and P. Schott (2007). “Firms in International Trade.” Journal of
   Economic Perspectives 21(3), p.105-130.
Bernard, A., Redding, S. and P. Schott (2011). “Multi-Product Firms and Trade Liberalization.” Quarterly
   Journal of Economics 126(3), p.1271-318.
Bertrand, M., Mehta, P. and S. Mullainathan (2002). “Ferreting Out Tunneling: An Application to Indian
    Business Groups.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(1), p.121-48.
Bertrand, M., Duflo, E. and S. Mullainathan (2004). “How Much Should We Trust Differences-in-
    Differences Estimates?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(1), p.249-75.


                                                                                                               25
Bilir, K., Chor, D. and K. Manova (2013). “Host-Country Financial Development and Multinational
    Activity.” NBER Working Paper 20046.
Brainard, L. (1997). “An Empirical Assessment of the Proximity-Concentration Trade-off between
    Multinational Sales and Trade.” American Economic Review 87(4), p.520-44.
Branstetter, L., Fisman, R. and F. Foley (2006). “Do Stronger Intellectual Property Rights Increase
   International Technology Transfer? Empirical Evidence from U.S. Firm-Level Panel Data.” Quarterly
   Journal of Economics 121(1), p.321-49.
Braun, M. (2003). “Financial Contractibility and Asset Hardness.” University of California - Los Angeles
   mimeo.
Bricongne, J.C., Fontagné, L., Gaulier, G., Taglioni, D. and V. Vicard (2012). “Firms and the Global
    Crisis: French Exports in the Turmoil.” Journal of International Economics 87(1), p.134-46.
Buch, C., Kesternich, I., Lipponer, A. and M. Schnitzer (2009). “Financial Constraints and the Margins of
    FDI.” CEPR Discussion Paper 7444.
Bustos, P. (2007). “FDI as a Source of Finance in Imperfect Capital Markets: Firm-Level Evidence from
   Argentina.” Pompeu Fabra University - CREI mimeo.
Carluccio, J. and T. Fally (2012). “Global Sourcing under Imperfect Capital Markets.” Review of
    Economics and Statistics 94(3), p.740-63.
Chaney, T. (2013). “Liquidity Constrained Exporters.” NBER Working Paper 19170.
Chor, D. and K. Manova (2012). “Off the Cliff and Back: Credit Conditions and International Trade during
   the Global Financial Crisis.” Journal of International Economics 87(1), p.117-33.
Claessens, S. and L. Laeven (2003). “Financial Development, Property Rights, and Growth.” Journal of
    Finance 58(6), p.2401-36.
Desai, M., Foley, F. and K. Forbes (2008). “Financial Constraints and Growth: Multinational and Local
   Firm Responses to Currency Depreciations.” Review of Financial Studies 21(6), p.2857-88.
Desai, M., Foley, F. and J. Hines (2004a). “A Multinational Perspective on Capital Structure Choice and
   Internal Capital Markets.” Journal of Finance 59(6), p.2451-87.
Desai, M., Foley, F. and J. Hines (2004b). “Foreign Direct Investment in a World of Multiple Taxes.”
   Journal of Public Economics 88(12), p.2727-44.
Dollar, D. and S.-J. Wei (2007). “Das (Wasted) Kapital: Firm Ownership and Investment Efficiency in
   China.” NBER Working Paper 13103.
Feenstra, R., Li, Z. and M. Yu (2011). “Exports and Credit Constraints under Incomplete Information:
   Theory and Evidence from China.” Review of Economics and Statistics (forthcoming).
Feinberg, S. and G. Phillips (2004). “Growth, Capital Market Development and Competition for Resources
    within MNCs.” NBER Working Paper 9252.
Fisman, R. and I. Love (2003). “Trade Credit, Financial Intermediary Development and Industry Growth.”
    Journal of Finance 58(1), p.353-74.
Freund, C. and L. Klapper (2009). “Has the Decline in the Supply of Financing Affected Trade during the
    Crisis?” World Bank mimeo.
Gertler, M. and S. Gilchrist (1994). “Monetary Policy, Business Cycles, and the Behavior of Small
   Manufacturing Firms.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 109(2), p.309-40.
Girma, S., Gong, Y. and H. Görg (2008). “Foreign Direct Investment, Access to Finance, and Innovation
   Activity in Chinese Enterprises.” World Bank Economic Review 22(2), p.367-82.




                                                                                                      26
Gompers, P., Ishii, J. and A. Metrick (2003). “Corporate Governance and Equity Prices.” Quarterly
   Journal of Economics 118, p.107-155.
Greenaway, D., Guariglia, A. and R. Kneller (2007). “Financial Factors and Exporting Decisions.” Journal
   of International Economics 73(2), p.377-95.
Guiso, L., Sapienza, P. and L. Zingales (2004). “Does Local Financial Development Matter?” Quarterly
   Journal of Economics 119(3), p.929-69.
Harrison, A., Love, I. and M. McMillan (2004). “Global Capital Flows and Financing Constraints.” Journal
   of Development Economics 75(1), p.269-301.
Helpman, E. (1984). “A Simple Theory of International Trade with Multinational Corporations.” Journal of
   Political Economy 92(3), p.451-71.
Helpman, E., Melitz, M. and S. Yeaple (2004). “Exports versus FDI with Heterogeneous Firms.” American
   Economic Review 94(1), p.300–16.
Héricourt, J. and S. Poncet (2009). “FDI and Credit Constraints: Firm-Level Evidence from China.”
   Economic Systems 33(1), p.1-21.
Huang, Y., Ma, Y., Yang, Z. and Y. Zhang (2008). “A Fire Sale without Fire: An Explanation of Labor-
   Intensive FDI in China.” MIT Sloan Research Paper. 4713-08.
Hur, J., Raj, M. and Y. Riyanto (2006). “Finance and Trade: A Cross-Country Empirical Analysis on the
   Impact of Financial Development and Asset Tangibility on International Trade.” World Development
   34(10), p.1728-41.
Iacovone, L. and V. Zavacka (2009). “Banking Crises and Exports: Lessons from the Past.” World Bank
    Policy Research Working Paper 5016.
Jarreau, J. and S. Poncet (2012). “Credit Constraints, Firm Ownership, and the Structure of Exports in
    China.” University Paris I mimeo.
Javorcik, B. and M. Spatareanu (2009). “Liquidity Constraints and Firms' Linkages with Multinationals.”
    World Bank Economic Review 23(2), p.323–46.
Javorcik, B. and S.-J. Wei (2009). “Corruption and Cross-Border Investment in Emerging Markets: Firm-
    Level Evidence.” Journal of International Money and Finance 28(4), p.605-24.
Ju, J. and S.-J. Wei (2005). “Endowment vs. Finance: A Wooden Barrel Theory of International Trade.”
    CEPR Discussion Paper 5109.
Ju, J. and S.-J. Wei (2010). “Domestic Institutions and the Bypass Effect of Financial Globalization.”
    American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 2(4), p.173-204.
Ju, J. and S.-J. Wei (2011). “When Is Quality of Financial System a Source of Comparative Advantage?”
    Journal of International Economics 84(2), p.178-87.
Khandelwal, A., Schott, P. and S.-J. Wei (2013). “Trade Liberalization and Embedded Institutional
   Reform: Evidence from Chinese Exporters.” American Economic Review 103(6), p.2169-95.
Kletzer, K. and P. Bardhan (1987). “Credit Markets and Patterns of International Trade.” Journal of
    Development Economics 27(1-2), p.57-70.
Kroszner, R., Laeven, L. and D. Klingebiel (2007). “Banking Crises, Financial Dependence, and Growth."
   Journal of Financial Economics 84(1), p.187-228.
La Porta, R., Lopez de Silanes, F., Shleifer, A. and R. Vishny (1998). “Law and Finance.” Journal of
   Political Economy 106, p.1113–1155.
La Porta, R., Lopez de Silanes, F., Shleifer, A. and R. Vishny (2002). “Investor Protection and Corporate
   Valuation.” Journal of Finance 57, p.1147-1170.

                                                                                                      27
Manova, K. (2008). “Credit Constraints, Equity Market Liberalizations and International Trade.” Journal of
   International Economics 76(1), p.33-47.
Manova, K. (2013). “Credit Constraints, Heterogeneous Firms and International Trade.” Review of
   Economic Studies 80(2), p.711-44.
Manova, K. and Z. Yu (2012). “Firms and Credit Constraints along the Global Value Chain: Processing
   Trade in China.” NBER Working Paper 18561.
Manova, K. and Z. Zhang (2009). “China's Exporters and Importers: Firms, Products and Trade Partners.”
   NBER Working Paper 15249.
Manova, K. and Z. Zhang (2012). “Multi-Product Firms and Product Quality.” NBER Working Paper
   18637.
Markusen, J. (1984). “Multinationals, Multi-Plant Economies, and the Gains from Trade.” Journal of
   International Economics 16(3-4), p.205–26.
Markusen, J. and A. Venables (2000). “The Theory of Endowment, Intra-industry and Multi-national
   Trade.” Journal of International Economics 52(2), p.209–34.
Matsuyama, K. (2005). “Credit Market Imperfections and Patterns of International Trade and Capital
   Flows.” Journal of the European Economic Association 3(2-3), p.714-23.
Melitz, M. (2003). “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry
   Productivity.” Econometrica 71(6), p.1695-725.
Minetti, R. and S.C. Zhu (2011). “Credit Constraints and Firm Export: Microeconomic Evidence from
   Italy.” Journal of International Economics 83(2), p.109-25.
Moulton, B. (1990). “An Illustration of a Pitfall in Estimating the Effects of Aggregate Variables on Micro
  Units.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 72(2), p.334-38.
Muûls, M. (2008). “Exporters and Credit Constraints. A Firm Level Approach.” National Bank of Belgium
  Working Paper Research 139.
Nunn, N. (2007). “Relationship-Specificity, Incomplete Contracts, and the Pattern of Trade.” Quarterly
   Journal of Economics 122(2), p.569-600.
Paravisini, D., Rappoport, V., Schnabl, P. and D. Wolfenzon (2012). “Dissecting the Effect of Credit
    Supply on Trade: Evidence from Matched Credit-Export Data.” NBER Working Paper 16975.
Poncet, S., Steingrass, W. and H. Vandenbussche (2010). “Financial Constraints in China: Firm-Level
   Evidence.” China Economic Review 21(3), p.411-22.
Raddatz, C. (2006). “Liquidity Needs and Vulnerability to Financial Underdevelopment”. Journal of
   Financial Economics 80(3), p.677-722.
Rajan, R. and L. Zingales (1998). “Financial Dependence and Growth.” American Economic Review 88(3),
    p.559-86.
Song, Z., Storesletten, K. and F. Zilibotti (2011). “Growing Like China.” American Economic Review
   101(1), p.196-233.
Svaleryd, H. and J. Vlachos (2005). “Financial Markets, the Pattern of Industrial Specialization and
   Comparative Advantage: Evidence from OECD Countries.” European Economic Review 49(1), p.113-
   44.
Tong, H. and S.-J. Wei (2010). “The Composition Matters: Capital Inflows and Liquidity Crunch During a
   Global Economic Crisis.” Review of Financial Studies 24(6), p.2023-52.
Yeaple, S. (2003). “The Role of Skill Endowments in the Structure of U.S. Outward FDI.” Review of
   Economics and Statistics 85(3), p.726-34.

                                                                                                        28
                          Table 1. Distribution of Trade Flows across Firms and Sectors


This table examines the distribution of Chinese trade flows across firms with different organizational structure and across sectors
with different levels of financial vulnerability in 2005. External Finance Dependence is the share of capital expenditures not financed
with cash flows from operations. Inventories Ratio is the ratio of inventories to sales. Asset Tangibility is the share of fixed assets in
total assets. Trade Credit Intensity is the ratio of the change in accounts payable to the change in total assets. These measures
come from Kroszner-Laeven-Klingebiel (2007) or Fisman-Love (2003), and are based on Compustat data for U.S. firms. The trade
values in the first column are in billion US Dollars. The percentage shares reported in each row sum to 1.


Firm Type:                     All Firms          State-Owned         Private Domestic Joint Ventures                Foreign-Owned
                                   (1)                   (2)                    (3)                   (4)                    (5)

  Total Exports                  531.36                 9.8%                 12.9%                  26.3%                  51.0%

Panel A. Classifying sectors by external finance dependence
    Low                          173.47                14.9%                 23.4%                  29.4%                  32.3%
    High                         357.89                 7.3%                  7.8%                  24.8%                  60.1%

Panel B. Classifying sectors by inventories ratio
    Low                           94.01                19.9%                 18.8%                  32.1%                  29.2%
    High                         437.35                7.6%                  11.6%                  25.1%                  55.7%

Panel C. Classifying sectors by asset tangibility
    Low                          423.04                6.2%                  9.9%                   25.9%                  58.0%
    High                         108.32                23.8%                 24.4%                  28.1%                  23.7%

Panel D. Classifying sectors by trade credit intensity
    Low                          285.63                4.9%                  7.5%                   24.8%                  62.8%
    High                         245 73
                                 245.73                15.5%
                                                       15 5%                 19.1%
                                                                             19 1%                  28 1%
                                                                                                    28.1%                  37 3%
                                                                                                                           37.3%
                                   Table 2. Foreign Ownership, Firm Size and Firm Exports

This table examines the effect of credit constraints on firm exports across sectors within firms. JV and MNC are indicator variables for joint
ventures and fully foreign-owned MNC affiliates respectively. Firm size is proxied by firms' (log) total exports. The measure of sectors'
financial vulnerability is indicated in the column heading and defined as in Table 1. In Colmn 5 (Column 6) it is the first principal component
of the individual measures in Columns 1-2 (Columns 1-4). In Column 7, it is the standardized average of the measures in Columns 1-4. All
regressions include a constant term, firm fixed effects, and sector fixed effects. Standard errors clustered by sector. T-statistics in
parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level.


Dependent variable: (log) firm exports by sector

                                                                                         First Principal First Principal Sandardized
Fin vuln             Ext Finance       Inventories        Asset         Trade Credit
                                                                                          Component       Component        Average
measure:             Dependence           Ratio         Tangibility       Intensity
                                                                                        (FinDep,Tang) (All Measures) (All Measures)

                           (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)               (5)                (6)               (7)

JV x Fin vuln            0.88             6.76             -2.94            -1.56            0.54              0.25               0.74
                         (4.09)***        (1.96)*          (-3.05)***       (-0.40)          (4.68)***         (1.85)*            (3.35)***
MNC x Fin vuln           0.94             7.20             -4.18            -5.40            0.67              0.35               0.95
                         (3.40)***        (2.56)**         (-4.69)***       (-1.46)          (6.37)***         (2.72)***          (4.85)***
Size x Fin vuln          0.21             2.93             -1.16            -0.72            0.16              0.11               0.25
                         (1.84)*          (3.35)***        (-3.96)***       (-0.76)          (3.42)***         (2.94)***          (3.32)***

Sector FE                   Y                Y               Y                Y                 Y                 Y                  Y
Firm FE                     Y                Y               Y                Y                 Y                 Y                  Y

R-squared                0.51             0.51             0.52             0.51             0.52              0.51               0.52
# observations           221,801          221,801          221,801          221,801          221,801           221,801            221,801
# firms                  88,004           88,004           88,004           88,004           88,004            88,004             88,004
# sectors                36               36               36               36               36                36                 36
                                    Table 3. Extensive and Intensive Margins of Firm Exports

This table examines the effect of credit constraints on the intensive and extensive margins of firm exports. The dependent variable is indicated in
the column heading. Financial vulnerability is measured by the first principal component of External Finance Dependence and Asset Tangibility .
All other variables are defined as in Table 2. All regressions include a constant term, firm fixed effects, and sector fixed effects. Columns 1, 2,
and 6 also include destination fixed effects. Standard errors clustered by sector. T-statistics in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at
the 1%, 5%, and 10% level.



                                  Intensive Margin                                                Extensive Margin


                      (log) Exports by (log) Exports by           (log) # Dest-prod      (log) # Dest by      (log) # Prod by       (log) # Prod by
Dep variable:
                      firm-sector-dest firm-product-dest            by firm-sector          firm-sector          firm-sector       firm-sector-dest

                             (1)                   (2)                    (3)                   (4)                  (5)                   (6)

JV x Fin vuln             0.47                 0.41                   0.11                  0.11                 0.02                  0.03
                          (5.09)***            (4.56)***              (1.93)*               (2.41)**             (0.36)                (1.50)
MNC x Fin vuln            0.62                 0.54                   0.12                  0.10                 0.02                  0.04
                          (7.49)***            (6.60)***              (2.00)*               (2.33)**             (0.45)                (1.78)*
Size x Fin vuln           0.14                 0.09                   0.04                  0.03                 0.03                  0.02
                          (3.98)***            (3.71)***              (2.84)***             (3.02)***            (2.49)**              (3.32)***

Firm, Sector FE               Y                      Y                     Y                     Y                    Y                    Y
Destination FE                Y                      Y                     --                    --                   --                   Y

R-squared                 0.37                 0.34                   0.52                  0.55                 0.57                  0.35
# observations            978,140              1,824,950              221,801               221,801              221,801               978,140
# firms                   88,004               88,004                 88,004                88,004               88,004                88,004
# sectors                 36                   36                     36                    36                   36                    36
# destinations            231                  231                    --                    --                   --                    231
                   Table 4. Trade Costs across Export Destinations

This table examines the effect of credit constraints on firm exports across destinations with different
trade costs. Trade costs (Cost ) are measured by log bilateral distance, the log nominal cost of
importing per shipping container, the log number of required import documents, or the log number of
days necessary for import procedures as indicated in the column heading. These come from CEPII
and the World Bank's "Doing Business Report". All other variables are defined as in Table 3. All
regressions include a constant term, firm-, sector- and destination fixed effects. Standard errors
clustered by sector. T-statistics in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and
10% level.


Dependent variable: (log) firm exports by sector and destination

Trade cost                                     (log) Import        (log) Import         (log) Import
                         (log) Distance
measure:                                           Cost                Docs                 Days

                               (1)                  (2)                 (3)                  (4)

Cost x Fin vuln           -0.30               -0.38                -1.25               -0.83
                          (-3.34)***          (-3.17)***           (-4.28)***          (-4.29)***
JV x Cost x               0.05                0.07                 0.23                0.15
    x Fin vuln            (5.06)***           (5.10)***            (4.47)***           (4.13)***
MNC x Cost x              0.07                0.09                 0.29                0.18
  x Fin vuln              (7.42)***           (7.61)***            (6.41)***           (5.28)***
Size x Cost x             0.02                0.02                 0.06                0.04
    x Fin vuln            (3.91)***           (3.97)***            (3.94)***           (3.88)***

Firm, Sector FE                 Y                    Y                   Y                    Y
Destination FE                  Y                    Y                   Y                    Y

R-squared                 0.37                0.37                 0.37                0.37
# observations            977 119
                          977,119             956 320
                                              956,320              956,320
                                                                   956  320            956,320
                                                                                       956  320
# firms                   88,001              87,640               87,640              87,640
# sectors                 36                  36                   36                  36
# destinations            210                 171                  171                 171
              Table 5. Placebo Variation across Export Destinations
              and Financial Development across Chinese Provinces

This table examines the effect of credit constraints on firm exports across export destinations with
different non-finance related characteristics, and across Chinese provinces with different levels of
financial development. The dependent variable is indicated in the column heading. Destinations'
Natural Resources endowment and Rule of Law come from the World Bank's "Expanding the
Measure of Wealth" and La Porta-Lopez de Silanes-Shleifer-Vishny (1998). Financial Development
is measured by the ratio of total bank loans to GDP by province. All other variables are defined as in
Table 3. All regressions include a constant term, firm fixed effects, and sector fixed effects. Columns
1-2 also include destination fixed effects. Standard errors clustered by sector. T-statistics in
parenthesis. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level.


                                         (log) Natural                               Financial
                                                              Rule of Law in
Dest / prov characteristic               Resources in                              Development in
                                                               Destination
                                          Destination                                 Province

                                        (log) Exports by     (log) Exports by      (log) Exports by
Dep Variable
                                        firm-sector-dest     firm-sector-dest         firm-sector

                                               (1)                   (2)                  (3)

JV x Fin vuln                              0.72                  0.42                 0.62
                                           (3.09)***             (2.46)**             (2.32)**
MNC x Fin vuln                             0.83                  0.38                 0.98
                                           (2.80)***             (2.01)*              (5.99)***
Size x Fin vuln                            0.13                  0.13                 0.15
                                           (3.49)***             (3.85)***            (3.33)***
JV x Fin vuln x                            -0.03                 0.01                 -0.08
    x Dest or Prov char                    (-1.25)               (0.48)               (-0.48)
MNC x Fin vuln x                           -0.02
                                            0 02                 0 05
                                                                 0.05                 -0.29
                                                                                       0 29
  x Dest or Prov char                      (-0.83)               (1.59)               (-2.77)***
Size x Fin vuln x                          0.00                  0.00                 0.01
    x Dest or Prov char                    (1.32)                (2.37)**             (1.28)

Firm, Sector FE                                 Y                     Y                    Y
Destination FE                                  Y                     Y                    --

R-squared                                  0.39                  0.37                 0.52
# observations                             693,771               953,655              221,801
# firms                                    76,976                87,572               88,004
# sectors                                  36                    36                   36
                           Appendix Table 1. Industry Characteristics

This table lists the different sector measures of financial vulnerability used in the empirical analysis, as
defined in Table 1. The bottom two rows of the table report the mean and standard deviation of these
measures across the 36 sectors.


                                             Ext Finance      Inventory         Asset        Trade Credit
 ISIC                Industry
                                             Dependence         Ratio         Tangibility      Intensity

  311   Food products                            -0.15           0.10            0.37            0.06
  313   Beverages                                 0.03           0.10            0.40            0.05
  314   Tobacco                                  -1.14           0.28            0.19            0.04
 321    Textiles                                  0.01           0.17            0.31            0.08
 322    Apparel                                  -0.21           0.21            0.15            0.08
 323    Leather products                         -0.95           0.23            0.12            0.02
 324    Footwear                                 -0.74           0.22            0.13            0.04
 331    Wood products                             0.05           0.11            0.32            0.08
 332    Furniture                                -0.38           0.15            0.28            0.05
 341    Paper products                           -0.35           0.13            0.42            0.06
 342    Printing and publishing                  -0.42           0.07            0.21            0.05
 352    Other chemical products                  -0.30           0.15            0.27            0.07
 353    Petroleum refineries                     -0.02           0.07            0.62            0.22
 354    Petroleum and coal products               0.13           0.12            0.46            0.07
 355    Rubber products                          -0.02           0.15            0.36            0.13
 356    Plastic products                         -0.02           0.13            0.38            0.10
 361    Pottery, china, earthenware              -0.41           0.17            0.28            0.03
 362    Glass products                            0.03           0.15            0.42            0.04
 369    Non-metallic products                    -0.29           0.15            0.48            0.07
 371    Iron and steel                            0.05           0.17            0.44            0.09
 372    Non-ferrous metals                       -0.12           0.16            0.32            0.08
  381   Fabricated metal products                -0.25           0.17            0.28            0.08
  382   Machinery, except electrical             -0.04           0.20            0.22            0.09
  383   Electrical machinery                      0.24           0.18            0.21            0.08
  384   Transport equipment                      -0.08           0.18            0.23            0.06
  385   Prof and scient equipment                 0.72           0.21            0.16            0.05
  390   Other manufactured products               0.28           0.20            0.18            0.08
 3211   Spinning                                 -0.05           0.16            0.38            0.18
 3411   Pulp and paper                           -0.07           0.12            0.60            0.06
 3511   Industrial chemicals                     -0.19           0.14            0.43            0.06
 3513   Synthetic resins                          0.03           0.13            0.40            0.07
 3522   Drugs                                     2.43           0.13            0.16            0.03
 3825   Office and computing                      0.54           0.17            0.14            0.06
 3832   Radio products                            0.70           0.19            0.14            0.07
 3841   Ship building                             0.38           0.15            0.28            0.08
 3843   Motor vehicles                            0.06           0.14            0.28            0.10


        Average across Industries                -0.01           0.16            0.31            0.07
        St Dev across Industries                  0.57           0.04            0.13            0.04
                     Appendix Table 2. Correlations between Industry Characteristics

This table reports the two-way correlations between different measures of sectors' financial vulnerability as defined in Table
1 and Table 2. Correlations in bold are significant at 5%.


                                     First Princ
                                                 Ext Finance                Inventory          Asset         Trade Credit
                                    Component
                                                 Dependence                   Ratio          Tangibility       Intensity
                                   (FinDep,Tang)

   First Princ Component
                                          1.00
            (FinDep,Tang)
Ext Finance Dependence                    0.75               1.00
             Inventory Ratio              0.27              -0.23              1.00
           Asset Tangibility             -0.75              -0.12             -0.64              1.00
    Trade Credit Intensity               -0.29               0.03             -0.32              0.45             1.00
     Appendix Table 3. Firm Size, Selection into Exporting, and Other Sector Characteristics

This table examines the contribution of firm size and selection into exporting to the effect of credit constraints on firm exports
by sector, and the robustness of this effect to controlling for other sector characteristics. Factor Intensity refers to sectors'
physical and human capital intensity, from Braun (2003); the columns with these controls report interaction coefficients for
these two measures in that order. R&D Intensity is the share of R&D expenditures in total sales, from Kroszner-Laeven-
Klingebiel (2007). Contract Intensity reflects the importance of relationship-specific investments in the production of inputs
for a given sector, from Nunn (2007). All other variables are defined as in Table 3. All regressions include a constant term,
firm fixed effects, and sector fixed effects; Column 3 excludes the firm fixed effects. Standard errors clustered by sector. T-
statistics in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level.


Dependent variable: (log) firm exports by sector

                                                       No Firm                         Factor           R&D          Contract
                                        No Size
                       Baseline                         Fixed        With SOEs        Intensity       Intensity      Intensity
                                      Interaction
                                                       Effects                         Control         Control        Control

                           (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)             (6)            (7)

JV x Fin vuln          0.54            0.62            0.33           0.56            0.41            0.56           0.56
                       (4.68)***       (4.41)***       (3.95)***      (4.77)***       (2.64)**        (3.31)***      (4.34)***
MNC x Fin vuln         0.67            0.73            0.60           0.70            0.57            0.66           0.67
                       (6.37)***       (5.94)***       (6.45)***      (6.50)***       (3.73)***       (5.35)***      (6.36)***
Size x Fin vuln        0.16                                           0.13            0.17            0.20           0.15
                       (3.42)***                                      (3.16)***       (2.96)***       (3.86)***      (3.27)***
JV                                                     0.52***
MNC                                                    0.25***
SOE x Fin vuln                                                        -0.17
JV x Control                                                                          -7.5, 1.5**       -1.0            -1.1
MNC x Control                                                                         -5.6, 1.3**       0.4             0.3
Size x Control                                                                        1.0, -0.2         -1.3            0.4**

Sector FE                   Y              Y               Y              Y               Y               Y              Y
Firm FE                     Y              Y               N              Y               Y               Y              Y

R-squared              0.52            0.51            0.15           0.51            0.52            0.52           0.52
# observations         221,801         221,801         221,813        246,426         216,473         221,801        221,801
# firms                88,004          88,004          88,005         93,580          87,291          88,004         88,004
# sectors              36              36              36             36              35              36             36
