                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                COMPARING ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL INTERVENTIONS
                     TO REDUCE INTIMATE PARTNER VIOLENCE:
                 EVIDENCE FROM CENTRAL AND SOUTHERN AFRICA

                                            Radha Iyengar
                                            Giulia Ferrari

                                        Working Paper 16902
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16902


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2011




Previously circulated as "Discussion Sessions Coupled with Microfinancing May Enhance the Role
of Women in Household Decision-Making in Burundi." The authors are grateful to Jeannie Annan,
Oriana Bandiera, Shawn Cole, Erica Field, Michael Kremer, Emily Oster and participants at the NBER
Africa Project Conferences and Harvard Development Seminars for helpful comments. The authors
also thank Bersebeh Beyene and Gabrielle Cole as well as members of the IRC Burundi staff for assistance
in data collection. We thank Prof. Charlotte Watts (London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine)
for providing us the raw data from the IMAGE study. The authors gratefully acknowledge financial
support from the NBER Africa Project and the Centre for Economic Performance. Iyengar also acknowledges
financial support from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. Any remaining errors are our own.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Radha Iyengar and Giulia Ferrari. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Comparing Economic and Social Interventions to Reduce Intimate Partner Violence: Evidence
from Central and Southern Africa
Radha Iyengar and Giulia Ferrari
NBER Working Paper No. 16902
March 2011, Revised June 2014
JEL No. D12,G21,I12,J12

                                           ABSTRACT

The empowerment of women within households remains a major issue around the world including
in Africa. We have conducted a study in Burundi coupling discussion sessions with microfinancing
to determine if they enhance the role of women in decisions regarding household purchases and the
reduction of domestic violence. We compare our findings to that from a published study in South
Africa that combined discussion sessions on life skills and health on reduction in domestic violence
and decisions on economic issues. Both studies used randomized controlled experiments. Both studies
show a trend towards increases in household authority, with the Burundi study showing statistical
significance. In South Africa there was a large, albeit short lived decrease in domestic violence. In
Burundi there was small reduction but trends suggest a longer duration. The effects on overall
empowerment are small. These studies suggest that a more sustained use of discussion sessions may
result in longer and more sustained economic and social empowerment. Future research could focus
on the longer term effects of the use of discussion sessions and investigate how the observed impacts
can be sustained in magnitude and duration.


Radha Iyengar
London School of Economics
Department of Economics
Houghton St
London WC2A 2AE
UNITED KINGDOM
riyengar@rwj.harvard.edu

Giulia Ferrari
London School of Economics
G.Ferrari@lse.ac.uk
                                      1 INTRODUCTION


Empowerment of women within households and reduction in domestic violence remains a major
issue around the world including Africa. Despite this, there is a lack of broad evidence and little
consensus either among scholars or among practitioners as to what programs or policies are
effective. In particular, the debate remains as to whether economic conditions, such as wage
rates or labor market opportunities, affect bargaining power and reduction in violence on the
one hand or whether specific gender-based programs are required. This paper describes an
impact evaluation of a financial skills and negotiation training program in conjunction with
microfinancing in Burundi compared to data from a previously published study on gender-based
training for women receiving microfinancing in South Africa.

The Burundi program coupled discussion groups for both women and men with participation and
financing for women in local savings and loan association. The discussion groups focused on
financial decision making within households with the aim increasing the role of women in
household decision making and in reducing domestic violence towards women. The program
was designed to provide women with access to economic resources through village savings and
loan associations (VSLA).The International Refugee Committee (IRC) randomly selected half of
the members in each of the 25 VSLAs groups to participate in a set of 6 discussion sessions
where it shared with women and their spouses progressive attitudes about the role of gender in
household decision making regarding finances. The evaluation utilized focus groups to
investigate whether the discussion sessions were effective at increasing the role of women in
decisions regarding household purchases and concomitantly in reducing violence against
women.

In this study we compared the Burundi program to the well-known program in South Africa -
Microfinance for Gender Equity (IMAGE). The South African study was designed to increase
access to resources and reduce violence for poor women (Kim, et al 2009). The program
included both microfinancing and a 10-session group course for the women. In South Africa, the
study focused on general life skills and specific gender issues like fertility and sexually
transmitted diseases. In South Africa the program was purposefully targeted at women and
intended specifically to reduce violence in the household.

Both studies show that discussion sessions in conjunction with microcredit participation
improves financial decision making authority for women, reduces exposure to violence, reduces
acceptance of violence, and increases consumption of household goods relative to luxury goods
such as alcohol. The evidence from both studies suggests that discussion groups may be a
useful approach for empowering women when applied in combination with the improved
economic access provided by microcredit participation. In the following sections we present the
program and evaluation designs, the sources of data and the related timeline and outputs.
                                            2. BACKGROUND

Programs to reduce gender-based violence have spanned a range of countries in Southern,
Central, and Eastern Africa with varying degrees of success. In part this is because these
programs have been largely divorced from theories on underlying causes of intimate partner
violence. Theories on the relationship between resources and violence are abundant in
several disciplines including psychology, sociology and economics. Despite this there is
limited empirical evidence to distinguish between these models.

In psychology, there are a range of theories and explanations for violence. Broadly speaking,
there have been two types of theories.1 The first characterize violence as due to either a lack of
control during escalating arguments. Such violence programs focus on anger management
programs and more detailed cognitive behavioural therapy as a means to reduce violence.
(Dutton and Corvo, 2006). If increased resources reduce conflict within the household then
regardless of who the resources are provided to, violence should reduce. On the other hand, if
female resources increase conflict then the chance of escalation to violence increases. An
alternative theory is that violence is a strategically chosen systematic means to exercise control.
Strategic violence for the purposes of control might therefore increase as women have
increased access to resources.

Work by sociologists and criminologist largely focuses on social and contextual causes of
violence but parallels closely the psychology theories. In these fields, there are two prominent
sets of theories: “exposure” and “backlash”. The exposure theory focuses on the amount of
time spent together. This is similar to the violence is due to lack of control described in the
psychology literature. Programs that increase income-generating activities by women or
generally increase separation will reduce violence by reducing the time partners spend together.
Similarly, increased unemployment by men may increase violence by increasing the time
partners spend together (Laura Dugan, Daniel Nagin and Richard Rosenfeld, 1999). The other
theory is that of “male backlash” related to the strategic violence theory cited in psychology.
Aizer (2010) gives a detailed description of this literature but the basic concept is that increased
financial independence by women increases repression by men in other areas of interaction. As
a result, increased access to resources for women will increase violence.

In contrast, work by economists typically focuses on modeling household interactions. While
neoclassical models of unitary household decision making (such as Becker, 1965) are still used
occasionally data from a wide range of settings have rejected several features of the unitary
model. This has led to a now large literature that models household decisions as the result of
bargaining among household members (e.g., Browning and Chiappori 1998). These models
have helped frame findings from developing countries that show that increases in the female
share of household income, interpreted as providing the woman more power within the


1
 There is a rich and detailed psychology literature on both the motivation and effects of intimate partner violence,
a full review of which is beyond the scope of this paper. For a more detailed treatment, see Johnson and Ferraro,
2000.
household, induce an allocation of resources that better reflects her preferences (Duflo 2003;
Rangel 2005). This allocation tends to feature greater investment in education, housing, and
nutrition for children (Strauss and Thomas 1995; Duflo 2003). Many now see women’s
empowerment as key to improving the welfare of women and children. To date, however, there
is little evidence that externally induced “empowerment” is effective. While experimental
evidence does suggest that legal control of a new asset empowers women (Ashraf, Karlan, and
Yin 2006), this empowerment effect is short-lived. Typically these models do not include
violence though adaptations by Aizer (2010) and Pollack (2005) present results where the
man’s utility increasing in violence and the woman’s decreasing in violence. In such models,
increased resources increase women’s bargaining power suggesting that violence should
decrease. However, this is only true if the increased resources imply an increased outside
opportunity.

Empirical evidence distinguishing the theories largely comes from economists who have
employed structural methods or used panel data to overcome the problem posed by
endogenous wages. Bowlus and Seitz (2006) use structural methods to estimate a negative
impact of female employment on abuse. Tauchen, Witte and Long (1991) and Farmer and
Tiefenthaler (1997) utilized panel data on victims of domestic violence to examine the impact of
changes in a woman’s income over time on violence. In all cases, there is limited ability to
distinguish between resources affecting violence and reverse causality of violence affecting
resources and unemployment. Recent work by Aizer (2009) uses demand shocks in female-
dominant sectors to identify the effect of increased wages on violence. Aizer’s findings suggest
increase resources reduce violence and are thus inconsistent with the backlash/strategic control
models that predict that as women’s wages increase, violence against them increases. In
addition, Aizer find that violence reduction occurs during non-working hours, inconsistent with
the exposure/lack of control models as well. Aizer’s work provides important insight into
settings where outside options improve and women have substantial economic and social
freedom. In many settings across the world and particularly in Sub-Saharan Africa, women
have few outside options. Women often have few legal rights and there is extreme social
pressure to stay in marriages that are often extremely abusive. There is even more limited
evidence on the role of resources and negotiations in these settings. The only existing evidence
on the impact of women’s economic status on domestic violence comes from an experiment in
South Africa and Burundi VSLA interventions described below.


           3. EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FROM SOUTH AFRICA AND BURUNDI

Among the most prominent of these experiments to reduce intimate partner violence was the
program with Microfinance for Gender Equity (IMAGE) in South Africa, a cooperative study
between the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine (LSHTM), Wits University in
Johannesburg, and the microfinance NGO Small Enterprise Foundation (SEF). When this study
was first implemented, SEF had been working in the Limpopo Province of South Africa for nine
years. Limpopo is one of the poorer provinces in South Africa, with 50% of its population
earning 800 Rands or less a month in 20011. The IMAGE pilot was introduced in the peri-urban
area around the mining town of Burgersfort, Sekhukhuneland. The researchers from LSHTM
and Wits Universities structured a 10-session curriculum on life skills, health and gender training
to be administered to the women receiving microloans. The sessions were structured as
discussion forums for adult learning facilitated by a group of social workers specially trained for
the task. The ten sessions were offered to women fortnightly, at repayment meetings. The
training entailed the discussion of gender roles and self-awareness, as well as communication
on difficult issues, especially around HIV, and within the household.2 The training was bundled
into a package that also entailed participation into the pro-poor group-lending program that SEF
runs in the province, based on the Grameen model of group lending schemes, where
participants form groups of five individuals that are jointly liable for the repayment of their
individual loans.

The framework followed by the IMAGE researchers is illustrated schematically in Figure 1. As
shown in the diagram, there is a common risk environment that determines a number of
structural – in public health terms – and cultural and socio-economic conditions that determine
the vulnerability of the women. The aim of the IMAGE program was to break this vicious cycle
by breaking the cycle of poverty the women are trapped into and alter the women’s perceptions
of gender norms, thereby increasing their empowerment not just by giving them access to
increased income, but also by altering their attitudes to violence and their decision making skills.

                                     [INSERT FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE]

In 2001, the IMAGE study was designed as a pilot study of the introduction of a microfinance
and training (mf plus) product in a new market. It was geared towards understanding the
intervention’s efficacy, in view of possibly expanding operations in the area. To our knowledge it
was the first randomized controlled trial of an mf plus. It compared the full package of
microfinance and life skills and gender training versus no program participation.3 This is in line
with the multifaceted nature of the risk that the study hypothesized the individuals to be faced
with, and does not allow us to disentangle the effects of each component, but only to observe
their joint effect.4




2
  1Equivalent to 93USD a month at 2001 exchange rates (calculated at September 2001; source:
http://www.oanda.com/currency/converter/ )
3
  2 This would ideally also include an intervention with life skills training only, although the difference here is that
these types of discussion forums typically do not enjoy the regularity in attendance that microfinance program
based sessions typically do. This, as noted above, is possibly one of the reasons why life skill training programs are
often coupled to microfinance program.
4
  A subsequent cross‐sectional study compared the two initial groups at follow up with a third group of women in
similar villages that only had access to microfinance, and found that the latter group tended to fare better on most
economic outcomes, while the full intervention group fares comparatively better on all of the other empowerment
and violence‐reduction outcomes (Kim et al., 2009). Further, the group exposed to full treatment seemed to do
better on some longer term economic outcomes, a finding that we corroborate from the Burundi study we present
here. Further investigations of these trends may be useful and here we also analyzed the data from Kim et al
(2009)
The IMAGE evaluation assigned villages randomly to treatment (microloans plus discussion
sessions) and control. The study villages were first assigned to three different groups on the
basis of their size and accessibility – large and accessible, two pairs of medium and accessible,
and small ad inaccessible – to reflect the typology of villages in the area, because it was
hypothesized that villages that were larger and closer to main roads would have a more
dynamic market than smaller villages, or villages that were not as close to main roads. Village
characteristics were measured during field reconnaissance visits, due to lack of census data on
these villages at the time the pilot started.

Randomization happened at the level of the cluster defined by the village pair, and individual
villages were randomized either to treatment or to control by means of a lottery. Each of the
three clusters contained two villages, and the lottery assigned these randomly to treatment
immediately, or to deferred treatment. The women joined in groups of five in each village,
generating between a minimum of 9 to a maximum of 30 groups per village.

Within both intervention and control villages, the pool of individuals eligible to join the program
was identified by means of a participatory rural appraisal technique, called participatory wealth
ranking (PWR), devised by the collaborating NGO, and whose consistency with statistical
methods has been tested and discussed elsewhere (Hargreaves et al., 2007). The program was
designed to measure the effectiveness of the intervention, and it compared treated individuals in
the villages assigned to treatment versus non-treated eligible individuals in control villages; this
implies that we would find some statistically significant differences at baseline for socio-
demographic characteristics that could bias the estimates, and that we therefore controlled for.
Finally, because the level of treatment is the village, we clustered the errors at the village level.
Program evaluation happened at two points in time: the baseline survey was collected in 2001-
2002, and the follow up survey in 2003-2004, so that each individual would be interviewed 2
years after their baseline interview. Interviewers received one month of training prior to going to
the field.

In contrast to previous efforts to enhance women’s empowerment, the program in Burundi did
not to focus on women’s empowerment explicitly, fearing backlash in the home and community,
and increase women’s vulnerability to violence in the short-term. Instead, the program
approached the issues of empowerment and gender-based violence subtly by encouraging
discussion among partners to analyze how men and women relate to one another within the
privacy of their homes in negotiating access to and control over household resources. While the
courses did not explicitly deal with gender issues, the hypothesis driving the program was that
encouraging husbands and wives to discuss household decisions and respect women’s
opinions may improve women’s decision making power in the home. The courses were
conceived to help facilitate a household atmosphere where women (and their opinions) would
be more valued and violence against them becomes a less acceptable way of solving issues
and conflicts. This change in attitudes and respect could reduce vulnerability to violence within
the household.
The Burundi program, run by the IRC, established the pilot VSLA program in the Makamba
province of Burundi. The pilot project involved 25 groups across the Makamba Province in
Burundi: 7 in Nyanza-Lac, 6 in Kibago, 6 in Kayagoro, and 6 in Mabanda. In addition to
implementing the VSLA methodology according to the guidelines and principles developed by
CARE International, researchers from London School of Economics (with input from IRC)
developed a 6-course discussion group series that addressed household decision-making along
gender lines, the respective roles of women and men, and the use of violence against women in
the home more broadly. Half of the participants in the VSLAs were invited to attend these
discussions with their spouses. IRC staff members from the gender-based violence program
were trained to facilitate these discussion groups. The basic logic model is presented below.
This impact evaluation is among the few detailed studies IRC has ongoing in post-conflict
countries. IRC has partnered with academic evaluators in Liberia, Congo, and Cote d’Ivoire, to
assess the net difference its work makes for people and investigate what works best to
accomplish IRC objectives.5

The Burundi evaluation is relatively unique because it used randomization more narrowly than
other evaluation designs that are based on a complete random assignment of units
(communities, villages, individuals) into treatment and control. Such broad randomization,
although very valuable for testing overall effectiveness does not provide insights into what parts
of a program work and how existing programs may be specifically enhanced. In Burundi, the
VSLAs were already formed at the time the evaluation began, thereby limiting the random
assignment to units into which individuals had already self-selected. Thus, although this
evaluation cannot assess the effectiveness of the VSLA program overall – which would require
a control group that does not receive VSLA – it can assess the degree to which an important
additional variation of the program design is more or less effective at influencing women’s
empowerment, defined here as their ability to not only access economic resources but also
participate in controlling them.

The cluster unit of randomization was the VSLA but randomization occurred at the individual
level, with half of each VSLA’s members selected randomly into the treatment – i.e. the
discussion groups – through a lottery, held in each VSLA.6 Slips were drawn from a hat, and
those with "winning" slips were the ones who entered the discussion groups with spouses.




5
  This project was approved by Harvard University Human Subjects (Application Number: F15660‐101)
6
  The VSLA groups initially formed through members of the community designated as community based facilitators
(CBF).The IRC identified CBFs during community mobilization on the VSLA approach. The IRC was able to reach four
communes and eight zones. After having explained the VSLA approach and the role of CBFs, community members
elected two or three people. In each commune, the IRC invited 4 CBFs (for a total of 16 CBFs) to a meeting where a
transparent selection process was conducted to identify the 8 CBFs. The IRC chose two individuals that fulfilled all
or the majority of the criteria in each commune. At the end of the process, the IRC had retained 8 CBFs, four
women and four men as facilitators. Each commune had one female and one male facilitator. The CBFs were
responsible for training groups in the VSLA methodology. Appendix Table 1 lists the CBF identifiers, sex, and the
gender composition of each group.
Those selected were invited to attend a 6 session course on household decision-making with
their spouses.7

The program was evaluated at different points in time, and both quantitative and qualitative data
were analyzed statistically, in order to fully capture the complexity of the programmatic impact.
After the initial formation of groups through the community-based facilitators the IRC conducted
a baseline survey of all participants to determine attitudes and assess comparability of
treatment (discussion group attendees) and control groups. During the course of the discussion
groups, IRC designed monitoring tools were used to test the comprehension and retention of
discussion group material. These tools can also used to improve the quality of how the
discussion groups are designed and facilitated along the way and during the 2nd phase of
implementation. After the conclusion of the discussion groups, the IRC conducted a second
survey to determine direct immediate-effect of discussion groups on attitudes. At this stage, the
IRC also conducted four focus groups, with both treated and non-treated men and women, to
contextualize and enrich the quantitative findings from the post-discussion focus group survey.
After the VSLA groups had completed their one-year cycle, and savings plus interest had been
distributed to all participants, the IRC conducted a final survey of the short-run effects of VSLA
participation and attendance in facilitated discussion groups on reported outcomes. In theory,
participation by both men and women can also open up opportunities for dialogue over
economic decisions from more equalized positions of power, which is often a critical barrier to
economic self-reliance among women. The discussion sessions were conceived to improve
attitudes towards women’s empowerment, thereby decreasing their vulnerability to violence in
the home. We formulated and tested four hypotheses to investigate whether and how women’s
empowerment was increased and their vulnerability reduced as a consequence of the
intervention.

3.1 Sampling and Design
3.1.1 Burundi
The sample of treatment and control participants was drawn from the VSLA groups initially
formed through members of the community designated as community based facilitators
(CBF).In order to determine the sample size necessary to detect a significant change in the
outcome measures, we conducted a power analysis of a one tailed test of Treatment = Control
against the two-sided alternative Treatment ≠ Control. To conduct a power analysis to
determine feasibility, we used previous related work by Kim, et al (2007).Kim et al provided
microfinance and sexual health and empowerment counseling to women in South Africa, and
found that average effect sizes among treatment group women revealed a reduction of almost
half relative to their control group counterparts. With such a large effect, the pilot study sample
of 500 would be sufficient to detect statistically significant change.


7
  All participants were informed that due to space constraints, only half of the members would be able to attend.
In each discussion group, individuals drew numbers from a bag or hat. Those who drew a “winning” number were
invited to attend the groups. Others were informed that they would not participate this time but would hopefully
be able to participate in the next round. The lottery was conducted this way due to concerns that choosing half of
the discussion groups would result in insufficient statistical power to detect an effect.
To determine if such a distribution was applicable to the Burundi population we compared the
results from the baseline survey to the South African sample. The baseline survey used the
Hurt, Insult, Threat, Scream (HITS) screening tool.8 This tool was designed as a "paper-and-
pencil" instrument for identifying both physical and verbal abuse. It includes four items: physical
abuse (such as hitting or punching), insults, threats and screaming. The four items are scored
on a Likert 5-point scale.9

Baseline results indicate that the distribution of violence among respondents in Burundi is
similar to that of respondents in the South African sample analyzed by Kim et al. Applying the
same distribution (mean and standard deviation) of the population in Burundi would imply that
the minimum effect size the current pilot could significantly detect is a 27 percent change in
outcome values. This is significantly smaller than the economic well-being and attitude effects
detected in Kim et al (2009).10

To increase power for analysis, the sample was randomly drawn from each of the 25 groups so
that the probability of being chosen for any respondent was 50 percent conditional on being in
their VSLA group. Because of a small number of absences, the overall probability of any given
VSLA member being chosen to participate in the discussion groups was 48 percent. Absences
were random and so this slight divergence does not significantly affect the comparability of the
control and treatment groups.

3.1.2 South Africa
For the study of the IMAGE program, no prior estimates of impact for similar studies existed for
all outcomes(Hargreaves et al., 03PRT/24), hence the protocol for the study published expected
outcomes and interval estimates for such outcomes, discussing the sensitivity of results to
changes in key statistical parameters. In particular, because the power for the estimation of
impact in randomized trials at the village level is influenced by the number of villages included in
the study, the number of individuals in each village, and the intra-class correlation coefficient
within each village, the IMAGE protocol presented expected estimates and relative precision

8
  Sherin, Kevin, et al. “HITS: A Short Domestic Violence Screening Tool for Use in Family Practice Settings” Fam Med
1998;30(7):508‐12.)HITS is used globally now in China, Saudi Arabia, the Middle East, Africa, Europe, and South and
North America. It has been validated for women in Spanish, and partner violence with males. In the US, the HITS
tool is used or has been recommended by Kaiser Permanente Group of Northern California, The New Jersey
Hospital Association, the Alaska Department of Health and Human Services, Parkland Hospital in Dallas, the
Department of OB GYN at USF in Tampa, the CDC, and others. It has been translated into multiple languages
including Mandarin Chinese and Arabic.
9
   It has been validated against the CTS in a study of 160 female patients in an urban/suburban family practice
setting and 99 self‐identified abused women. The HITS scores were strongly correlated with the CTS, with
sensitivity and specificity of 96% and 91%, respectively. Positive predictive and negative predictive values in the
family practice setting were 87% and 97%, respectively.
10
   We show that the randomization into the different treatment groups was successful, and that participants do
not differ significantly along any identifiable socio‐economic dimension. This is an important step in the evaluation
design, because it tells us whether the groups generated via the randomization process are indeed good
counterfactuals for one another. As the analyses below illustrate, the groups do not differ in any statistically
significant way on average and thus do constitute good counterfactuals for one another. In turn, this allows us to
attribute any statistically significant difference in the outcomes to the intervention.
taking these elements into account.11 However because virtually no data was available on either
the intra-class correlation coefficient, nor on various outcomes variables, the protocol reported a
range of such estimates, for different values of both baseline prevalence rates and intra-class
correlation coefficients for the key outcomes it focused on. 12

3.2 Distinguishing Between Theories
The evaluation design allows distinguishing the effect of increased resources in addition to
discussion sessions. Broadly the studies test whether increased access to resources results in
increased control of resources and the extent to which improved information on the benefits of
cooperative household decision making relative to sole-male, sometime violence decision
making reduced violence. In both studies, the underlying hypothesis is that the program acts by
both improving the woman’s economic status and her ability to negotiate her role within the
household. In turn, this should imply that the resources she brings into the household remain
under her control to a greater extent because she has learned to better negotiate her role; and
her demands for increased autonomy are less likely to be perceived as threatening by the man,
because the woman is bringing in resources of her own, and therefore may be seen as more of
an equal by her partner.

Compared to a situation where the women are do receive microfinancing and participate in
discussion sessions, the joint administration of these two services should support the woman in
improving her status in the household in a non-threatening, and rather constructive manner, so
that she may play a more autonomous and constructive role in household decision making, and
thereby reduce her exposure to violence.

If increased resources reduce conflict in the household then microfinance programs alone may
be sufficient to reduce violence. However, if who receives resources matter, this may be due to
either the economic bargaining model by economist or the backlash/strategic violence theory by
sociologists and psychologists. If increased resources to women reduce violence, this is
supportive of the bargaining model. However, changes in resource levels should only salient if
women have access and decision making power over the use of these resources. Thus the
question also arises about whether if changes in resource control are required, this may better
accomplished in single sex or mixed sex interventions.

The two investigations in South Africa and Burundi explore different facets of women’s
empowerment and reduction in domestic violence in sub-Saharan Africa in ways that reflect the
intrinsic differences in study design, as well as the different socio-economic contexts. The
IMAGE study mostly focused on the dimension empowerment related to autonomy – i.e. the
ability of the individual to think and for themselves, independently of what others around them

11
  Except for HIV data.
12
  We report the baseline values for a number of relevant socio economic dimensions and demographic
characteristics, which show the extent to which the randomization was successful. Women in the two groups are
not statistically different on a number of accounts that will be shown below, and belong to the same socio‐
economic milieu according to the participatory wealth ranking exercise carried out by the microfinance NGO to
identify the group of poorest individuals in the village (Hargreaves et al., 2007; Simanowitz and Nkuna, 1998).
say. Thus, it encouraged the women to think for themselves, and see themselves as more self-
interested individuals compared with the role of women who were not in the program. The
Burundi VSLA intervention, in contrast, focused more on the aspect of empowerment that has to
do with positive relations with others – i.e. meaningful connections with significant others that
are mutually enriching and constructive. These intrinsic difference explains the exclusive focus
on women we find in IMAGE, and the inclusion of clients both genders in the Burundi VSLA,
respectively. Further, both programs were designed to respond to the local environment they
were introduced in, to enhance their respective salience in relation to the local context and, by
so doing enhancing their chance of successfully achieving their stated targets. Thus, IMAGE
was geared toward South African women in peri-urban areas, who have a tradition of joining
women’s groups, both for economic purposes – as the presence of numerous women’s
stokvels–locally initiated rotating savings associations indicated, and for political and social
purposes (Bozzoli, 1990). The program in Burundi, owed its structure instead to the fact that
IRC preferred to entertain a dialogue with both genders, in an effort to offset previous failed
attempts that had exclusively focused on women, and in order to reduce the likelihood of
rejection on the part of the population of an intervention that only focused on women, given the
very conservative nature of the local culture in Burundi.
Summary of Comparative Measures
Question                                         Burundi VSLA          South Africa IMAGE

Household Roster (relation, age)                        Y                        Y

Education                                               Y                        Y

Displacement                                            Y                       N /A

Assets                                           Land Ownership           LO + index of hh
                                                                        durables + heads of
                                                                           cattle & other
                                                                         domestic animals

Consumption                                      Y (past 2 weeks)                N

Who decides on a variety of issues                      Y                        Y

How disputes get resolved                               Y                        N

Attitudes towards women’s roles and rights              Y                   Roles Only

Controlling Behavior                                    N                        Y

Violence Levels                                 HITS Tool (past 2      WHO Tool (past 12m)
                                                    weeks)

Response to Violence                                    N                        Y

Knowledge of & Communication on HIV                    N/A                       Y


Networks & Community Participation                      N                        Y




                                     4. METHODS
4.1 Quantitative Data
4.1.1 Burundi
The evaluation relies on 4 sources of data: 1) a baseline survey conducted in January, 2008; 2)
a post-discussion group survey conducted in July, 2008; 3) qualitative monitoring to
complement the discussion group findings in January 2009; and 4) a final survey conducted in
April 2009. These, together with the methods used for data analysis, are briefly described .
The Survey Instrument
The three waves of survey collected data on household consumption, decision making and
conflict resolution, gender roles, attitudes toward violence, exposure to violence, women’s
rights. The first wave of the survey also included a household roster; while the second also
included sections on asset ownership and income, VSLA loans and savings, and wealth and
wellbeing. The measure of exposure to violence used in this survey is the Hurt Insult Threaten
Scream (HITS) instrument (Sherin et al., 1998). The HITS was chosen due to its proven
applicability in a variety of settings, and because it allows for a rapid appraisal of past
experiences of violence. Its measurement regards the two weeks prior to the interview. The
surveys were conducted by 12 interviewers, 4 of which were males. Each interview lasted
approximately 30 minutes

Analysis
The data was collected in Excel spreadsheets and imported into Stata, a statistical package
widely used for econometric analysis. We performed regression analysis on the data, using a
‘difference in differences’ approach. This method allowed us to compare the magnitude and
statistical significance of the relative change in the outcomes of interest experienced by the
relevant groups as a result of the treatment, compared to the initial situation. The rigorous
randomization design allowed us to attribute the observed changes to the intervention.

4.1.2 South Africa
The Survey Instrument
The two waves of the IMAGE panel contained data on socio-demographics, group membership,
community participation, household dynamics, economic well-being and shortages, HIV/AIDS
awareness and communication, societal norms on gender roles, decision making in the
household, intimate partner violence including controlling behavior, responses on experiences
of abuse, and questions on loan performance for microfinance clients. Importantly, the tool that
measures exposure to violence in the IMAGE study – based on the WHO indicators of domestic
violence as found in the WHO multi-country study (WHO, 2005) – measured incidence over a
period of 12 months prior to the interview. This implies that comparisons between the HITS
results from the Burundi intervention and the tool used for IMAGE are not directly comparable.
The measures of exposure to violence used in the two evaluations differ in terms of the time
span they cover.

The women were also administered a household questionnaire that included a household
roster, questions on the type of the two most significant sources of income, characteristics of the
dwelling, household assets, credits and savings, perception of own wealth, and food security.
Questionnaires were in total about 25 pages long, and took 40 minutes to one hour to
administer. Interviewers were all females, and during the month long training prior to the first
wave of survey data collection they learned interviewing techniques for sensitive issues, and
studied the questionnaire in depth.
Analysis
The data was entered in Access databases, and transferred into Stata. We used the ‘difference-
in-differences’ approach in an OLS model to measure impact. We clustered the errors at the
village level, as this was the level at which treatment was administered, and control for village
pair effect, as these are identify geographical characteristics of relevance, as well as for a
number of socio-demographic variables to correct for baseline imbalances.

4.2 Qualitative Data
There were important differences in the way the qualitative data were collected in South Africa
vs. Burundi.

The qualitative data from South Africa used in this study focused on the understanding of the
women’s conception of subjective well-being (SWB) and was used to formulate initial
hypotheses as to what aspects of SWB the objective measures of empowerment may relate to
exposure to violence. For the Burundi project the qualitative data were the transcripts of the
discussion sessions. The data from Burundi was collected in a manner that could be analyzed
statistically by the text analysis program Alceste.

4.2.1 Burundi
The Focus Group Data Collection
Perceptions and customs around decision making within households including on daily and
major household purchases, family planning issues and women’s ability to negotiate sex,
domestic violence and the recent conflict between different ethnic groups were investigated in
focus group discussions. We used verbal descriptions to obtain answers to questions.

We then analyzed the transcripts from focus group sessions to enrich and contextualize the
interpretation of the quantitative data. In line with the underlying evaluation design, focus group
participants were divided into focus group according to their treatment status, and further
separated by gender, so that a total of four focus groups were run: one with treated women and
one with non-treated women; one with treated men and one with non-treated men. One
moderator supported by an interpreter conducted each focus group. A female moderator and
interpreter conducted the focus groups with the women, and a male moderator and interpreter
those with men, because it was thought this would favor a greater degree of understanding and
trust during the sessions. At times, especially for the most delicate parts of the discussion,
moderators and interpreters explicitly appealed to this form of trust and understanding, to
reassure participants that their thoughts would be comprehended, valued, and respected.13


The focus groups all had the same structure, and therefore produce information that may be
compared across the different groups. The sessions open with the moderator and interpreter

13
  In the following excerpt the female facilitator introduces the part of the discussion on violence to the women in
the discussion group Let us now talk about violence. I would like to remind you that you are free to talk according
to your understanding, and whatever you say will be confidential, you know we are almost the same age, so, feel
free to express yourselves. Tell me, when a man is angry, what kind of reactions can he have?”
briefly explaining the purpose of the focus group, introducing themselves, and requesting an
informed oral consent of participants. The focus groups interactions were mainly devoted to
obtaining answers for eight key questions, some of which were further articulated as sub-
questions or themes: the market day, joint decision making, women and their ability to manage
money, the ethnic conflict and marital relationships, family planning, and conflict and violence
within the household.

Analysis
The verbal material from the focus groups was analyzed with the aid of Alcesté, a software suite
for the analysis of the content of textual data. The software applies a statistical technique called
correspondence analysis to identify themes (technically called classes) in the text; this is done
by computing the relative frequency and co-occurrence of different parts of speech in the text.
By identifying those elements in the text’s vocabulary that tend to occur together, the software
defines the key themes woven in the text itself. This technique is useful in the analysis of text
that reports responses to open questions, as it allows us to characterize the worldviews of
respondents associated with the prompts they were given. This feature makes Alcesté
particularly apt for the analysis of the material from the focus groups conducted in Burundi,
where the moderators only gave hints to introduce the themes they wanted to discuss, and let
participants express their own personal views in their own manner on these themes. The
software identified seven separate themes that we discuss below in conjunction with the results
from the quantitative econometric analysis of the survey data to more fully capture the impact of
the intervention.

4.3 Comparison of Results
The results are presented separately for our own data from Burundi and our analysis of the Kim
et al data from South Africa. We provide the results in the immediate context of the hypotheses
outlined above. The results are described around the three broad themes of financial decision
making, attitudes to violence, and violence outcomes, integrating both quantitative and
qualitative findings for Burundi. This integration allows us to provide a rigorous discussion of the
hypotheses in light of results while contextualizing them clearly into the areas of relevance for
policy making. Only quantitative analysis is provided for South Africa, as Kim et al are currently
conducting qualitative analyses of their data.

The tools used in the two interventions to measure experience of domestic violence differ
somewhat, the Burundi intervention relying on the HITS measure (Sherin et al., 1998), and the
IMAGE intervention relying on the WHO methodology found in the WHO multi-country study on
violence against women (Garcia-Moreno et al., 2005). However slightly different, both these
measures capture a measure of physical assault – push, and hit with a fist or object in the case
of IMAGE; and physically hurt you, in the case of the VSLA intervention in Burundi – as well as
a measure of insult, though the IMAGE instrument only gages whether insults are administered
in public, and is therefore likely to capture less instances. The two measures differ in that the
HITS measure also captures instances of threat and cases when the woman has been
screamed at, and hence in general focuses on aggressive behavior of the man toward the
woman broadly understood. The IMAGE tool looks explicitly as sexual violence, investigating
whether the woman has been forced to have sex and/or has had sex for fear of the
consequences, had she refused to, and also at controlling behavior more generally. In both
cases, the choice of questions is related to the context where the interventions were introduced,
which in turn, as we have seen, determined the nature of the interventions themselves. In the
case of IMAGE, the choice of asking explicit questions about sexual violence may be connected
both to the widespread incidence of sexual violence itself, and by the fact that in South Africa
this is an issue that is openly discussed in the media, and by policy makers. In contrast the
choice of the HITS tool – whose efficacy in detecting instances of domestic abuse is
documented (Sherin et al., 1998) – has rather to do with the overarching spirit of the
intervention, and the choice not to focus explicitly on domestic violence in order not to alienate
men and the general population in the communities where it was introduced.


                                           5. RESULTS

We report on results from our analyses of the effects of programs that couple microfinancing
with discussion sessions in Burundi and South Africa in the areas of decision making, attitudes
to traditional norms and violence against women, and reported exposure to violence, both in the
form of controlling behavior on the part of men and of more direct forms of violence. The results
are shown so as to assess the degree to which the programs have met the targets they had
originally defined. For each program, we first provide an overview of results to convey the
overall impact of the program; we then evaluate the success of the randomization, in order to
justify the econometric models, and then describe the results in relation to the hypotheses we
formulated for the two programs. We focus on the specific indicators related to these
hypotheses for each program and develop a comparative perspective. We discuss the common
and discordant features of the results from the two programs.

5.1. Burundi
The VSLA microfinancing program coupled with the discussion sessions in Burundi was
targeted at reducing male control over all household decision-making. Included in this, was the
goal of changed attitudes towards household violence. If successful in execution, both men and
women who participated in the discussion sessions will have developed a more nuanced
understanding of domestic violence without an explicit discussion or consideration of violence.
In particular, women who participated in the discussion sessions would be able to describe the
elements that constitute the ‘cultural risk environment’ for domestic violence. ‘Cultural risk
environment’ the set of criteria that identify an acceptable behavior for the woman in the
household and that at the same time underscore her lesser stand in the negotiation of roles.

In testing the impact of the Burundi program, we find that participation in the discussion groups
is associated with increased decision making for women. In particular, 26% more women in the
discussion groups report an increase in spending on their own earnings. There is no substantial
change in decisions on how men’s income is spent. In addition, women report increased
decision making authority over major household purchases also increases by nearly 14%. This
change in decision making directly impacts household consumption with women reporting and
more than 11% increase in household consumption. Attitudes towards violence changed by
9%., with men reporting more often that violence was unacceptable, in particular, when the wife
is perceived as neglecting the children and when the wife refuses sex. However, these changes
in attitude are not reflected in substantial changes to violence exposure. The program appears
to reduce violence by less than 1 percent.

5.1.1 Verifying Randomization
Before considering the initial reported attitudes of VSLA participants on gender issues, we
asked respondents detailed information about their household, including information about
displacement, education, and wealth. This information is important from a methodological
standpoint because it provides important information to test that discussion session participating
and control communities are similar across a range of background variables that might shape
the outcomes of interest or impact the efficacy of the program. In addition, the data offers a
detailed picture of the VSLA participants many of whom are recent returnees to post ethnic-
conflict Burundi.

The individuals who selected into the VSLA program were not necessarily representative of all
Burundians About two-thirds of participants and thus roughly as many respondents are female
(69 percent).The average age of participants is 37.9, with the youngest participants at age 15
and the oldest at age 80.On average, respondents had 4 children living at home. The maximum
number of children living at home is 12.Just short of two-thirds (61 percent) had young children
(under 5) in the household. Only 2.2 percent of respondents reported never being displaced due
to the ethnic conflict. More than half of respondents were displaced from their homes but
remained within Burundi while 41 percent of respondents reported having to leave their homes
and Burundi due to the ethnic conflict. A majority of participants own some land (72 percent).
Among land owners, the average number of hectares owned by the household is 4.5 hectares.
Approximately 61 percent of respondents had attended some primary school. Only 16 percent
of respondents had attended secondary school.

An important component in ascertaining the validity of an experiment is comparing the outcome
variables of interest in the control and treatment groups to ensure that there are no systematic
baseline differences. If randomization is successful then on average there should be no
statistically detectable difference between the control and treatment groups for baseline
variables. Confirming this, we found that almost no outcome variable recorded a statistically
significant baseline difference between average values recorded in the participants’ and non
participants’ groups respectively. 14


                                     [INSERT TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE ]

The only statistical difference in characteristics prior to the discussion sessions was whether the
husband that decides how the money his wife earns is to be spent. The discussion session


14
     The comparison of pre‐treatment variables are shown in appendix table 1
participants reported an approximately 10% rate (that is for discussion session participants,
more husbands decided how the money the wife earned is to be spent). This difference in one
pre-treatment outcome is not of concern given the large number of outcome variables tested.
Statistically, there is a 5% chance that an outcome would appear significantly different,
consistent with our baseline results.

To ensure the groups appear similar on observable characteristics we also compared socio-
demographic variables. The two groups are also similar along socio-demographic lines, with no
variable recording a statistically significant difference between the two groups.

                               [INSERT TABLE 2 ABOUT HERE ]

In both groups, approximately 60% of respondents are females. The two groups also do not
differ significantly in terms of amount of land owned: both spouse and respondent own on
average 2 half hectares of land, and the majority of spouses do not own land jointly.

5.1.2 Decision Making Authority
The first objective of the Burundi program was to improve women’s participation in decision
making. Women’s participation in decision making in the household is generally considered as
an important step in their emancipation. If she learns to take part in the management of
household matters, and if her husband learns that it is useful to listen to her, this is interpreted
to indicate a greater appreciation of the woman’s input in the household and, in turn, to lead to a
reduced likelihood that she is subject to violence. The intervention aimed to improve decision
making dynamics in this direction, encouraging both men and women to take increasingly more
decisions jointly. We identified several areas which may be critical to women’s empowerment:
income/asset-related decision making authority, fertility decision making authority, safety, and
political rights.10

Based on this objective, hypothesis B-H1 was that female members of discussion sessions are
more likely to be involved in increasing areas of household decision making. Men who
participate in the discussion sessions will be more likely than those that do not to believe that
women are capable of making decisions in a broader set of areas. Related to this, hypothesis
B-H2 was that members of discussion sessions would become more likely to apply negotiation
skills during conflict to reduce the risk of arguments escalating to violence

Our results show a statistically significant impact on three of the eight decision making (DM): the
husband’s role in deciding how the wife’s money is spent; husbands deciding unilaterally on
large purchases for the household; and husbands deciding unilaterally on how many children to
have. In addition, all three indicators show a similar trend, with women reporting having become
more able to co-operate. In all three cases, the percentage increase in co-operative behavior
among women with respect to the baseline group is 100- fold the increase reported by men in
absolute value.
                                 [INSERT TABLE 3 ABOUT HERE ]
                                 [INSERT TABLE 4 ABOUT HERE ]
Tables 3 and 4 report full results for the battery of decision making indicators at baseline and
follow-up, Table 4 also reports the percent change in each indicator, relative to the baseline
levels. The results suggest that joint decision making on large purchases improves markedly in
the group of treated individuals—with an increase in about 15 percent for women relative to
baseline decision making authority.. This same trend is observed for decisions on when to visit
one’s own or one’s spouse’s family; further, the management of disagreements in these two
areas also shows similar patterns, although these results are not statically significant. The
results in Table 4 also suggest that negotiation skills targeted as nonviolent resolution of
disagreements improve for women in the intervention group. Women are 4 percent more likely
to discuss with their husbands when they disagree with both large and daily purchases. A
similar trend in negotiation abilities is observed for resolving disagreements in relation to visits
to either their own or their spouse’s family.

Men in the treatment group report a very small reduction in their ability to negotiate. Although
this effect is small in magnitude (less than 1 %) it appears consistent across various indicators
and may be due to heightened awareness of what negotiation entails. The results are most
pronounced on decision making on sex, and alcohol and cigarette purchases which are also the
outcomes which had the lowest levels of co-operation as well as the areas with the largest
influence of men in decision making.

Figure 2 shows the change in whether the respondent’s partner decides how to spend
respondent’s money: female VSLA members who were members of discussion groups reported
a 26% increase in level of empowerment when compared to female VSLA members in the
control group at baseline.
                           [INSERT FIGURE 2 ABOUT HERE ]

Men who participated in the discussion sessions, however, reported a greater degree of control
of household money when compared to female participants at baseline, i.e. a lower tendency to
cooperate. Though significant at the 95% level, this decrease in cooperation is 100 times
smaller than the increase reported by the women (-0.27% on females in the control group at
baseline; and -0.26% when compared to males in the control group at baseline)

Females who participated in the discussion groups co-operate on major purchases on average
14.26% more than the women at baseline (p<0.05), reporting an average of 2.347.Men showed
a decrease, instead, of 0.14 percentage points in their ability to share decision making on the
initial 2.054 average recorded by women in the control group at baseline.
                              [INSERT FIGURE 3 ABOUT HERE ]

Females who had participated in the discussion sessions recorded an increase of 0.36 points
over females clients in control groups at baseline regarding the decision of how many children
to have, recording a 14.12% increase from 2.542 (p<0.05). Men reported a decrease of 0.14
percentage points on the initial value reported by women in the control group.

                              [INSERT FIGURE 4 ABOUT HERE ]
When considering the full range of the decision making indicators, even those that did not
change significantly showed trends similar to the ones illustrated above. In general, the women
report an increase in joint decision, while men report a very small (often 100-fold smaller)
increase in their own role in household decision making.

This is consistent with the evidence from the qualitative analysis. Two themes emerged in the
focus groups related to the economic sphere of access to and management of resources. One
theme specifically describes the role of the woman in the management of the household.
Typically the activities included were cleaning, making the bed, fetching water and wood, and
preparing meals. The role of women in this area was most often associated with her
responsibility or duty. The related theme for men contains a very rich description of all activities
revolving around the market, and is associated explicitly with men in their role as fathers. This is
specifically in relation to the key role they seem to play in providing for their children’s school
purchases. The sentences characteristic of this theme seem to report the husband is in a
dominant position, i.e. as the one who has ultimately privilege to make decisions that revolve
around the acquisition of resources in the market, possibly because of his more direct access to
money. The focus on woman’s duties in the household and her role in its management is
associated to the discussion on the division of labor, and was largely concentrated among
participants in the discussion sessions. In contrast, the discussion on men’s privileged access to
the market was prevalent with both men and women who were not participants. This is
consistent with some initial effect of the treatment in fostering a more diverse set of perceptions
and ideas around the role of men and the household’s access to the market among treated
individuals. This interpretation is supported by the quantitative results, where a greater degree
of joint decision making is reported by both males and females, as opposed to the control
groups.

5.1.3 Attitudes towards Gender Norms and Violence
A second objective of the Burundi program was to affect attitudes towards domestic violence by
challenging traditional views of women. The nature of the challenge was in the economic and
decision making sphere but theory suggests that increased decision making authority may
enhance perceptions of capability and reduce tolerance and acceptance of violence. The
program aimed to improve attitudes in this direction, by encouraging both men and women to
consider why conflicts arise and why such resolutions are achieved via violence rather than
negotiation. We identified several areas in which violence might be more or less tolerated:
mobility, fertility, household behavior and general social/political rights.10 Based on this
objective, hypothesis B-H3 stated that members of the discussion groups would be more likely
to think that abuse is never justified.

                               [INSERT TABLE 5 ABOUT HERE ]

In general, the program has a positive and statistically significant impact in the reduction of the
tolerance of violence in 2 out of the 6 areas measured: neglecting children and refusing to have
sex. The impact is stronger than the time trend observed in the control group in the case of kids’
neglect, and approximately the same when it comes to the refusal to have sex, though the
estimate for the control group is more precise than that for discussion session participants.
Moreover, the acceptance of wife beating in cases of kids neglect records an increase in
rejection of abuse among discussion session participating women equal to 0.137 when
compared to baseline females (23% increase), versus a negligible decrease in the rejection of
violence on the part of discussion session participating men (-0.23%), also significant at the
90% level.

                              [INSERT FIGURE 5 ABOUT HERE ]

Participants in discussion sessions are less likely to accept violence for indiscriminate reasons
and, in particular, if women go out without saying, argue with their husband, burn food, or say
something annoying. Female participants in the discussion sessions are less likely to accept
violence against women if they say something annoying or for indiscriminate reasons. Unlike for
the cases of neglect of kids and refusal to have sex, the change in these other dimensions is
however not statistically significant with respect to levels of acceptance recorded by females at
baseline for discussion sessions participants.

The control group recorded statistically significant reductions in the tolerance of violence if the
wife goes out without letting her husband know, argues with him, neglects the kids, refuses sex
or burns food. In all these cases, trends are identical in both groups and for both genders
across groups, with a change of approximately the same order of magnitude for women in the
intervention and control groups in relation to arguments.

                              [INSERT FIGURE 6 ABOUT HERE ]

Moreover, the control group recorded a statistically significant opposite shift in views between
males and females: female clients see it as less acceptable that wives be beaten, while men
see it as more acceptable. The discussion session participants recorded a similar trend; in both
cases, the absolute difference in change is very large (about 100-fold).

5.1.4 Exposure to Violence
The ultimate objective of the program was to reduce women’s exposure to violence. Rather
than approach the norms that affect violence directly, the program in Burundi was based on the
theory that improving women’s authority over household decisions could challenge the norms
that enable violence, thus reducing violence. Based on this theory, B-H4 was that the program
reduces the prevalence of domestic violence.

                               [INSERT TABLE 6 ABOUT HERE ]

Table 6 presents the impact of the program on reported violence. It appears that females that
did not participate in the discussion sessions reported a reduction in the levels of violence in all
areas except for the experience of threats. Males who did not participate in the discussion
sessions reported an increase in the level of violence imposed on their partners with respect to
the levels control women reported at baseline, and virtually unchanged from their own report at
baseline (conditional average was 1.20 at baseline and is 1.19 at follow up).

Females in the control group reported a statistically significant reduction in the experience of
violence at the end of the savings cycle, i.e. when they receive their total savings back,
suggesting that the actual access to the savings makes a difference. However, males in this
group reported increasing levels of violence in time, and especially once they receive their
savings, suggesting that increased access to material resources may induce men to inflict more
violence.
Across individuals in the discussion sessions, there is an overall reduction in violence for
women. Similarly, men kept reporting higher levels of violence, just as their non-participating
counterparts however, the increase is much lower among those in the discussion session than
the levels reported by men in the control group. Thus while there may have been a secular
trend of violence increasing (perhaps due to other environmental factors), the effect of this
increase is subdued among discussion session participants.

Female participants exhibit a similar reduction in the exposure to violence both immediately
after the discussion sessions and after receiving their savings. Treated men, like their untreated
counterparts, still report stepping up the violence; in this case, however, the increase is much
lower and no longer statistically significant. This seems to suggest that while increased access
to resources does encourage violence among men, partaking in activities designed to increase
their awareness of the importance of negotiation encourages them to resort to violence less
frequently than they would otherwise do.

It is critical to note that while Table 6 shows an overall reduced exposure to violence for women
in both the intervention and control group, the self-reports may be affected directly by the
program. Evidence from Jewkes (1999) shows evidence that women tend to report lower
reductions in experienced violence after increased awareness about domestic violence because
they are more likely to categorize events as violence relative to their less-aware counterparts.
This has been consistently documented over a range of other studies. Men in the control group
report increases in violence across the board, significant in all cases except for threatening
behavior. Men in the intervention group instead report a more mixed picture, though the
changes they report are never statistically significant. In the focus groups men show a finer
understanding of the issues around domestic violence; hence, these mixed results may be
interpreted as further corroborating the hypothesis that they have developed a clearer
understanding of domestic violence. The reported increase may indicate an ability to distinguish
improvements in one area from a worsening situation in another.

The analysis of focus group data revealed two themes of discussion related to household
violence. The first may be labeled ‘modes of violence’, as it contains words that refer to the type
of violence inflicted on the women. This is mostly reported to be of a physical nature, with
effects both psychological and physical on the victim. The main violent acts are beating,
insulting, threatening in order of importance. An important form of physical violence that differs
from other areas is burning and scorching which both men and women report. This seems to be
consistent with conflict related dynamics previously identified in the academic literature. In
general, the verbs characterizing this theme are verbs of active aggression: beat, burn, hurt.
The preposition ‘against’ is also typical of this theme, further indicating an antagonistic
interaction. The juxtaposition of the language of ‘psychological’ versus ‘physical’, suggests that
violence is not only perceived as physical and there is a sense of what is cause of psychological
violence.15 Words that refer to feelings associated to this theme are ‘anger’ or ‘mood’ in relation
to the man and ‘frustration’ and ‘abused’ associated to the woman.16
.
Though the focus group data illustrated an enhanced ability to identify and categorize
antagonistic physical abuse, it is particularly associated to the focus group run with men that
had participated in the program. This is consistent with a greater awareness of domestic
violence, and in particular the ability to recognize it and describe its different facets, as well as
the implications it has for the victims. This, coupled with lower – though small in magnitude –
reported threatening and insulting behavior in this group, suggests the participant group may
have had some initial impact on the men’s perception of what is acceptable and hence on their
behavior.

A second issue identified in the focus group is the acceptability of some forms of physical
violence. Thus violence associated with aggressive behavior on the part of the man, and in
particular violence initiated because of changes in his mood is considered distinct relative to
violence instigated by the wife’s behavior or the general social conditions. The nature of
violence is most often categorized as reasonable versus unreasonable rather than existing or
not. There is a general attitude which tolerates some motivations for violence as “reasonable”
while others are considered inappropriate or mistreatment.            The unreasonable and
unpredictable nature of male violence is typically associated with the language of
powerlessness by the women. Consistent with this, attitudes described are aggressiveness on
the part of the man, while submissiveness and politeness are associated to the woman.

5.2 South Africa
The microcredit program coupled with the discussion sessions in South Africa was targeted at
identifying harmful gender norms with the objective of reducing violence. Included in the gender
issues considered were cultural norms, domestic violence, sexuality, and HIV/AIDS status in
addition to broader skill such as communication, conflict resolution, solidarity, leadership. The
discussion sessions in South Africa were only for women. If successful in execution, women
who participated in the discussion sessions would develop a better understanding of domestic
violence and an explicit set of skills to reduce their own risk and exposure to violence. Though

15
   In the transcripts, the word ‘moral’ is used to qualify some types of violence. This seems to be an inaccurate
translation from the French ‘moral’. In French this part of speech may be both a noun and an adjective, and the
noun may be both masculine and feminine, both with slightly different meanings. In the masculine acceptation it
has the same meaning as the English ‘mood’. This latter sense seems to be the one meant by the interviewees in
this context. It will thus be substituted here by ‘psychological’, as this adjective best captures the meaning
interviewees gave it
16
   In the transcript, the word ‘nervous’ is also found and is highly correlated with this theme. This is the other
example of inaccurate translation from the French into English. In this case the original French word ‘nerveux’
means precisely irritable, irascible or, more commonly, angry.
not explicitly targeted at other spheres of influence, the more general skills could be adapted to
a range of other circumstance to more broadly increase women’s decision making authority at
home.

In testing the impact of the South Africa program, we find that participation in the discussion
sessions reduced experience of violence in the previous year among women, compared to
women in the control group by 23%. There is no substantial change in decisions on household
spending or purchases. Attitudes towards gender norms and violence did change with
substantial, nearly 50 percent, increases in willingness to request condom use. There was no
significant change in attitudes towards violence

5.2.1 Verifying Randomization
The IMAGE program in South Africa used a village cluster design to randomize. Assuming the
clustering achieved randomization, we would expect no significant difference in pre-program
outcome measures
                            [INSERT TABLE 7 ABOUT HERE]

Among the baseline measures of the outcomes we investigated (presented in Table 7), only
three record differences between the discussion participant and the non-participant groups at or
below the 5% significance level. One of these is from the group of indicators that measure
attitudes to social norms: women in the non-participant group revealed themselves as more
progressive than women in the discussion sessions, disagreeing on average more with the
proposition that women should do all household chores; they also reported a more progressive
attitude of the partner in relation to the woman’s seeking health care for herself: the partners of
women in the control group are on average reported as expecting to ask for permission less
often than the partners of the women in the intervention group. However, women in the control
group disagree more at baseline with the proposition that the wives are entitled to refuse sex if
they are worried that their partner may have AIDS. As in the case of Burundi, given the large
number of outcomes considered, it is not surprising to find a few cases of statistical differences
at baseline.

                               [INSERT TABLE 8 ABOUT HERE]

Table 8 presents the comparison of socio-demographic characteristics of individuals in the
IMAGE study. Of those characteristics considered, parity, access to sanitation in the house and
access to electricity differ at the 5% level of significance between participant and non-participant
group. We also consider the degree of connectedness as a proxy for baseline levels of
entrepreneurship and initiative the women display. We measured connectedness as a count of
the associations the women report being a member of at baseline. Connectedness does differ
significantly between the two groups at the 1% level. To address baseline differences, we
controlled for these variables in our regressions, in order to correct for these baseline
differences between the two groups
5.2.2 Decision Making Authority
Although the IMAGE intervention was targeted at gender roles and violence, the authors posited
that such a directed program might have broader impacts on the role of women in the
household. The hypothesis in SA-H1 was that women participating in the program would be
more likely to participate in decision making in the household relative to women in control
groups.

                              [INSERT TABLE 9 ABOUT HERE]

The results for decision making in South Africa are presented in Table 9. The decision making
indicators often indicate a tendency towards increased decision making authority among
discussion session participations but nearly all indicators are insignificant. The only indicators
that mark a statistically significant positive change are the one capturing medium purchases for
the home and the degree of controls the husband exerts over the money the respondent earns.
Women appear to increase a decision making authority relative to the non-participant group
baseline level. However, there appears to be no substantial difference in the post-program
levels in the control and treatment group. Thus while decision making authority does appear to
improve, it is ambiguous the extent to which such change is due to the IMAGE program rather
than other environmental factors.

5.2.3 Attitudes towards Gender Norms and Violence
The primary target of the IMAGE study was to affect the set of gender norms and cultural
practices that facilitate violence against women. Specifically, hypothesis SA-H2 was that
women participating in the IMAGE program are more likely to exhibit gender norms that are
more favorable for women.

Table 10 presents the results of the IMAGE program on attitudes toward gender norms shows
that women in the treatment group are less likely to accept gender norms biased against
women. In particular, treatment group participations are 12-15 percent more likely to reject
tradition roles for women (e.g. women do all the household chores, obey if husband paid
brideprice). Effects on attitudes towards fidelity and sex are much larger, showing a near 50
percent change. Subsequent to participation in discussion sessions, women become less
tolerant of the husbands’ other girlfriends, and are more open to the possibility of divorce,
compared to control women at baseline, albeit none of the latter three changes reaches
statistical significance. This is consistent women also being less likely to think that it is
acceptable for a woman to refuse to have sex with her partner if he does not want to use a
condom. Areas specifically targeted by the program do show substantial changes after the
program. There is a 63 percent decline among participants who believe women can refuse sex
if her husband refuses to wear a condom and a 50 percent decline in women believing that
requesting her husband to use a condom indicates the woman is having an affair.

                              [INSERT TABLE 10 ABOUT HERE]
The measures of the acceptability of the husband’s beating his wife were only measured at
follow up for IMAGE. They depict a mixed picture, with women who participated in discussion
sessions becoming less willing to accept that men beat their wife because she does not want to
have sex or because she may be unfaithful; however, treated women become more likely to
accept that a man beat his wife because she asks him to use a condom, or because she
disagrees publicly with him. Overall the evidence on attitudes towards violence indicate only
limited changes many of which are not statistically significant.

5.2.4 Exposure to Violence
The primary objective of the program was to reduce women’s exposure to domestic violence. In
contrast to the Burundi study, the IMAGE program was specifically targeted at reducing
violence. As a result, the intervention was expected to substantially reduce violence. The
specific hypothesis stated in SA- H3 was that women in the IMAGE program would be more
likely to experience a reduction in the exposure to violence. Overall the results appear
consistent with this hypothesis: the IMAGE intervention reduced violence among discussion
series participants by 38% relative to the control group experienced at baseline, conditional on
baseline values of women’s parity, connectedness, and access to drinking water and sanitation.
Compared to their own level at baseline, these women experienced a 34% reduction in the
experience of violence.

                              [INSERT FIGURE 7 ABOUT HERE]

Breaking down the aggregate measure in its components, we observe that women in the control
group also experienced a statistically significant reduction in the incidence of physical assault –
both in the form of their partner hitting them with a fist or an object; and of her pushing or
shoving them. the third component of our aggregate measure of violence – experience of sexual
assault in the form of forced sex – was also reduced, albeit not to a statistically significant
extent. Finally, we included among the indicators of violence the measure of insult contained in
the IMAGE survey that in fact here belongs to another group of indicators, and namely those
aimed at detecting controlling behavior. The results are presented in Table 11.

                              [INSERT TABLE 11 ABOUT HERE]

Much of the violence reduction seems to come from declines in physical violence. To facilitate
comparison to the Burundi results, we include a measure of ‘insults’ from the South Africa
violence measurement tool. This is similar to the HITS indicator that was used in Burundi. In
light of this, it is important to note that the question in the IMAGE questionnaire is worded
slightly differently from the HITS questionnaire, asking as it does whether the respondent has
been insulted or humiliated by her partner in public, rather than more generally insulted. Hence,
for the same individual, the IMAGE question would elicits responses that are only a subset of
the instances captured by the HITS indicator in Burundi. There is a marginal increase in the rate
of insults among participants although there was an increase among the control group as well.
This may suggest that violence shifted from physical to verbal after the intervention. It is
important to note, however, that like in the case of Burundi, this may be because of differences
in how the respondent categorizes violence.

                                        6. DISCUSSION

The interventions we have studied here constitute two of the first randomized evaluations of the
impact of microfinance products on domestic violence in sub-Saharan Africa. Concentrating only
on female users, IMAGE explores the impact of the introduction of a microfinance and training
product in a new market. The Burundi VSLA investigation explores the impact of training skills
on a population that has self-selected for receiving microfinance services. Both programs
sought to enhance women’s decision making power, reduce acceptance of gendered social
norms which facilitate domestic violence against women, and reduce exposure to such violence.
The emphasis of the programs however differed in two key dimensions: first, the IMAGE
program focused only on women while the Burundi program included both women and men.
Second, the IMAGE program specifically targeted gender norms and violence while the Burundi
program discussed household economic matters and issues in an effort to highlight and
challenge traditional norms.

We find that both interventions had impacts on a range of desired indictors. In South Africa the
IMAGE program is associated with a substantial decline in violence, and some changes in
tolerance of gender-specific norms which facilitate violence. However, IMAGE appears to have
had only limited impact on enhancing the role of women in decision making authority in the
household. In Burundi on the other hand, there was substantial changes in household decision
making authority over purchases and even fertility decisions by women but limited impact on
decision making about sex. There were marginal changes in acceptability of violence. Violence
was categorized in reasonable and unreasonable dimensions consistent with existing attitudes
prevalent in Burundi. There were only marginal and often insignificant changes in exposure of
women to domestic violence in Burundi. The findings suggest that discussion groups in
conjunction with VSLA may empower women by increasing decision making authority over
household purchases. The evidence suggests a trend towards potentially important
improvements in reducing domestic violence. Beating one’s wife, together with insulting and
threatening her, seem to be the most common forms of violence. While, within the relatively
brief study period physical violence did not significantly decrease, insults did, which may
indicate reduced levels of violence and abuse within the household in the future.

Together these studies suggest a few key take-home messages: First, programs which target
violence and do not incur backlash from the community may reduce exposure to violence (as in
the case of South Africa). Second, in areas where it is infeasible to introduce gender-specific
programming on violence, programs on economic factors may improve decision making
authority and may aid in reducing violence, albeit to a lesser degree. Third, targeted programs
tend to impact the areas in which they are targeted, whether that target is violence or economic
decisions. Spillover effects to related areas appear to be insignificant. As a result, policy
makers should be careful in assuming that limited programs will have broad effects across
areas of decision making.
The central message that emerges from both studies is that long-term (~5 -10 year) prospective
studies are needed to assess the real efficacy of discussion group based interventions. Of
critical importance is an assessment of whether impacts are permanent or decay over time and
if periodic reinforcement help. The quantitative evidence indicate that in Burundi the greatest
change in attitudes takes place in the management and access to resources, while in South
Africa it is on violence. It should be noted that these results are not directly comparable,
because of the different sub-populations the two interventions compare; it is however of interest
to note that, in relation to the array of results both interventions measure, it is those they
targeted most directly that record the greatest impact, at least in the short term. In both cases,
longer term evaluations are warranted. Programs and evaluations should be designed to serve
the purpose of assessing whether these initial results are maintained and broader effects in
other areas reinforce the set of intended impacts.
References

Aizer, Anna. 2010. "The Gender Wage Gap and Domestic Violence." American Economic
Review, 100(4): 1847–59. DOI:10.1257/aer.100.4.1847

Ashraf, N., D. Karlan and W. Yin (2006). "Tying Odysseus to the Mast: Evidence from a
Commitment Savings Product in the Philippines." Quarterly Journal of Economics 121(2): 673-
697
Becker, G. (1965) “A Theory of the Allocation of Time,” Economic Journal 75 (299), p p. 493-51

Bozzoli, Belinda (with Mmanto Nkotsoe) (1990), The women of Phokeng: consciousness, life
strategy, and migrancy in South Africa, Heinemann Educational Books, Inc.

Bowlus and Seitz (2006) Domestic Violence, Employment, And Divorce," International
Economic Review 47(4), pages 1113-1149,

Browning and Chiappori (1998).           "Efficient Intra-Household Allocations: A General
Characterization and Empirical Tests," Econometrica, 66(6), pp 1241-1278

Duflo, E. (2003). "Grandmothers and Granddaughters: Old Age Pension and Intra- Household
Allocation in South Africa." World Bank Economic Review 42: 1-25.

Dutton, Donald G; Corvo, Kenneth (2006) “Transforming a flawed policy: A call to revive
psychology and science in domestic violence research and practice” Aggression and Violent
Behavior 11: 457-483

Farmer and Tiefenthaler (1997) “An Economic Analysis of Domestic Violence." Review of Social
Economy 55(3): 337-358

Garcia-Moreno, C., Jansen, Ellsberg, H.A.F.M., Heise, L., M., Watts, C., (2005) WHO Multi-
country Study on Women’s Health and Domestic Violence against Women, World Health
Organization

Hargreaves, James R., Morison, L.A., Gear J.S.S., Makhubele M. B., Porter, J.D.H., Busza, j.,
Watts, C., Kim, J.C., Pronyk, P. M., (2007) ‘‘Hearing the Voices of the Poor’’: Assigning Poverty
Lines on the Basis of Local Perceptions of Poverty. A Quantitative Analysis of Qualitative Data
from Participatory Wealth Ranking in Rural South Africa”, World Development, Vol. 35, No. 2,
pp. 212–229

Johnson, Michael P. (1995) “Patriarchical Terrorism and Common Couple Violence: Two Forms
of Violence against Women” Journal of Marriage and Family 57(2): 283-294

Johnson, Michael P; Ferraro, Kathleen J. (2000) “Research on Domestic Violence in the 1990s:
Making Distinctions” Jouranl of Marriage and the Family 62: 948-963
Kim; J; Ferrari; G, Abramsky; T, Watts; C, Hargreaves; J, Morison; L Phetla; G. Porter; J, Prony,
P (2009) “Assessing the incremental effects of combining economic and health interventions:
the IMAGE study in South Africa” Bulletin of the World Health Organization vol.87 no.11
Genebra Nov.

Kim, J, Watts, C, Hargreaves, J, Ndhlovu, L, Phetla,G,. Morison, L Busza, J, Porter, J, Pronyk,
P (2007) “Understanding the Impact of a Microfinance-Based Intervention on Women’s
Empowerment and the Reduction of Intimate Partner Violence in South Africa” American
Journal of Public Health, Vol 97, No. 10 October 1794-1802

Pollak, R. (2005). "Bargaining Power in Marriage: Earnings, Wage Rates and Household
Production." NBER Working paper. 11239

Rangel, M. (2005). "Alimony Rights and Intrahousehold Allocation of Resources: Evidence from
Brazil." The Economic Journal, 116 (July), 627–658

Sherin, K., Sinacore, J.M, Li, X-Q., Zitter, R.E., Shakil, A., (1998) “HITS: A Short Domestic
Violence Screening Tool for Use in Family Practice Settings” Family Medicine, 30(7):508-12

Simanowitz, A., Nkuna, B., (1998), “Participatory Wealth Ranking Operational Manual”,
Tzaneen, Small Enterprise Foundation

Tauchen, Witte and Long (1991) “Domestic Violence: a Non-Random Affair” NBER Working
Paper Series. w1665

Strauss, J. and Thomas, D (1995). "Empirical Modeling of Household and Family Decisions,"
Papers 95-12, RAND Reprint series
Figure 1 Theoretical framework of the IMAGE study (South Africa)
Notes: Based on figure from IMAGE study results (Kim et al., 2009). A subsequent cross‐sectional study
compared the two initial groups at follow up with a third group of women in similar villages that only
had access to microfinance (not depicted here)
Figure 2. Decision Making on Economic Issues: Who decides how to spend money? (Burundi)
Notes: Outcome measures based on survey data collected with assistance of the International Rescue
Committee – Burundi. Participants refer to individuals randomly selected to attend the program that
consisted of set of 6 discussion sessions. Non‐Participants refer to individuals who did not attend the
program. Confidence intervals are based on village‐cluster estimated standard errors.
Figure 3. Decision Making on Economic Issues: Who decides on large household purchases? (Burundi)
Notes: Outcome measures based on survey data collected with assistance of the International Rescue
Committee – Burundi. Participants refer to individuals randomly selected to attend the program that
consisted of set of 6 discussion sessions. Non‐Participants refer to individuals who did not attend the
program. Confidence intervals are based on village‐cluster estimated standard errors.
 Figure 4. Decision Making on Household Issues: Who decides on having children? (Burundi)
Notes: Outcome measures based on survey data collected with assistance of the International Rescue
Committee – Burundi Participants refer to individuals randomly selected to attend the program that
consisted of set of 6 discussion sessions. Non‐Participants refer to individuals who did not attend the
program. Confidence intervals are based on village‐cluster estimated standard errors.
Figure 5.Attitudes towards violence: Acceptability of abuse if wife refuses sex (Burundi)
Notes: Outcome measures based on survey data collected with assistance of the International Rescue
Committee – Burundi. Participants refer to individuals randomly selected to attend the program that
consisted of set of 6 discussion sessions. Non‐Participants refer to individuals who did not attend the
program. Confidence intervals are based on village‐cluster estimated standard errors.
Figure 6.Attitudes towards violence: Acceptability of abuse if wife neglects children (Burundi)
Notes: Outcome measures based on survey data collected with assistance of the International Rescue
Committee – Burundi. Participants refer to individuals randomly selected to attend the program that
consisted of set of 6 discussion sessions. Non‐Participants refer to individuals who did not attend the
program. Confidence intervals are based on village‐cluster estimated standard errors.
Figure 7. Change in Violence Exposure over the previous 12 months (South Africa)
Notes: Outcome measures based on survey data collected by Intervention with Microfinance for
Gender Equity (IMAGE) in South Africa, a cooperative study between the London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine (LSHTM), Wits University in Johannesburg, and the microfinance NGO Small
Enterprise Foundation (SEF). Results have been presented in Kim et al (2009). Estimates shown here
based on authors’ own calculations from the data in Kim et. al. (2009). Participants refer to individuals
randomly selected to attend a program consisting of a set of 10 discussion sessions. Non‐Participants
refer to individuals who did not attend the program. Confidence intervals are based on village‐cluster
estimated standard errors.
Table 1. Comparison of Baseline Levels of Decision Making, Attitudes and Violence Between Control and Program Participation Groups (Burundi)
                                                          Participants                  Non Participants                    Comparison
                                                  N        Mean          SD        N      Mean           SD          t         Diff      %Chng
 Panel A: Violence Outcomes
 Woman has been Physically Hurt                   184        1.207       0.534    154         1.20        0.46     ‐0.217         0.01     1.01
 Woman has been Insulted                          184        1.728       1.004    154         1.81        1.05      0.744        ‐0.08     0.95
 Woman has been Threatened                        184        1.245       0.693    154         1.35        0.79      1.301        ‐0.11     0.92
 Woman has been screamed at                       184        2.087       1.057    154         2.23        1.05      1.223        ‐0.14     0.94
 Total HIT Score                                  184        6.266       2.515    154         6.58        2.54      1.152        ‐0.32     0.95
 Total HIT Score greater than 5                   184        0.250       0.434    154         0.32        0.47       1.38        ‐0.07     0.79
 Total HIT Score Females' Reports Only            119        6.345       2.857     99         6.48        2.72      0.344        ‐0.13     0.98
 Total HIT Score Females' Only> 5                 119        0.269       0.445     99         0.31        0.47      0.712        ‐0.04     0.86
 Panel B: Decision Making Outcomes
 How Money is Spent: Spouse Decides               246         2.09        1.24    209         2.34        1.21      2.093        ‐0.24     0.90
 Spend Money Disagree: Spouse Changes             206        4.272       1.231    161         4.05        1.32     ‐1.646         0.22     1.05
 Daily hh Purchases Spouse Decides                243        2.313       1.088    199         2.20        1.04     ‐1.152         0.12     1.05
 Daily hh Purchases Disagree: Spouse Changes      206        4.311       1.177    158         4.23        1.16     ‐0.619         0.08     1.02
 Large hh Purchases Spouse Decides                244        2.053       1.264    201         2.02        1.15     ‐0.291         0.03     1.02
 Large hh Purchases Disagree: Spouse Changes      205        4.200       1.326    159         4.14        1.33     ‐0.439         0.06     1.01
 Alcohol/Cigarettes Spouse Decides                173        1.705       1.000    140         1.76        1.02      0.513        ‐0.06     0.97
 Alcohol/Cigarettes Disagree: Spouse Changes      138        3.667       1.577    104         3.52        1.55     ‐0.728         0.15     1.04
 When to Visit Family & Friends ‐ Spouse
 Decides                                          241        2.672       1.296    202         2.52        1.21     ‐1.322         0.16     1.06
 When to Visit Family & Friends Disagree:
 Spouse Changes                                   189        4.349       1.155    155         4.20        1.22     ‐1.153         0.15     1.04
 When to Visit Spouse's Family & Friends ‐
 Spouse Decides                                   220        2.691       1.305    184         2.53        1.21     ‐1.261         0.16     1.06
 When to Visit Family & Friends Disagree:
 Spouse Changes                                   180        4.567       0.922    142         4.42        1.07     ‐1.272         0.14     1.03
 How Many Kids Spouse Decides                     128        2.602       1.433     97         2.81        1.40      1.117        ‐0.21     0.92
 Have Sex Spouse Decides                          194        1.938       1.318    142         1.89        1.24     ‐0.361         0.05     1.03
 When to Visit Family & Friends Disagree:
 Spouse Changes                                       110       4.555       0.982      82          4.26         1.26     ‐1.784        0.30    1.07
 Panel C: Attitudes to Women and Violence
 Women should do as Men Say                           257       2.202       0.571     225          2.13         0.56     ‐1.418        0.07    1.03
 Wife should give money she earns to husband          257       2.525       0.587     225          2.60         0.55      1.441       ‐0.08    0.97
 Okay for husband to abandon wife if he wants         257       2.467       0.599     225          2.45         0.63     ‐0.241        0.01    1.01
 Woman's job to gather water, even if unsafe          257       2.486       0.560     225          2.45         0.54     ‐0.658        0.03    1.01
 Women cannot manage money                            256       2.879       0.350     225          2.89         0.34        0.46      ‐0.01    1.00
 Women should have sex when husband wants             256       2.555       0.636     222          2.50         0.71     ‐0.953        0.06    1.02
 Women should have as many kids as husband
 wants                                                256       2.773       0.759     222          2.66         0.75     ‐1.611        0.11    1.04
 Okay to beat wife if goes out w/out telling
 husband                                              254       1.630       0.484     223          1.58         0.50     ‐1.145        0.05    1.03
 Okay to beat wife if neglects kids                   257       1.455       0.499     224          1.48         0.50      0.491       ‐0.02    0.98
 Okay to beat wife if argues w/ husband               254       1.736       0.442     221          1.74         0.44      0.145       ‐0.01    1.00
 Okay to beat wife if refuses sex                     249       1.707       0.456     216          1.74         0.44      0.702       ‐0.03    0.98
 Okay to beat wife if burns food                      257       1.887       0.317     223          1.89         0.31      0.182       ‐0.00    1.00
 Okay to beat wife if does something annoying         256       1.859       0.348     223          1.87         0.33      0.484       ‐0.02    0.99
 Okay to beat wife for any reason                     257       1.864       0.344     224          1.89         0.31      0.974       ‐0.03    0.98
 Never okay to beat wife                              255       1.525       0.500     222          1.53         0.50      0.033       ‐0.00    1.00
 Panel D: Consumption
 Weekly Consumption (value)                           241    13,379.3 15,372.22       200 11,291.93 11,592.24            ‐1.624    2,087.33    1.18
 Weekly Self‐production (value)                       192     5,646.2    6,140.84     150     4,901.47      4,689.70     ‐1.272      744.73    1.15
 Yearly Consumption (value)                           257 1,360,000 1,630,000         226 1,140,000 1,500,000            ‐1.524    220,000.    1.19
 Rights for women to own and inherit land             257          0.9       1.23     224          0.74         0.72     ‐1.661        0.15    1.20
 Women reps in reconstruction programs                257          1.0          ‐‐    224          1.00            ‐‐         ‐‐          ‐‐     ‐‐
 Women reps in local community meetings               257          1.0       0.50     224          0.99         0.09     ‐1.261        0.04    1.04
 Increased penalties for spousal abuse                257          1.0       0.15     224          0.97         0.16     ‐0.240        0.00    1.00
Notes: Outcome measures based on survey data collected with assistance of the International Rescue Committee – Burundi.
Participants refer to individuals randomly selected to attend the program that consisted of a set of 6 discussion sessions. Non‐
Participants refer to individuals who did not attend the program. Confidence intervals are based on village‐cluster estimated
standard errors. Number of respondents varies due to differential response rates to questions. Comparison columns report mean
difference between participant and non‐participant groups. Also reported are the t‐statistics testing if this difference is
distinguishable from zero.
Table 2. Comparison of Baseline Levels of Sociodemographic Characteristics Between Control and Program Participation Groups (Burundi)
                                                Participants                   Non Participants                     Comparison
               Variable                    N       Mean       SD            N       Mean        SD          t         Diff     %Change
 Males                                      257      0.401    0.491          226     0.336      0.473     ‐1.468      0.065         0.16
 Age                                        256         39   12.395          226         37    13.209      ‐1.31      1.534         0.04
 Respondents' Level of schooling            174      0.897    0.305          148     0.892      0.312     ‐0.135      0.005         0.01
 Spouse's Level of Schooling                137      0.912    0.284          116     0.905      0.294     ‐0.198      0.007         0.01
 Displaced                                  254      0.996    0.063          222     0.995      0.067     ‐0.095      0.001         0.00
 Displaced outside Burundi                  239      0.402    0.491          207     0.391      0.489     ‐0.223      0.011         0.03
 Respondent Half Hectares                   175      2.061    1.617          149     1.935      1.666     ‐0.688      0.126         0.06
 Spouse's Half Hectares                     115      1.935    1.427           93     1.949      1.726      0.063     ‐0.014        ‐0.01
 Use Others' Land                           129      0.744    0.438          109     0.761      0.428      0.307     ‐0.017        ‐0.02
 Respondent & Spouse Own Land
 Jointly                                      257     0.412      0.493        226     0.345     0.476       ‐1.524      0.067       0.16
Notes: Outcome measures based on baseline survey data collected with assistance of the International Rescue Committee –
Burundi. Participants refer to individuals randomly selected to attend the program that consisted of a set of 6 discussion
sessions. Non‐Participants refer to individuals who did not attend the program. Confidence intervals are based on village‐
cluster estimated standard errors. Number of respondents varies due to differential response rates to questions. Comparison
columns report mean difference between participant and non‐participant groups. Also reported are the t‐statistics testing if
this difference is distinguishable from zero.
Table 3. Comparison of Pre‐Program Decision Making and Dispute Resolution Behavior (Burundi)
                                                                          Non‐Participants                         Participants
                                                                    females               males           females                 males
Panel A: Decision Making Authority over Household Decisions
How money you earn is spent                                        2.276***               0.0790         ‐0.247**             0.00247**
                                                                     (0.128)            (0.0826)           (0.117)             (0.00118)
Major household purchases                                          2.054***               0.136*           0.0186              ‐0.000184
                                                                   (0.0897)             (0.0786)         (0.0858)             (0.000866)
Daily household purchases                                          2.213***              ‐0.0712            0.112               ‐0.00113
                                                                   (0.0892)             (0.0621)         (0.0919)             (0.000925)
Purchases of alcohol and cigarettes                                1.725***              ‐0.151*          ‐0.0449              0.000459
                                                                   (0.0752)             (0.0812)         (0.0863)             (0.000870)
Visits your family or friends                                      2.393***               0.121             0.145               ‐0.00152
                                                                    (0.109)             (0.0919)         (0.0977)             (0.000992)
Visits your spouse's family or friends                             2.442***               0.114*            0.131               ‐0.00134
                                                                   (0.0988)             (0.0625)         (0.0810)             (0.000812)
How many children to have                                          2.542***            0.331***            ‐0.137                0.00138
                                                                    (0.146)              (0.111)          (0.102)              (0.00102)
When to have sex                                                   1.649***            0.556***            0.0212              ‐0.000201
                                                                   (0.0978)             (0.0738)         (0.0913)             (0.000913)
Panel B: Dispute Resolution over Disagreements on Household Decisions (No dispute because Spouse knows better)
Disagree w spouse on how money is spent                            4.074***               0.137           0.210**             ‐0.00212**
                                                                     (0.136)            (0.0953)           (0.101)             (0.00102)
Disagree w spouse on major hh purchases                            4.159***               0.150            0.0540              ‐0.000561
                                                                     (0.161)            (0.0906)           (0.126)             (0.00127)
Disagree w spouse on daily hh purchases                            4.175***             0.259**            0.0539              ‐0.000562
                                                                     (0.135)             (0.111)           (0.122)             (0.00123)
Disagree w spouse on purchases of alcohol and cigarettes           3.639***            ‐0.315**             0.123               ‐0.00124
                                                                     (0.115)             (0.145)           (0.156)             (0.00156)
Disagree w spouse on visit your spouse's family or friends         4.387***            0.200***             0.119               ‐0.00119
                                                                        (0.0996)              (0.0607)             (0.0936)            (0.000951)
Disagree w spouse on visit your family or friends                       4.243***                0.130                0.141              ‐0.00143
                                                                         (0.113)              (0.0919)              (0.138)             (0.00138)
Disagree on having sex                                                  4.144***             ‐0.293***             0.275**             ‐0.00275**
                                                                         (0.113)              (0.0731)              (0.107)             (0.00108)
Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the village level are reported in parentheses. Results that are significant at the 0.05
(0.10, 0.01) level are marked with a ** (*, ***). Outcome variable in Panel A is an indicator variable that is 1 if the decision was
taken unilaterally by the respondent. Outcome variable in Panel B is an indicator variable that is 1 if there was no discussion
because the respondent believes their spouse knows better for each of the categories listed in the panel. Participants refer to
individuals randomly selected to attend the program that consisted of a set of 6 discussion sessions. Non‐Participants refer to
individuals who did not attend the program.
Table 4. Estimated Effect of Discussion Sessions on Decision Making and Dispute Resolution Outcomes (Burundi)
                                                                            Non‐Participants                            Participants
                                                                       females             males            females                   males
Panel A: Decision Making Authority over Household Decisions (=1 if Respondents decide alone)
How money you earn is spent                                         ‐0.00272              4.37e‐05             0.602***             ‐0.00605***
                                                                    (0.0817)             (0.000822)             (0.138)               (0.00138)
% change (relative to female baseline)                               ‐0.01%                 0.00%             26.45%***              ‐0.27%***

Major hh purchases                                                  0.106               ‐0.00104               0.293**             ‐0.00293**
                                                                  (0.0942)             (0.000938)              (0.119)               (0.00120)
% change (relative to female baseline)                             5.16%                 ‐0.05%               14.26%**              ‐0.14%***

Daily hh purchases                                                 0.0818               ‐0.000803              0.0927               ‐0.000924
                                                                  (0.0770)             (0.000776)              (0.115)              (0.00116)
% change (relative to female baseline)                             3.70%                  ‐0.04%                4.19%                 ‐0.04%

Purchases of alcohol and cigarettes                                0.0132               ‐0.000103              0.0156              ‐0.000158
                                                                  (0.0860)             (0.000866)              (0.127)             (0.00128)
% change (relative to female baseline)                             0.90%                  ‐0.01%                0.90%                ‐0.01%

Visit your family or friends                                      0.232**              ‐0.00232**              0.0836               ‐0.000772
                                                                  (0.0961)             (0.000962)              (0.144)              (0.00145)
% change (relative to female baseline)                            9.69%**               ‐0.10%**                3.49%                 ‐0.32%

Visit your spouse's family or friends                              ‐0.0367              0.000351               0.0563               ‐0.000525
                                                                  (0.0776)             (0.000787)             (0.0900)             (0.000913)
% change (relative to female baseline)                             ‐1.50%                 0.01%                2.31%                  ‐0.02%

How many children to have                                         ‐0.147**             0.00149**              0.359***            ‐0.00359***
                                                                   (0.0639)            (0.000645)              (0.108)              (0.00109)
% change (relative to female baseline)                            ‐5.78%**              0.06%**              14.12%***             ‐0.14%***

Having sex                                                         0.0118              ‐0.000115                0.104               ‐0.00102
                                                                 (0.0748)              (0.000750)             (0.0949)            (0.000954)
% change (relative to female baseline)                             0.72%                 ‐0.01%                 6.31%               ‐0.06%
Panel B: Dispute Resolution over Disagreements on Household Decisions (=1 if there was no dispute because respondent feels spouse knows better)
Disagree w spouse on major hh purchases                            0.183                 0.00104                0.183              ‐0.00184
                                                                  (0.135)               (0.00152)              (0.135)             (0.00135)
% change (relative to female baseline)                             4.40%                  0.03%                 4.40%               ‐0.04%

Disagree w spouse on how money is spent                               ‐0.00814                8.84e‐05               ‐0.00253                3.37e‐05
                                                                       (0.139)               (0.00139)                (0.147)               (0.00148)
% change (relative to female baseline)                                 ‐0.20%                  0.00%                  ‐0.06%                  0.00%

Disagree w spouse on daily hh purchases                                ‐0.213*               0.00216*                 0.0474                ‐0.000477
                                                                        (0.109)              (0.00110)                (0.119)               (0.00119)
% change (relative to female baseline)                                 ‐5.10%*                0.05%*                   1.14%                  ‐0.01%

Disagree w spouse on purchases of alcohol and cigarettes               ‐0.0731               0.000747                 ‐0.0404               0.000406
                                                                       (0.125)               (0.00124)                (0.209)               (0.00209)
% change (relative to female baseline)                                 ‐2.01%                  0.02%                  ‐1.11%                  0.01%

Disagree w spouse on visit your family or friends                      ‐0.0341               0.000367                 0.0658                ‐0.000667
                                                                       (0.108)               (0.00109)                (0.165)               (0.00165)
% change (relative to female baseline)                                 ‐0.80%                  0.01%                   1.55%                  ‐0.02%

Disagree w spouse on visit your spouse's family or friends              0.124                 ‐0.00126                0.0154                ‐0.000174
                                                                      (0.0891)               (0.000902)               (0.109)               (0.00111)
% change (relative to female baseline)                                 2.83%                   ‐0.03%                  0.35%                  0.00%

Disagree on having sex                                                ‐0.868***             0.00876***                ‐0.0710               0.000688
                                                                        (0.133)              (0.00134)                (0.148)               (0.00149)
% change (relative to female baseline)                               ‐20.95%***              0.21%***                 ‐1.71%                  0.02%
Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the village level are reported in parentheses. Results that are significant at the 0.05 (0.10,
0.01) level are marked with a ** (*, ***). Outcome variable in Panel A is an indicator variable that is 1 if the decision was taken
unilaterally by the respondent for each of the categories listed in the panel. Outcome variable in Panel B is an indicator variable that is 1
if there was no discussion because the respondent believes their spouse knows better for each of the categories listed in the panel.
Participants refer to individuals randomly selected to attend the program that consisted of a set of 6 discussion sessions. Non‐
Participants refer to individuals who did not attend the program.
Table 5. Estimated Effect of Discussion Sessions on Attitudes towards Gender Norms and Violence (Burundi)
                                                                                        Non‐Participants                   Participants
                                                                                  females             males     females                   males
Panel A: Baseline
= 1 if Agree that it’s acceptable to beat ones wife                              1.475***           0.176***     0.0476              ‐0.000490
if she goes out without her husband’s permission                                 (0.0375)           (0.0281)    (0.0432)             (0.000437)

= 1 if Agree that it’s acceptable to beat ones wife if she neglects kids         1.390***           0.189***    ‐0.0262               0.000271
                                                                                 (0.0459)           (0.0302)    (0.0449)             (0.000451)

= 1 if Agree that it’s acceptable to beat ones wife if she argues                1.724***           0.0478**    ‐0.00899              0.000106
                                                                                 (0.0387)           (0.0223)    (0.0467)             (0.000473)

= 1 if Agree that it’s acceptable to beat ones wife if she refuses sex           1.668***           0.124***    ‐0.0328               0.000335
                                                                                 (0.0345)           (0.0268)    (0.0387)             (0.000393)

= 1 if Agree that it’s acceptable to beat ones wife if she burns food             0.203**           ‐0.00739    ‐0.0525               0.000535
                                                                                  (0.0797)          (0.0173)    (0.0653)             (0.000666)

= 1 if Agree that it’s acceptable to beat ones wife if she annoying              1.854***          0.0540***    ‐0.0160               0.000158
                                                                                 (0.0199)           (0.0160)    (0.0354)             (0.000357)

= 1 if Agree that it’s acceptable to beat ones wife for any reason               1.866***           0.0385*     ‐0.0292               0.000297
                                                                                 (0.0239)           (0.0190)    (0.0328)             (0.000332)

= 1 if Agree that it’s acceptable to beat ones wife that it’s never ok to beat   1.617***          ‐0.0986**    ‐0.00332              3.49e‐05
wife
                                                                                  (0.0421)          (0.0398)    (0.0556)             (0.000561)
Panel B: Post‐Program
= 1 if Agree that it’s acceptable to beat ones wife                               0.187***        ‐0.00191***    0.0223              ‐0.000222
if she goes out without her husband’s permission                                  (0.0384)         (0.000390)   (0.0380)             (0.000386)
% change (relative to female baseline)                                           12.68%***         ‐0.13%***     1.51%                 ‐0.02%

= 1 if Agree that it’s acceptable to beat ones wife if she neglects kids         0.141***         ‐0.00143***   0.130**             ‐0.00132**
                                                                                 (0.0398)          (0.000404)   (0.0533)            (0.000538)
% change (relative to female baseline)                                           10.14%***      ‐0.10%***            9.35%               ‐0.09%

= 1 if Agree that it’s acceptable to beat ones wife if she argues                0.127***       ‐0.00129***          0.0275            ‐0.000295
.                                                                                (0.0343)        (0.000345)         (0.0478)           (0.000483)
% change (relative to female baseline)                                            7%***            0%***               2%                ‐0.02%

= 1 if Agree that it’s acceptable to beat ones wife if she refuses sex              0.101***      ‐0.00102***           0.0661*            ‐0.000674*
                                                                                     (0.0247)       (0.000250)          (0.0341)            (0.000347)
% change (relative to female baseline)                                                 6%***        ‐0.06%***               4%*                ‐0.04%*

= 1 if Agree that it’s acceptable to beat ones wife if she burns food               0.0570**      ‐0.000580**             0.0166             ‐0.000169
                                                                                     (0.0219)       (0.000223)          (0.0307)            (0.000312)
% change (relative to female baseline)                                                  3%**          ‐0.03%**             0.89%         ‐9.02296E‐05

= 1 if Agree that it’s acceptable to beat ones wife if she annoying                    0.0325        ‐0.000333            0.0495            ‐0.000496
                                                                                     (0.0259)       (0.000262)          (0.0460)           (0.000463)
% change (relative to female baseline)                                                  1.75%           ‐0.02%             2.67%               ‐0.03%

= 1 if Agree that it’s acceptable to beat ones wife for any reason                     0.0265        ‐0.000265            0.0334            ‐0.000346
                                                                                     (0.0232)       (0.000236)          (0.0355)           (0.000361)
% change (relative to female baseline)                                                  1.41%           ‐0.01%             1.77%               ‐0.02%

= 1 if Agree that it’s acceptable to beat ones wife that it’s never ok to beat      ‐0.0848**      0.000863**           ‐0.0185              0.000182
wife
                                                                                     (0.0373)       (0.000377)          (0.0566)           (0.000571)
% change (relative to female baseline)                                              ‐5.40%**          0.05%**             ‐1.18%                0.01%
Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the village level are reported in parentheses. Results that are significant at the 0.05 (0.10, 0.01) level
are marked with a ** (*, ***). Each row presents the results from a separate regression with the dependent variables listed in each row.
Percent changes in panel B are based on comparison to females in the control group prior to treatment. Participants refer to individuals
randomly selected to attend the program that consisted of a set of 6 discussion sessions. Non‐Participants refer to individuals who did not
attend the program.
Table 6. Estimated Effect of Discussion Sessions on Violence Levels (Burundi)
                                                             Non‐Participants                       Participants
                                                       females                males      females                     males
Panel A: Baseline
Physically Hurt                                       1.185***                  0.011      0.015                      0.000
                                                      (0.0320)                (0.0185)   (0.0359)                  (0.000363)
Insult                                                1.821***               ‐0.217***    ‐0.044                      0.000
                                                      (0.0731)                (0.0415)   (0.0656)                  (0.000663)
Threaten                                              1.350***               ‐0.131***    ‐0.069                    0.000676
                                                      (0.0575)                (0.0392)   (0.0504)                   (0.0392)
Scream                                                2.144***                 ‐0.131     ‐0.082                      0.001
                                                      (0.0759)                (0.0514)   (0.0734)                  (0.000740)
tothit>5                                              0.304***              ‐0.0685***   ‐0.0424                    0.000424
.                                                     (0.0336)                (0.0180)   (0.0341)                  (0.000342)
Panel B: Post Program
Physically Hurt                                       ‐0.09***               0.001***    ‐0.0385                 0.000399
                                                      (0.0232)              (0.000233)   (0.0356)               (0.000360)
% change (relative to female baseline)                ‐0.08***               0.001***     ‐0.032                    0.000
Insult                                                ‐0.15***              0.00152**    ‐0.0573                  ‐0.00122
                                                     (0.000663)             (0.000675)   (0.0912)                (0.00148)
% change (relative to female baseline)                ‐0.08***                0.001**     ‐0.031                    0.001
Threaten                                                ‐0.03                  0.000       0.005               ‐0.0000432
.                                                     (0.0437)              (0.000446)   (0.0504)               (0.000541)
% change (relative to female baseline)                  ‐0.02                  0.000     ‐0.0685                    0.000
Scream                                                ‐0.22***               0.002***     ‐0.019                 0.000191
                                                      (0.0743)              (0.000754)   (0.0907)               (0.000918)
% change (relative to female baseline)                ‐0.10***               0.001***     ‐0.009               8.90858E‐05
tothit>5                                                ‐0.08               0.000836**   0.00999                 ‐0.000273
                                                      (0.0300)              (0.000302)   (0.0450)               (0.000454)
% change (relative to female baseline)                ‐0.28***                0.003**      0.033                   ‐0.001
Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the village level are reported in parentheses. Results that are significant at the
0.05 (0.10, 0.01) level are marked with a ** (*, ***). Each row presents the results from a separate regression with the
dependent variables listed in each row. Percent changes in panel B are based on comparison to females in the control
group prior to treatment. Participants refer to individuals randomly selected to attend the program that consisted of a set
of 6 discussion sessions. Non‐Participants refer to individuals who did not attend the program
Table 7. Comparison of Baseline Levels of Decision Making, Attitudes and Violence Between Control and Program Participation Groups (South
Africa)
                                                          Non‐Participants                   Participants                    Summary
                                                           N    Mean           SD        N        Mean        SD         t      Diff        %Chng
Panel A: Violence
Total Violence (Push, Hit, Forcesex)                     178     0.163       0.593     193       0.187      0.609   ‐0.378    ‐0.024        1.145
Insulted by partner ‐ Past Year Experience               178     0.899       0.302     193        0.87      0.337    0.856     0.028        0.968
Pushed by partner ‐ Past Year Experience                 178     0.067       0.251     193       0.083      0.276   ‐0.565    ‐0.015         1.23
Partner hit w\fist ‐ Past Year Experience                178     0.051        0.22     193       0.067      0.251   ‐0.687    ‐0.017        1.332
Had forced sex w\partner ‐ Past Year Experience          178     0.045       0.208     193       0.036      0.187    0.421     0.009        0.807
Had sex for fear of reprisal‐ Past Year Experience       178     0.045       0.208     193       0.036      0.187    0.421     0.009        0.807
Panel B: Decision Making
Large purchases self, ask partner                        178     0.225       0.419     190       0.237      0.426   ‐0.275    ‐0.012        1.054
Small purchases household, ask partner                   178     0.781       0.415     190       0.847      0.361   ‐1.636    ‐0.066        1.085
Medium purchases household, ask partner                  176     0.426       0.496     189        0.36      0.481    1.296     0.066        0.844
Large Purchases household, ask partner                   178     0.152        0.36     190       0.105      0.308    1.326     0.046        0.694
Visit family of birth, ask partner                       178     0.354        0.48     189       0.265      0.442    1.853     0.089        0.747
Visit friends in the village, ask partner                178     0.601       0.491     189       0.577      0.495    0.474     0.024        0.959
Visit family or friends outside village, ask partner     178     0.236       0.426     189       0.238      0.427   ‐0.048    ‐0.002        1.009
Join credit association, ask partner                     178     0.101       0.302     190       0.126      0.333    ‐0.76    ‐0.025        1.249
Partner encouraged to participate outside
household                                                178     0.506       0.501     193       0.477      0.501    0.556     0.029        0.943
Partner asks for advice                                  178     0.416       0.494     193       0.451      0.499   ‐0.679    ‐0.035        1.084
Partner keeps from friends                               178     0.888       0.317     193       0.876      0.331    0.357     0.012        0.986
Partner restricts contact w\family                       178     0.927       0.261     193       0.922      0.268     0.17     0.005        0.995
Partner insists on knowing where she is                  178     0.854       0.354     193       0.819      0.386    0.918     0.035        0.959
Partner controls access to health care                   178     0.899       0.302     193       0.788       0.41    2.991     0.111        0.876
Partner boasts g‐friends                                 178     0.938       0.241     193       0.922      0.268    0.601     0.016        0.983
Partner threatened eviction                              178     0.944       0.231     193       0.891      0.312    1.855     0.053        0.944
Spend own money ‐ Ask Partner                             92     2.935       0.248     153       2.941      0.236   ‐0.199    ‐0.006        1.002
Panel C: Attitudes towards Women and Violence
 Women should do all chores                                  419       1.752     0.432      424      1.663       0.473       2.852      0.089   0.949
 If paid lobola, wife must obey                              419       1.668     0.471      425      1.614       0.487        1.64      0.054   0.968
 Wife asks condom, disrespectful                             410       1.917     1.459      413      1.835       0.371       1.099      0.082   0.957
 Wife asks condom, sleeps around                             408       1.811     0.392      413      1.804       0.398       0.269      0.007   0.996
 Man has g‐friends, must tolerate                            420       1.812     0.391      423      1.823       0.382      ‐0.405     ‐0.011   1.006
 Wife must not divorce                                       418       1.689     0.463      422      1.690       0.463      ‐0.018     ‐0.001    1.00
 Ok to refuse sex if not want                                416       1.538     0.499      423      1.522          0.5      0.464      0.016    0.99
 Ok to refuse sex if no condom                               413       1.528        0.5     418         1.5      0.501       0.802      0.028   0.982
 Ok to refuse sex if angry for other g‐friends               419       1.477        0.5     424      1.434       0.496       1.264      0.043   0.971
 Ok to refuse sex if worried about aids                      416       1.498     0.501      423      1.428       0.495       2.027       0.07   0.953
Notes: Outcome measures based on survey data collected by Intervention with Microfinance for Gender Equity (IMAGE) in South Africa,
a cooperative study between the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine (LSHTM), Wits University in Johannesburg, and the
microfinance NGO Small Enterprise Foundation (SEF). Results presented in Kim et al (2009). Estimates based on authors’ own
calculations of the data from Kim et al (2009). Participants refer to individuals randomly selected to attend program consisting of a set
of 10‐discussion sessions. Non‐Participants refer to individuals who did not attend the program. Comparison columns report mean
difference between participant and non‐participant groups. Also reported are the t‐statistics testing if this difference is distinguishable
from zero.
  Table 8. Comparison of Sociodemographic Characteristics Between Control and Program Participation Groups (South Africa)
                                               Non‐Participants                       Participants                       Comparison
                                          N            Mean            SD       N         Mean             SD         t         Diff          %Chng
 Age                                   420            42.519       12.594     426        42.077        10.904   0.545         0.442             0.99
 Marital Status                        420               2.15        1.09     426         2.277         1.049 ‐1.727         ‐0.127            1.059
 Parity                                420              4.417       2.885     425         5.009         2.955    ‐2.95       ‐0.593            1.134
 Connectedness                         426              2.178       1.263     428         2.874         1.383 ‐7.671         ‐0.695            1.319
 Maximum Schooling                     425              1.386       0.572     426         1.458         0.632 ‐1.739         ‐0.072            1.052
 Total Asset Value                     412          4,265.09     7,284.84     421      5,245.02      9,927.12 ‐1.627       ‐979.929             1.23
 Non‐livestock Value                   412          3,204.97     6,115.00     421      3,576.25     6,991.39 ‐0.816        ‐371.283            1.116
 Livestock Value                       413          1,057.56     3,139.42     422      1,664.92     5,978.12 ‐1.843        ‐607.358            1.574
 Type of Toilet                        421              2.268       0.485     425         2.191         0.405   2.533         0.078            0.966
 Access to Electricity                 422              1.218       0.413     425         1.195         0.397   0.816         0.023            0.981
 Dwelling Walls Material               422              4.265       1.241     425         4.393         1.306 ‐1.457         ‐0.128             1.03
 Access to Water                       416              2.565       1.162     425         3.226         1.483 ‐7.204         ‐0.661            1.258
Notes: Outcome measures based on survey data collected by Intervention with Microfinance for Gender Equity (IMAGE) in South Africa, a
cooperative study between the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine (LSHTM), Wits University in Johannesburg, and the microfinance
NGO Small Enterprise Foundation (SEF). Results presented in Kim et al (2009). Estimates based on authors’ own calculations of the data from Kim
et al (2009) . Participants refer to individuals randomly selected to attend program consisting of a set of 10‐discussion sessions. Non‐Participants
refer to individuals who did not attend the program. Comparison columns report mean difference between participant and non‐participant
groups. Also reported are the t‐statistics testing if this difference is distinguishable from zero.
Table 9. Estimated Effect of Discussion Sessions on Decision Making and Dispute Resolution Outcomes (South Africa)
                                                                             Baseline                                      Post‐Program
 Does not ask husband’s permission for:                   Non‐Participants              Participants        Non‐Participants            Participants
 Small purchases for herself                                 0.359***                     ‐0.067                0.200*                     0.174
                                                             (0.0626)                    (0.0791)              (0.0856)                   (0.103)
 % change relative to non‐participant baseline                                             ‐19%                  56%                        48%

 Large purchases for own self, does not ask for              0.228***                    ‐0.00302                 0.143                    0.0945
 husband's permission                                        (0.0503)                      (0.09)               (0.0924)                   (0.156)
 % change relative to non‐participant baseline                                              ‐1%                    63%                       41%

 Small purchases for the hh, does not ask for husband's      0.672***                     0.0495                  0.123                   0.00542
 Permission                                                   (0.068)                    (0.0459)               (0.0688)                  (0.0807)
 % change relative to non‐participant baseline                                            7.40%                  18.30%                    0.80%

 Medium purchases for the hh, does not ask for               0.351***                     ‐0.0921               0.240**                   0.233**
 husband's permission                                        (0.0522)                    (0.0615)               (0.0774)                  (0.0928)
 % change relative to non‐participant baseline                                           ‐26.24%               68.38%**                  66.38%**

 Large purchases for the hh                                  0.228***                     ‐0.0518                0.0837                    0.171
                                                             (0.0503)                    (0.0781)               (0.0891)                   (0.13)
 % change relative to non‐participant baseline                                             ‐23%                   37%                       75%

 Taking children to hospital,                                0.520***                    ‐0.0785                0.0618                      0.199
                                                              (0.118)                     (0.113)               (0.171)                    (0.195)
 % change relative to non‐participant baseline                                           ‐15.10%                11.90%                     38.30%

 Visit Family of Birth                                       0.352***                     ‐0.0986               ‐0.0776                     0.314
                                                              (0.097)                     (0.108)               (0.136)                    (0.177)
 % change relative to non‐participant baseline                                            ‐28%                          ‐22%                          89%

 Visit Friends                                               0.491***                    ‐0.0317                        0.16                          0.124
                                                             (0.0854)                   (0.0869)                       (0.118)                       (0.143)
 % change relative to non‐participant baseline                                           ‐6.46%                        32.59%                        25.25%

 Visits Family and Friends outside the                       0.260***                 ‐0.00703                        0.0165                           0.169
  husband's permission                                       (0.0598)                  (0.0814)                      (0.0874)                         (0.143)
 % change relative to non‐participant baseline                                          ‐2.70%                         6.30%                          65.00%
Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the village level are reported in parentheses. Results that are significant at the 0.05 (0.10, 0.01) level
are marked with a ** (*, ***). Each row presents the results from a separate regression with the dependent variables listed in each row.
Percent changes in panel B are based on comparison to females in the control group prior to treatment. Outcome measures based on survey
data collected by Intervention with Microfinance for Gender Equity (IMAGE) in South Africa, a cooperative study between the London School of
Hygiene and Tropical Medicine (LSHTM), Wits University in Johannesburg, and the microfinance NGO Small Enterprise Foundation (SEF). Results
presented in Kim et al (2009). Estimates based on authors’ own calculations of the data from Kim et al (2009). Participants refer to individuals
randomly selected to attend 10‐series discussion group series. Non‐Participants refer to individuals not selected to attend the program.
Table 10. Estimated Effect of Discussion Sessions on Gender Norms and Violence (South Africa)

                                                                                     Baseline                               Post‐Program
 % who disagree that                                                   non‐participant          participant   non‐participant         participant
 Woman should do most hh chores                                           1.747***               ‐0.0766*        ‐0.133*              0.210***
                                                                          (0.0224)               (0.0363)        (0.0562)              (0.0598)
 % change relative to non‐participant baseline                                                   ‐4.38%*         ‐7.61%*             12.02%***
 Wife must obey Husband who paid Lobola                                   1.615***               ‐0.0599         ‐0.0473                0.212*
                                                                          (0.0250)               (0.0461)        (0.0969)              (0.0951)
 % change relative to non‐participant baseline                                                    ‐3.7%           ‐2.9%                13.1%*
 A wife is disrespectful if asks to use a condom                          2.149***               ‐0.0386          1.427*                   ‐1.242
                                                                           (0.201)               (0.265)          (0.710)              (0.660)
 % change relative to non‐participant baseline                                                    ‐1.8%           66.4%                 ‐57.8%
 If wife asks for condom she is unfaithful                                2.124***                0.0367         1.287**               ‐1.093*
                                                                           (0.156)               (0.172)          (0.501)               (0.463)
 % change relative to non‐participant baseline                                                    1.7%           60.6%**               ‐51.5%*

 A man must have many girlfriends; wife tolerate                           1.684***              ‐0.0153          0.0250                   0.265

                                                                          (0.0994)               (0.110)         (0.0901)              (0.240)
 % change relative to non‐participant baseline                                                    ‐0.9%            1.5%                    15.7%
 Women should never divorce their husband                                 1.711***                0.0120         ‐0.0465                   0.150
                                                                          (0.0421)               (0.0549)        (0.0854)              (0.0886)
 % change relative to non‐participant baseline                                                    0.70%           ‐2.72%                   8.77%
 Married Woman can refuse sex if does not want it                         1.494***               ‐0.0223         ‐0.0450                   ‐0.141
                                                                          (0.0611)               (0.0759)         (0.108)              (0.112)
 % change relative to non‐participant baseline                                                   ‐0.01493        ‐0.03012              ‐0.09438
 Married woman can refuse sex if husband will not wear a condom              1.596***           ‐0.0199            0.874*            ‐1.003**
                                                                              (0.132)           (0.145)            (0.453)            (0.419)
 % change relative to non‐participant baseline                                                   ‐1.2%             54.8%*            ‐62.8%**
 If she is angry because he has other g‐friends,                             1.395***           ‐0.0579             0.146             ‐0.311
 married woman can refuse sex                                                 (0.106)           (0.0537)           (0.202)            (0.192)
 % change relative to non‐participant baseline                                                    ‐4%               10%                ‐22%
 She worries he might have AIDS, married woman can refuse sex                1.282***           ‐0.0491             1.017             ‐1.172
                                                                              (0.224)           (0.255)            (0.799)            (0.739)
 % change relative to non‐participant baseline                                                    ‐4%               79%                ‐91%
 Ok to beat wife if she refuses to have sex                                  1.830***           0.0368*           ‐0.00277           0.000886
                                                                             (0.00972)          (0.0184)         (0.00192)           (0.00183)
 % change relative to non‐participant baseline                                                   2.0%*              ‐0.2%              0.0%
 Ok to beat wife if she asks to use a condom                                 2.634***            ‐0.477           0.00632            ‐0.00740
                                                                              (0.195)           (0.291)          (0.00654)           (0.00934)
 % change relative to non‐participant baseline                                                  ‐18.1%              0.2%              ‐0.3%
 Ok to beat wife if she is unfaithful                                        1.724***           0.0150            ‐0.00257           0.00120
                                                                             (0.0367)           (0.0284)         (0.00280)           (0.00282)
 % change relative to non‐participant baseline                                                   0.87%             ‐0.15%             0.07%
 Ok to beat wife if she disagrees in public                                  1.924***            ‐0.502           0.00536            ‐0.00184
                                                                              (0.181)           (0.354)          (0.00658)           (0.00434)
 % change relative to non‐participant baseline                                                 ‐26.09%              0.28%             ‐0.10%
Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the village level are reported in parentheses. Results that are significant at the 0.05
(0.10, 0.01) level are marked with a ** (*, ***). Each row presents the results from a separate regression with the dependent
variables listed in each row. Percent changes in panel B are based on comparison to females in the control group prior to
treatment. Outcome measures based on survey data collected by Intervention with Microfinance for Gender Equity (IMAGE) in
South Africa, a cooperative study between the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine (LSHTM), Wits University in
Johannesburg, and the microfinance NGO Small Enterprise Foundation (SEF). Results presented in Kim et al (2009). Estimates based
on authors’ own calculation of the data from Kim et al (2009). Participants refer to individuals randomly selected to attend
program consisting of a set of 10‐discussion sessions. Non‐Participants refer to individuals who did not attend the program.
Table 11. Estimated Effect of Discussion Sessions on Violence and Consumption Levels (South Africa)

                                                                      Baseline                                        Post‐Program
                                                       non‐participant           participant           non‐participant           participant
 Insult                                                  0.882***                 ‐0.0176                  0.0239                 0.0309*
                                                          (0.0237)                (0.0104)                (0.0140)                (0.0137)
 % change relative to non‐participant baseline                                      ‐2%                    2.71%                   3.50%*

 Push                                                    0.0915***                  0.0112                 0.00612                ‐0.0466**
                                                         (0.00684)                (0.00801)                (0.0117)                (0.0168)
 % change relative to non‐participant baseline                                      12.2%                    6.7%                   ‐51%**
 Has been hit with a fist by partner                     0.0782***                 0.0129*                  0.0157                ‐0.0371**
                                                         (0.00532)                (0.00550)               (0.00950)                (0.0121)
 % change relative to non‐participant baseline                                     16.50%*                   20%                    ‐47%**

 Has had Forced Sex w Partner                            0.0720***                 ‐0.00237                0.0195*                   ‐0.0223
                                                         (0.00799)                (0.00435)               (0.00833)                  (0.0164)
 % change relative to non‐participant baseline                                        ‐3%                  27.08%*                     ‐31%

 Total Violence                                           0.231***                  0.0204                 0.0337*                 ‐0.0844***
                                                          (0.0189)                 (0.0147)                (0.0161)                  (0.0239)
 % change relative to non‐participant baseline                                        9%                   14.59%*                  ‐37%***
Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the village level are reported in parentheses. Results that are significant at the 0.05
(0.10, 0.01) level are marked with a ** (*, ***). Each row presents the results from a separate regression with the dependent
variables listed in each row. Percent changes in panel B are based on comparison to females in the control group prior to
treatment. Outcome measures based on survey data collected by Intervention with Microfinance for Gender Equity (IMAGE) in
South Africa, a cooperation between the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine (LSHTM), Wits University in
Johannesburg, and the microfinance NGO Small Enterprise Foundation (SEF). Results presented in Kim et al (2009). Estimates
based on author’s own calculations. Participants refer to individuals randomly selected to attend 10‐series discussion group
series. Non‐Participants refer to individuals not selected to attend the program.
