                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   PHYSICIAN RESPONSE TO PAY-FOR-PERFORMANCE:
                      EVIDENCE FROM A NATURAL EXPERIMENT

                                                Jinhu Li
                                            Jeremiah Hurley
                                             Philip DeCicca
                                             Gioia Buckley

                                         Working Paper 16909
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16909


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2011




We thank Catherine Deri Armstrong, Linda Dynan, Jasmin Kantarevic, Sisira Sarma, Adam Wagstaff
and participants at the 7th World Congress on Health Economics of the International Health Economics
Association, the 3rd biennial conference of the American Society of Health Economists, the 44th annual
conference of the Canadian Economics Association, the May 2010 annual conference of the Canadian
Health Economic Study Group, and the 2010 annual Canadian Association for Health Services and
Policy Research conference for helpful comments and advice. This research was funded by the grant
from the Ontario Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care to the Centre for Health Economics and
Policy Analysis as part of their collaborative research program. We thank Marsha Barnes for initially
sponsoring this project. We also thank Ji Li for excellent research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Jinhu Li, Jeremiah Hurley, Philip DeCicca, and Gioia Buckley. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Physician Response to Pay-for-Performance: Evidence from a Natural Experiment
Jinhu Li, Jeremiah Hurley, Philip DeCicca, and Gioia Buckley
NBER Working Paper No. 16909
March 2011
JEL No. I18,J33

                                                 ABSTRACT

Explicit financial incentives, especially pay-for-performance (P4P) incentives, have been extensively
employed in recent years by health plans and governments in an attempt to improve the quality of
health care services. This study exploits a natural experiment in the province of Ontario, Canada to
identify empirically the impact of pay-for-performance (P4P) incentives on the provision of targeted
primary care services, and whether physicians’ responses differ by age, practice size and baseline compliance
level. We use an administrative data source which covers the full population of the province of Ontario
and nearly all the services provided by practicing primary care physicians in Ontario. With an individual-level
data set of physicians, we employ a difference-in-differences approach that controls for both “selection
on observables” and “selection on unobservables” that may cause estimation bias in the identification.
We also implemented a set of robustness checks to control for confounding from the other contemporary
interventions of the primary care reform in Ontario. The results indicate that, while all responses are
of modest size, physicians responded to some of the financial incentives but not the others. The differential
responses appear related to the cost of responding and the strength of the evidence linking a service
with quality. Overall, the results provide a cautionary message regarding the effectiveness of pay-for-performance
schemes for increasing quality of care.


Jinhu Li                                                Philip DeCicca
McMaster University                                     Department of Economics
1280 Main St. West                                      422 Kenneth Taylor Hall
Hamilton, ON L8S 4M4                                    McMaster University
lij53@mcmaster.ca                                       Hamilton, ON L8S, 4M4
                                                        CANADA
Jeremiah Hurley                                         and NBER
McMaster University                                     decicca@mcmaster.ca
1280 Main St. West
Hamilton, ON L8S 4M4                                    Gioia Buckley
hurley@mcmaster.ca                                      McMaster University
                                                        1280 Main St. West
                                                        Hamilton, ON L8S 4M4
                                                        buckle@mcmaster.ca
   1. Introduction
Explicit financial incentives, especially pay-for-performance (P4P) incentives, have been
extensively employed and strongly advocated in recent years by health plans and
governments in an attempt to improve the quality of health care services. Pay-for-
performance is now a concept that is embraced by a lot of policy makers and is deemed as a
critical component of health care reforms. A typical P4P program offers financial rewards to
health care providers for meeting pre-established targets for the provision of specific health
care services. These explicit financial incentives, which are used within different
compensation schemes, aim to motivate health care providers to provide high-quality care.

        A variety of P4P programs have been established in several countries. In the United
States, as of 2005 at least 100 nationwide P4P initiatives had been sponsored by health plans,
employer coalitions and the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) (Baker and
Carter 2005). Initially, most of the P4P programs were targeted at primary care physicians
affiliated with Health Maintenance Organizations (HMO). Since 2004 there has been
significant expansion of P4P programs to specialists and hospitals, which use more
sophisticated measures for performance assessment (Rosenthal and Dudley 2007, Baker 2004,
Baker and Carter 2005). In the United Kingdom, the British National Health Service (NHS)
introduced a pay-for-performance contract for family practitioners in 2004 which linked
physician income to performance with respect to 146 quality indicators relating to clinical
care for 10 chronic diseases, the organization of care and patient experience (Doran et al.
2006). P4P incentive programs have also been used in Canada, Australia, Haiti and other
nations (Frolich et al. 2007).

        The rationale for employing P4P incentives to induce desired physician behaviour
comes primarily from principal-agent theory and incentive-contract theory. The classic
principal-agent and incentive contract theories analyze how pay-for-performance can be used
to elicit desired behaviours from individuals in the presence of information asymmetry. The
analysis focuses particularly on how the ability to elicit desired behavior is constrained by the
noisiness of the performance measures, the extent to which the performance is easily
monitored, the ability of agents to handle risk, and the extent to which the desired behavior
consists of multiple tasks (Prendergast 1999; Baker 1992; Hart and Holmstrom 1987;
Milgrom and Roberts 1992; Stiglitz 1974). The take-away message from these theories is that
performance-based contracting can induce agents to improve performance when payment is
based on achieving pre-specified performance targets.

        In reality though, using P4P programs to motivate health care providers’ behaviour is
controversial. Advocates believe that P4P can fix many of the long-standing deficiencies in


                                               2
health care system, especially the failure to deliver appropriate and evidence-based care to all
patient populations. Years of reforms to general payment mechanisms have had little impact
on reducing the deficiencies in health care delivery. This has led to the gradual employment
of explicit P4P incentives to link financial gains and losses to quality indicators (Maynard
2008). The belief is that, by making payments at least partly contingent on indicators of high-
quality care, P4P programs will induce providers to improve health care quality (Rosenthal
and Frank 2006). However, critics argue that P4P programs are not as effective as commonly
claimed and often create unintended consequences. Some argue that P4P programs can be
very costly because payment used to induce even marginal improvement in quality is often
expensive (Christianson et al. 2008; Lewis 2009). Others argue that P4P will induce gaming
behaviors by physicians such as strategic coding of patient diagnoses, patient selection and
patients-exception reporting (Hutchison 2008; Shen 2003; Richards 2009; Doran et al. 2008;
Gravelle et al. 2010). Finally, some P4P programs create unintended consequences such as
provider focus on the clinical outcomes subject to incentives to the neglect of other aspects of
care (Rosenthal and Frank 2006; Mullen et al. 2010).

        Theoretical predictions on physician responses to P4P incentives are ambiguous.
Health economics generally models physicians as utility-maximizing service providers who
choose their optimal level and mix of services to trade off among income, leisure and other
consumption goods (McGuire and Pauly 1991; McGuire 2000). Physician responses to the
price increase of the targeted services, generated by individual P4P incentives, are ambiguous
because income effect and substitution effect work in opposite directions. Furthermore, there
is no consensus about the specific form of physicians’ utility function. Besides financial
objectives, non-pecuniary factors including medical ethics, professional autonomy and social
status, and altruistic concerns about patient outcomes are also argued influence physician
utilities (Scott 2001; Eisenberg 1985; Eisenberg 1986). As a result, physicians are less likely
to respond to financial incentives when a falling marginal utility of income renders income
less attractive in relation to other objectives (McGuire 2000). Moreover, P4P incentives in
health care are often embedded within complex compensation systems and provider
organizations (Conrad and Christianson 2004; Frolich et al. 2007), where physicians face
different incentives from multiple payers and operate in highly regulated settings. The effect
of P4P incentives can thus be mitigated by other simultaneous incentives. Therefore, how
physicians would respond to P4P incentives remains an empirical issue.

        Empirical studies providing good evidence of how performance incentives influence
physician delivery of targeted services are scarce. Studies based on Random Controlled Trials
(RCTs) have limited generalizability due to the small scale of the experiments. Although the
number of observational studies is growing, these empirical studies often suffer from poor

                                               3
study-design. Furthermore, the findings from the existing empirical studies are mixed and
inconclusive. Most of them find partial effects of P4P incentives in sense that, physicians
respond to some of the incentives but not the others; for the subset of incentives which did
improve the performance, the magnitude of the improvement is modest. A few studies find
consistent positive effects but others find no effect. We will discuss these studies, and others,
in more detail in the following section.

           This study exploits a natural experiment in the province of Ontario, Canada to
identify empirically the impact of pay-for-performance (P4P) incentives on the provision of
targeted primary care services. The P4P scheme rewards family physicians (FPs) and general
practitioners (GPs) when they achieve targeted levels of service provision 5 . Primary care
reform in Ontario provides a good setting that allows us to employ a difference-in-differences
approach to control for potential sources of bias when identifying the effect of P4P incentives
on physician behaviour. The policy intervention exposed some, but not all, of the GPs in
Ontario to P4P incentives. Therefore, the GPs who were not eligible for the P4P incentives
constitute a natural comparison group for our study design. Also, the timing of the P4P
implementation allows us to mitigate perfect confounding of other attributes of primary care
reform interventions with P4P. The majority of the GPs were exposed to P4P incentives
sometime after they participated into the primary care reforms. Using this group of GPs as the
treatment group in a difference-in-differences with individual fixed effects method allows us
to disentangle the impact of P4P incentives from the effect generated by other policy changes.

           We exploit an administrative data source which covers the full population of the
province of Ontario and nearly all GPs. The administrative databases include detailed
information on services provided that constitutes over 98% of all physician activity. By
linking different sources of administrative databases, we can observe the group of physicians
who were affected by the incentives and the group of physicians that were not affected by the
incentives in both pre- and post- intervention periods. The population-based nature of this
data provides us a large sample size, while the rich content of the data allows us to address a
variety of potential biases that are caused by “selection on observables” and to partially
control for potential bias that are caused by “selection on unobservables”.

           Furthermore, the universal public insurance and single-payer system in Canada
provides an extra advantage for identifying the P4P incentive effects. In multiple-payers
settings, such as the U.S., as Robinson notes (Robinson 2001), comprehension and
compliance to any payment mechanisms will be undermined when physicians face different
incentives from multiple insurers or organizations. Therefore, the estimates of the P4P

5
    For ease of exposition, for the rest of the paper I will refer to both FPs and GPs as “GPs”.


                                                       4
incentives from the US studies are expected to be biased towards zero. In Ontario, however,
physicians face only a single payer.

        This study also examines the heterogeneity of the P4P incentive effects across
different physician types and different practice characteristics. We expect that the impact of
P4P incentives is heterogeneous because both the benefit of responding to P4P incentives and
the cost of responding likely differ across physicians, services and practices. We compare the
incentives effects across physician age, across practices that differ in patient population size,
and across practices with different baseline levels of service provision.



   2. Empirical evidence on physician response to P4P
A large body of empirical studies has examined the effect of financial incentives on physician
behavior. There is considerable evidence that physicians respond to the incentives embedded
in different payment schemes (McGuire and Pauly 1991; McGuire 2000; Hurley et al. 1990;
Yip 1998; Nguyen and Derrick 1997; Hickson et al. 1987; Krasnik et al. 1990; Scott and
Shiell 1997). There is less evidence on physician in responses to explicit financial incentives
in the form of targeted performance payments intended to guide specific behaviours.

       This study focuses on the effect of pay-for-performance incentives on the behaviour of
physicians so we focus the review on thirty studies identified by several recent survey papers
(Rosenthal and Frank 2006; Christianson et al. 2008; Petersen et al. 2006; Town et al. 2005;
Armour et al. 2001) and by our own search of the literature for papers that pertain to
physician responses to P4P incentives (See Appendix 1 for the identified empirical studies).
Among the thirty studies, eight of them are based on Random Control Trials (RCTs) and
twenty-two are based on observational studies.

        The RCTs examine the effects of alternative forms of performance incentives, such as
bonus, bonus based on capitation payment, bonus with performance feedback, on the
provision of targeted services by physicians. In most RCTs, the incentives are mostly targeted
on preventive care services, including influenza immunizations, mammograms, Pap smear,
colorectal screening and pediatric immunization. The sample sizes are generally small.

        The results from the RCTs are mixed. Three studies (Grady et al. 1997; Hillman et al.
1998; Hillman et al. 1999) didn’t detect any significant effect of P4P bonus rewards or bonus
rewards combined with performance feedback on physician compliance with cancer screening,
pediatric immunization and mammography referrals. Two studies (Fairbrother et al. 1999;
Fairbrother et al. 2001) found that a bonus or bonus with performance feedback incentives
increased documented coverage levels for childhood immunization, but the measured increase


                                                5
was primarily due to better documentation not better immunization practices. A study of
bonus payments for smoking cessation clinics (Roski et al. 2003) found a significant
improvement in documentation of patient smoking status and in providing advice to quit, but
no effect on quitting rates. The other two RCTs showed a significantly positive effect of using
bonus payment at the practice or the clinic level: Kouides et al. (1998) showed that a bonus
payment for influenza immunization increased rates by 7 percent; Lawrence et al. (2008)
found that the clinics with P4P payments had higher level of referral rates on tobacco quitline
services than the clinics without payments.

        RCTs are often deemed as the “gold standard” to identify the causal effects, but the
results from these RCTs often suffer from small sample size problem and cannot easily be
generalized or extrapolated. All of these RCTs are based on small scale experiments
involving fewer than a hundred physicians or practices. One study (Hillman et al. 1998)
involved only 52 physician practices in total. As a result, the effect size might not be
statistically identified due to the lack of power. Moreover, the intervention studied by these
RCTs can make it impossible to disentangle the pure P4P financial incentives effects from
other quality management tools. Among these RCTs, two studies (Hillman et al. 1998;
Hillman et al. 1999) bundled the bonus payment with performance feedback regarding
compliance level; one study (Grady et al. 1997) bundled financial reward with the provision
of education in the form of chart reminder stickers.

        The observational studies are mostly based on small to large scale pilot pay-for-
quality programs or quality-improvement initiatives adopted by health plans in US, UK and
Taiwan. These programs generally covered a broader set of quality indicators than merely
preventive care services, such as process and outcome measures for diabetic care, asthma and
coronary heart disease and other chronic conditions

        Doran et al. (2006) evaluated the effect of the nationwide P4P program introduced by
Britain’s National Health Service in 2004 for family practitioners. The program linked
increases in income to performance with respect to 146 quality indicators covering clinical
care for 10 chronic diseases, organization of care, and patient experience. The English family
practices attained high levels of achievement meeting the quality indicators, as the median
reported achievement was 83.4 percent in the first year of the P4P program (April 2004
through March 2005). But this study is based on a cross-sectional analysis so it only
established an association between high level of reported achievement and the P4P
contracting, not the real effect of the P4P incentives. As Campbell et al. (2007) noted, because
a wide range of initiatives, including limited use of incentive programs, had been introduced
in the UK since 1990, the high levels of quality attained after the 2004 contract might just
reflect improvements that were already under way.

                                               6
        Campbell et al. (2007; 2009) used a before-after design to examine the effect of 2004
P4P contracting on the quality of care. Both studies measured quality indicators for three
chronic conditions --- asthma, coronary heart disease, and type-2 diabetes --- for
representative groups of general practitioners. Campbell et al. (2007) measured these quality
indictors two times before the P4P contracting (1998 and 2003) and one time after the
contracting (2005), and compared the quality score predicted by 1998-2003 trend against the
observed quality score in 2005. The results indicate that the introduction of pay for
performance was associated with a modest acceleration in improvement for two of these three
conditions, diabetes and asthma. Campbell et al. (2009) assessed the same quality indicators
at an additional time point of 2007, and extended the previous study by using an interrupted
time series analysis. The study found that in 2005 the rate of improvement in quality
increased for diabetes care and asthma but remained unchanged for coronary heart disease; by
2007, the rate of improvement for all three conditions had slowed down: as compared with
the period before the pay-for-performance scheme was introduced, the improvement rate was
unchanged for asthma or diabetes and was reduced for heart disease. Since the P4P
contracting is offered to all general practitioners in the U.K., neither study could include a
plausible control group against which to compare changes in service provision following the
introduction of the incentives. Other studies based on the same pay-for-performance scheme
in the U.K. (Millett et al. 2007; Steel et al. 2007;Vaghela et al. 2009) examined the effect of
P4P incentives on other quality indicators such as smoking cessation and hypertension
outcomes, and found statistically significant increase in these quality indicators after the
introduction of this P4P scheme. They suffer from the same problem of identification thus
hardly to provide reliable evidence by using only simple before-after analysis.

        Evidence of P4P incentives from the U.S. is rapidly growing. Most U.S. studies have
been based on small-scale pilot P4P programs adopted by health plans in different states.
These studies often suffer from poor study design: some of them only employed simple
before-after mean comparison or trend comparison (Levin-Scherz et al. 2006; Young et al.
2007; Cutler et al. 2007; Pearson et al. 2008); others do not provide any comparison group as
the counterfactuals (Amundson et al. 2003; Mandel and Kotagal 2007; Chung et al. 2010;
Boland et al. 2010; Lester et al. 2010; Coleman et al. 2007). Some of the programs were
targeted at health plans or clinics instead of individual physicians, so the lack of individual-
level data makes it difficult to draw inference on physician responses to P4P incentives (Felt-
Lisk et al. 2007; Gavagan et al. 2010). Furthermore, results are often limited by the small size
of these programs. For example, Beaulieu and Horrigan (2005) examined the effect of
performance bonus on the improvement of nine measures for diabetic care by using only 21
physicians as the treatment group. So it is difficult to draw reliable inference from this study.


                                                7
       The best evidence to date on the effects of P4P programs are from two observational
studies in the U.S. drawn from the P4P initiatives introduced by a large network Health
Managed Organization (HMO): PacifiCare Health Plan. The first study (Rosenthal et al. 2005)
examined the effect of Quality Incentive Programs (QIP) provided by PacifiCare Health Plan
to medical groups in California in 2002 on physician delivery of cervical cancer screening,
mammography and haemoglobin A1c test. It used a difference-in-difference design by
comparing provider groups in California which were affected by these incentives with
provider groups in the Pacific Northwest which were unaffected by the incentives but also
contracted with PacifiCare Health Plan. It found that outcomes improved for cervical cancer
screening, but did not improve for mammography and the haemoglobin A1c test. The second
study (Mullen et al. 2009) built on the first paper and examined the effect of QIP incentives
along with another larger P4P program by the Integrated Healthcare Association (IHA). It
also concluded that the P4P incentive effects are mixed. In line with the previous study, the
analysis found evidence of a positive effect only for cervical cancer screening, but not for
mammography, haemoglobin A1c test and asthma medication. Overall, the study concluded
that the pay-for-performance scheme resulted in neither a major improvement in quality nor a
notable disruption in care (which some hypothesized would be a negative side-effect).

       The findings from these empirical studies suggest that the evidence of physician
responses to P4P incentives is mixed and inconclusive. Physicians respond to some P4P
incentives but not the others. In general, physicians’ response to these financial incentives is
of modest size with no evidence of ultimate health improvement for the patients.



   3. Ontario’s Natural Experiment
This study draws on primary care reform interventions in Ontario, Canada as a natural
experiment of P4P incentive payments to address the following questions: 1) Does P4P
stimulate the delivery of targeted health care services by GPs? 2) Are P4P incentives effects
heterogeneous across physician and practice characteristics? Primary care reform in Ontario
provided a set of performance-based incentives to some of the primary care physicians in
Ontario but not to the others. This produces natural treatment and comparison groups by
which to identify the effect of P4P incentives on physician behavior. The ten-year study
period (fiscal years 1998/1999-2007/2008) covers years prior to the provision of the
performance-based incentives and those after the implementation. At the beginning of the
study period in April 1998, all but a few hundred primary care physicians in Ontario were in
the traditional fee-for-service practice; at the end of the study period, more than half of these
GPs converted to one or more of the primary care reform models that included P4P inventive.


                                               8
3.1 Background: Primary Care Reform

Over the last two decades, the province of Ontario, Canada has launched a series of primary
care renewal (PCR) models to improve the quality of primary health care. The PCR models
are intended to improve quality by: 1) providing P4P incentives to stimulate the delivery of
targeted health care services; 2) converting from traditional fee-for-service payment to a
blended payment method; 3) integrating primary care physicians, nurses and other
professionals into more collaborative, multidisciplinary teams (Wilson 2006).

        The Ontario Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care (MOHLTC) introduced the
different PCR models at different points of time for different purposes. This study focuses on
four PCR models: the Family Health Network model (FHN), the Family Health Group model
(FHG), the Comprehensive Care Model (CCM) and the Family Health Organization (FHO).
The earliest model introduced among these four PCR models is the FHN, which existed as
early as 2002, requires a group practice with at least 3 GP, and is funded through a blended
system of capitation for “core” services provided to rostered patients and fee-for-service for
both non-rostered patients and for “non-core” services excluded from the basket of capitated
services. FHGs were introduced in 2003, also required a group of 3 or more GPs but the basic
payment scheme is a enhanced fee-for-service formula, which consists of the traditional fee-
for-service payment for usual care, plus some capitation payments for comprehensive care
services provided to rostered patients. The CCM model was introduced in 2005, can include
only a solo GP, and is funded through fee-for-service. It is the most similar to traditional FFS
practice. The FHO model was introduced in 2006, like FHNs, and FHGs requires a group of
at least 3 GPs, and is funded through a blend of capitation payment and fee-for-service
payment for non-rostered patients and for “non-core” services. FHOs and FHNs are similar
in the funding scheme but different in size or rostering regulation. There is no size regulation
in patient roster size for the FHO model, but for FHN practices the required minimum roster
size is 2,400 patients for a group of 3 GPs while a financial penalty applies if the average
roster size is greater than 2400 patients/GP in the practice. Unlike traditional fee-for-service
practice, all of the above four PCR models offer enrolment to their patients (optional for
FHGs, required for FHNs, CCMs and FHOs), provide comprehensive care, impose
requirements on GPs to provide a minimum of after-hours care.



3.2 Pay-for-performance Incentives

Ontario initially introduced elements of pay-for-performance in primary care in 1999 to some
small-scale pilot PCR models, and expanded it within primary care in 2004. The 2004

                                               9
Physician Services Agreement included a large number of incentives targeting various aspects
of the organization of PCR practices and the care delivered by physicians in those practices.
Further, as discussed below, the specific incentives and dates of eligibility differ across the
various PCR models.

        We focus on a set of P4P financial incentives for five preventive care services
(referred to as the Service Enhancement Payments for Preventive Care): Pap smears,
mammograms, flu shot for seniors, toddler immunizations, and colorectal cancer screening;
and on special payments for services in six areas of care of particular interest to the
MOHLTC: payments for obstetrical deliveries, hospital services, palliative care, office
procedures, prenatal care, and home visits. Table 1 lists the details of the five performance-
based incentives for preventive care services and the six special payments for designated sets
of services.



3.2.1 P4P incentives for Preventive Care

The P4P incentives for the five preventive care services include two components: a contact
payment and the cumulative preventive care bonus payment. The contact payment rewards
PCR practices for contacting patients to schedule an appointment to receive a targeted
preventive service. Specifically, the PCR practice receives a contact payment of $6.86 for
each eligible patient in the target population that it contacts and for which it provides the
Ministry the required documentation. The cumulative preventive care bonus payment rewards
PCR practices for achieving high rates of coverage for the targeted preventive services in the
physician’s practice populations.

        Physicians receive cumulative bonus payment for each service on March 31 each year
based on the proportion of its physicians’ eligible and rostered patients who received the
targeted service over a specified period of time prior to March 31. Physicians receive a
specified amount of money if the proportion reaches a pre-specified coverage threshold, and
the payment grows as the proportion exceeds higher thresholds. For example, if 60% of a
physician’s rostered female patients in the age of 35 to 69 received a Pap smear for cervical
cancer screening during the previous 30 months as of March 31, a physician is rewarded 220
dollars. If 65% of the eligible patient population received a pap smear, a physician receives
440 dollars. The physician is compensated with 660 dollars, 1,320 dollars and 2,200 dollars
for coverage rates of 70%, 75% and 80%, respectively. It should be noted that, the bonus
payment is only based on the proportion of a physician’s rostered and eligible patients who
received the service in the defined time period; the physician with whom the patient is
rostered on March 31 need not have provided this service. For example, if a physician


                                              10
provided a pap smear to a patient on February 1 and that patient changed physicians on March
1, the patient’s receipt of the Pap smear would count toward the second physician’s bonus
calculation on March 31.

         It should also be noted that, although the payment is based on the performance of
individual physicians, whether the payment is made directly to individual physician varies
across the four PCR models. The payment is made to the physician’s PCR practice for GPs in
a FHN; how the practice uses the funds received is determined by the practice.6 Physicians in
FHGs, CCMs and FHOs receive the payment directly; it does not go to the PCR practice.



3.2.2 P4P Special Payments

         The special payments are structured differently. In each case, a physician received a
fixed payment if the targeted service was delivered to a minimum absolute level of service
provision during the preceding fiscal year, where that minimum is defined in terms of number
of services, dollar value of services, number of patients, or a combination of these factors. For
each incentive there is also only a single threshold level: if it is reached, the physician
receives the special payment; if it is not reached, the physician does not receive the payment.
For example, if five or more obstetrical services7 were delivered to five or more patients in a
fiscal year, a physician receives a fixed payment of 3,200 dollars (with an increase to 5,000
dollars since October 2007). Unlike the preventive care bonuses, the services had to be
provided by the physician. Moreover, for all six designated services, the payments were made
directly to the physician.



3.3 Eligible Physicians

Not all GPs in Ontario were eligible for these financial incentives. In general, these financial
incentives were offered only to physicians practicing in a PCR practice. Therefore, physicians
who remained in fee-for-service practices were never eligible to receive these P4P incentives.
Only physicians who converted from traditional fee-for-service to PCR models were eligible

6
  Beginning in 2006, if there is unanimous agreement among the physicians in a FHN practice, the
practice could request that the payments be made directly to its individual physicians rather than the
FHN. We have no information on the number of practices that have exercised this option. For ease of
exposition, for all incentives we refer to “whether a physician receives a payment” even in those
instances when the payment was made to the practice rather than the physician.
7
  Specific services eligible to count toward this special payment include: vaginal delivery, attendance
at labor and delivery, Caesarean section, attendance at labor when patient transferred to another centre
for delivery, etc.




                                                   11
for some or all of the P4P incentives. Furthermore, eligibility of these P4P incentives differs
by PCR models. As a result, physicians were eligible for a P4P incentive only after they
converted to one of the PCR models and only after the P4P incentives were in effect for the
specific PCR model they joined. During the study period of 1999-2008, the P4P incentives
were provided at different time points to the four PCR models. Table 2 presents the eligibility
timing for the 11 targeted services by PCR models types.

        As only some physicians in Ontario were entitled to these P4P incentives, this policy
intervention serves as a natural experiment that we can exploit to identify the casual effect of
P4P incentives. Since we can observe the practice activities of almost every GP in Ontario
over 10 years (1999-2008) and because this period spans the introduction of P4P incentives
implementation, we can assess the impact of P4P incentives within a difference-in-differences
framework by comparing the responses of the GPs exposed to the P4P incentives against
those not exposed to the P4P incentives.

        Of course, the natural experiment formed by this intervention poses some difficulties
for the identification. First, physicians are not randomly assigned to the PCR models. This
will lead to selection bias if we use simple difference-in-differences mean comparison on the
responses from eligible GPs against ineligible GPs. Moreover, the PCR model practices are
different from the traditional fee-for-service practice in various aspects. Table 3 lists the main
differences among each of the four PCR models in the aspects of general payment scheme,
practice composition, after-hour services and patient enrolment requirement. Traditional FFS
GPs receive only FFS payments, while all PCR model GPs receive a blend of capitation
payment and FFS payments, with different proportions of these two components. Unlike the
traditional FFS practices, most of the PCR models require GPs to work in group practice (the
only exception is CCMs that allows solo practice). Also PCR model GPs have to provide
extended services, nurse-staffed telephone health advisory services and on-call services.
Lastly, patient enrolment is required in these PCR models except for FHGs but not for FFS
GPs. As a result, the identification of the P4P incentive effects may be confounded by
differences between the traditional fee-for-service practices and the PCR model practices..

        In spite of these problems, the implementation of the performance-based incentives in
Ontario still allows us identify empirically the P4P incentive effects using several
identification strategies to mitigate selection bias and control for confounding effects. As
described in the method section below, eligibility for the incentive payments is not perfectly
confounded with joining a PCR: some GPs joined a PCR model before they became eligible
for bonus payments (unaware that they would later become eligible for such payments). This
enables the evaluation to distinguish the effects of the incentive payments from the effect of
joining a new practice model. Furthermore, variation in general payment scheme and practice

                                               12
setting among the four PCR models themselves provides us an opportunity to disentangle the
effect of P4P incentives from that of other primary care reform features.



   4. Data
4.1 Data Sources

The study draws primarily on four administrative databases of the Ontario Ministry of Health
and Long-Term Care (MOHLTC), linked by patient encrypted health number and physician
encrypted number. OHIP Claims Database provided information on all OHIP-funded services
received by each resident of Ontario each month of the study period; the Registered Persons
Database provided basic information on each OHIP beneficiary; the Corporate Provider
Database provided basic information on each physician and his or her practice; the Client
Agency Program Enrolment (CAPE) file provided information on the patient roster for each
physician in a PCR practice. OHIP claims data allowed us to identify all services provided by
every primary care physician in Ontario. The Client Agency Program Enrolment (CAPE) data
allowed us to match every patient to a physician enrolled in a PCR practice, and to identify if
this beneficiary should be counted towards the targeted population for each incentive payment.
This data plus the Registered Persons Database provided us the characteristics of the patient
population for each practice. OHIP Claims Database allowed us to construct the yearly
utilization rate of each of the targeted services for every physician. The Corporate Provider
Database allowed us to identify if a GP was enrolled with any of the PCR models at any point
of time during the study period. Together these four databases enabled us to construct for
each primary care physician in the province of Ontario, a measure of their practice population
each year and a record of all services received by those patients during the period of 1999 to
2008 fiscal years. (See Appendix 2 for all the data sources that we used and the corresponding
information that we extracted from each source).



4.2 Study sample

The unit of this analysis is a physician. The analyses focus on community-based GPs that do
not specialize in a subset of services. We used to following criteria to select the study sample:
(1) include physicians who are GPs throughout the study period; (2) excluded part-time GPs
who billed less than $30,000 each year; (3) to limit the study sample to GPs in an established
practice, we only included physicians who had at least two consecutive years of practice
before study period; (4) include GPs for whom the office-based consultations accounting for
the majority of their activities; (5) exclude locums as they are not eligible for bonuses; (6) we


                                               13
excluded GPs affiliated with the PCR models for which we do not have sufficient data for the
analyses; (7) we also exclude GPs who converted to FFS for more than one time during the
study period for simplicity of the analyses. Table 4 documents how many physicians were
excluded by the various criteria when they were applied in the order listed. After applying
these criteria, we obtain a core sample of 2,185 GPs.

        Since the eligibility scope and implementation dates for the 11 P4P incentives are
different for the four PCR models, the composition and the final sample size of the treatment
and control groups vary by the P4P incentives. Again for the simplicity of the analysis, we
dropped the physicians whose “treatment” status turned on and off for more than one time
during the study period8. The compositions of control and treatment groups as well as the
final sample sizes are presented in Table 5, divided into three subsets of targeted services.



4.3 Variable Specification

4.3.1 Physician responses

Physician responses were measured differently for the preventive care services and the
designated services for special payments. Because each of the preventive care bonuses is
defined with respect to the proportion of a GP’s practice population that has received a
specified service as of March 31 each year, the outcome variable is defined as the rate of
coverage for the relevant period each year for each preventive care service. For the special
payments, the outcome variable is defined as the number of services provided or the number
of individuals to whom the designated services had been provided.

        Analyzing the impact of the incentive payments requires that we identify each GP’s
practice population on March 31 of each year. Therefore, we used the following steps to
define the practice patient population for each GP. For each year we assigned all patients in
the Ontario Health Insurance Program (OHIP) physician claims database to a GP and thereby
defined a practice population for each GP on March 31 of each year of the study period.
Different methods were used to define practice populations for physicians in FFS and
physicians in a PCR. Physicians in traditional FFS practice do not roster patients. We defined
the practice population for these physicians using the validated methodology developed in
Hutchison et al. (1997). Specifically, a physician’s practice population is defined as: all
individuals for whom the physician billed OHIP for at least one visit during the previous
fiscal year; and all additional patients for whom the physician billed OHIP for at least one

8
  This might be switching back and forth between FFS practice and a PCR model, or switching back
and forth between a PCR model which was eligible for the incentives and another PCR model which
was not eligible for the incentives yet.


                                                14
visit in each of the two preceding fiscal years. Patients who met these criteria for more than
one physician were assigned to the physician who billed for the largest number of visits; if the
number of visits was equal, assignment was based on the physician with most recent visit
(details see Appendix 3). Physicians participating in PCR models have both rostered (the
sizable majority) and non-rostered patients. For this case we define the practice population as
the set of rostered patients (as indicated by the Ministry Client Agency Program Enrollment
database) plus non-rostered patients as assigned by the Hutchison et al. algorithm. As a result,
all OHIP beneficiaries were assigned to a physician for each year of the study period.

        After assigning the patients to each physician based on OHIP claims, we counted the
number of patients in each physician’s practice who received a targeted service during the
relevant period and constructed the dependent variables for the empirical analysis for each
targeted service for each GP in each year. It should be noted that for mammogram and senior
flu shot, this study requires additional data, because patients can receive these service at
specialized clinics whose activity is not captured by the OHIP claims database. For
mammogram we were able to merge individual-level data on services used in these clinics9
and so capture all mammograms in the province. For senior flu shot we were not able to do
this, so our data exclude such service provision. This has limited our ability to get an unbiased
estimate of P4P incentive effect for this service. We will return to, and discuss this limitation
in the method section below.
        For the five preventive care bonuses, the dependent variable of each targeted service
is defined, as of March 31 each year, as the proportion of a GP’s practice population that
received the service in question during the relevant period prior to that March 31st. For PCR
GPs, this variable is constructed using data from rostered patients only because Ministry’s
criterion for payment of the bonus is defined in reference to rostered patients only. We
conduct a sensitivity analysis (see section 6.1.3 below) using an alternate dependent variable
that includes both the rostered and non-rostered patients for GPs in PCR models so to obtain a
measure that is more consistent across traditional FFS and PCR physicians. A further
complication with this dependent variable definition is that PCR physicians can bill a
“tracking code” for patients who receive a flu shot at specialized clinics rather than the GP’s
office, an option not available to FFS physicians. We conduct sensitivity analyses regarding
the use of such codes to define flu shot uptake among PCR practices to test the robustness of
the findings to this potential problem.

9
  There is a provincial program —Ontario Breast-cancer Screening Program—from which patients can
also receive mammograms but these activities were not included in the OHIP claims. Therefore, we y
integrated this part of data provided by Cancer Care Ontario (CCO) into our analysis for
mammograms. Unfortunately we couldn’t get any data for this type of programs for flu shots so the
results for senior flu shots suffer from this data limitation.


                                                15
         For the six special payments the dependent variable of each designated service is
defined dichotomously, taking on the value of 1 if the physician’s service provision met the
criteria for the special payment of interest, and 0 if it did not.


4.3.2 Independent variables

As noted above, the Corporate Provider Database allowed us to identify if, and when a GP
joined a PCR practice during the study period. Based on this, we constructed a treated/control
dummy indicating if a GP was ever eligible for the incentives during the study period, a pre-
and post- dummy indicating if an observation was from a period is before or after the
implantation of P4P incentives, and a treatment dummy which is an interaction term between
the above two dummies, taking on the value of 1 when a GP was eligible for the incentive
during the time period in question.

         In addition, we included in the analyses a set of independent variables that represent
both the supply-side and demand-side characteristics of service utilization. These include
characteristics of a physician and the physician’s practice, and basic information of the
physician’s patient population. Physician-specific characteristics are physician age, sex, years
in practice, activity level measured by total value of claims submitted each year, and a set of
work-load variables including days of work, number of patient visits and number of patient
visits per working day. Practice-specific variables include: practice model (FFS, FHN, FHG,
CCM and FHO), size of practice population, and a set of practice location characteristics
measured by metropolitan influence zone (MIZ) categories and a rurality index of Ontario
(RIO). The MIZ categories indicate the degree of influence that metropolitan areas have on
the geographic location of a practice; the RIO score indicates the degree of ruralness of a
practice location. We also control for a set of patient population characteristics, including the
mean age of a physician’s patient population, and the proportions of female, infant and
elderly patients in the practice. The detailed covariate definitions are listed in Appendix 4.



4.3.3 Descriptive statistics of independent variables

Table 6 presents sample descriptive statistics at the pre-intervention baseline, defined as of
March 31, 2003, disaggregated by the control group and the incentive group.10 The control
group GPs differ at baseline from incentive group GPs. First, incentive group GPs are
younger and have fewer years of practice experience than control group GPs. This observed
difference is not surprising because we expect that GPs whose complying costs are relatively

10
  As noted above, the definition of the control groups differs slightly across some of the incentives, but
the patterns are so similar across the cases that we have collapsed them into one table.


                                                   16
smaller are more likely to participate in the PCR models. Younger GPs are more flexible in
practice style thus more easily to fit in with the specific rules of the PCR practice. Second, a
higher proportion of incentive group GPs are female doctors than control group GPs. This
might be due to the fact that female GPs are more interested in, or better at, collaborative
team production. Third, for all five bonuses and the special payment on palliative care,
incentive group GPs worked more days and more intensively than the control group GPs
before the intervention and they had bigger practice size. But this pattern is reversed for the
other five special payments on obstetrical deliveries, hospital services, office procedures,
prenatal care and home visits. For the five bonuses and the special payments on palliative
care, the patient population demographics are similar between incentive and control groups,
except for that the incentive group GPs have practices with slightly more female and infant
patients. For the other five special payments, the incentive group GPs also have practices with
slightly more female and infant patients, but they also have an older patient population.
Finally, incentive group GPs are more homogenous (as indicated by smaller standards
deviations) than control group GPs.



   5. Empirical Methods
5.1 Addressing Possible Sources of Bias

As described above, the policy intervention in Ontario serves as a natural experiment that we
can exploit to identify the casual effect of P4P incentives. The treatment of interest is a set of
P4P incentives targeted on 11 specific health care services or sets of services. Specifically,
this policy intervention conditions the eligibility of the P4P incentives on the PCR model-
participation status. A simple difference-in-differences approach can provide us an estimate
of the P4P incentive effects by directly comparing the mean change across the PCR model
GPs and the FFS GPs. However, voluntary participation generates non-random assignment of
GPs to treatment, invalidating the simple difference-in-differences approach (Meyer 1995). In
other words, we expect that the “treated” GPs are systematically different from the “non-
treated” ones and these differences may contribute to the observed difference in the response
of GPs to P4P incentives. Therefore, the identification of causal effect hinges on how well the
selected comparison group represents the counterfactual of the treatment group, and on the
extent to which we can mitigate selection bias.

        As noted in the descriptive statistics above, GPs who join PCR differ from those who
stay in FFS at the pre-intervention baseline in a number of ways. For example, PCR GPs are
younger and have fewer years of practice experience, and their workload is in general
different from those in traditional fee-for-service. These differences in physician

                                               17
characteristics might cause estimation bias generated by both “selection on observables” and
“selection on unobservables”. We discussed in section 5.2.1 below to discuss the empirical
strategies we used to mitigate selection bias.

        One might also be concerned about possible confounding from other factors-- it is
possible that some of the observed differences in response to P4P incentives between
treatment group and control group are actually caused by other unobserved attributes
pertaining to the PCR practice rather than the P4P incentives. For example, an important
institutional difference between some PCR and FFS practice is that these PCR models are
paid by a mixture of FFS and capitation instead of traditional FFS piece rate. One might
expect that FFS physicians respond less to P4P bonus related to preventive care services
because the opportunity cost may be greater for FFS physicians than for physicians paid by
capitation or salary in the sense that doing more preventive care may preclude the provision
of other services that generate higher fees per unit time. Another type of confounding may
arise if we are concerned about separate initiatives that influence the level of utilization of the
services being analyzed. The potential sources of this type of confounding and strategies we
used to control for them are described in section 5.2.2 below.



5.2 Identification strategies

5.2.1 Strategies to mitigate selection bias

We employ several identification strategies to mitigate the selection bias that may be
generated by both observable and unobservable physician characteristics. First, we control for
important aspects of physician characteristics and practice characteristics that might be
correlated with the self-selection process and are also important in determining the provision
of the targeted services. The data allows us to control for physician characteristics including
physician demographics, work experience, and work load measures; and practice
characteristics including practice size, geographical location of the practice and patient
population characteristics of the practice.

        Second, to address selection bias generated by unobservable characteristics, we
exploit the longitudinal nature of the data and employ a difference-in-differences approach
with individual fixed effects. As noted above, GPs may self-select into PCR models through a
process linked to unobserved physician characteristics.       This type of selection bias can be
reduced to the extent that the unobserved components that determine both the self-selection
behaviour and the outcomes are physician-specific and time-invariant, and thereby can be
differenced out by a difference-in-differences approach with individual fixed effects.



                                                 18
        A potential limitation of the above approach is the lack of control for unobserved
temporal individual-specific component that affected the selection into the treatment group
and control groups (Blundell and Costa Dias 2000). This could be a problem if some GPs
self-selected into PCR models because of temporary shocks that are directly related to the
targeted health care services. However, this should not be a big concern in this study for the
following reasons. Firstly, participating into a PCR model is unlikely to depend on short-term
changes that affect the utilization rates of the targeted services, such as a sudden demand-side
change or an onset of other simultaneous policies that are targeted to these specific services.
The monetary values of these P4P incentives are a relatively very small proportion of the total
income of GPs. So it is unlikely that any temporary changes related to the targeted services
caused the conversion behavior. This assumption is reinforced by the fact that only a very
small proportion of GPs who converted from FFS practice to PCR models switched back to
FFS practice during the study period of ten years. Secondly, any unobserved temporary
shocks that are correlated with PCR participation should not play an important role in
determining the utilization of the specific services that are targeted by P4P incentives,
because most of the treatment group GPs already converted a number of years prior to
becoming eligible for the P4P incentives. Hence, the incentives are unlikely to be the reason
that motivated the conversion behavior.



5.2.2 Strategies to control for confounding effects

        We are concerned about potential confounding from a PCR-practice effect because
PCR practices have features (beyond the P4P incentives) not found in traditional fee-for-
service practices. We argue that this type of confounding can be controlled in the analyses in
the following ways. First, the eligibility timing of the P4P incentives in the PCR models
facilitates the reduction of this confounding. The policy intervention provided the P4P
incentives to different PCR models in different time periods, but it created essentially three
types of physicians groups: non-incentive group, incentive group 1 and incentive group 2 (see
Figure 1). The non-incentive group consists of the GPs who remain in FFS over the study
period. Since they were never eligible for the incentives, they are used as the legitimate
control group in the difference-in-differences design. The Incentive group 1 consists of the
GPs who joined a PCR model and simultaneously became eligible for the P4P incentives.
This group of physician can be used as part of the treatment group but this is problematic--
given the participation in PCR models is a voluntary process, the P4P incentive effect is
perfectly confounded by the selection into the PCR model for this group of physicians. The
Incentive group 2 consists of the GPs who joined a PCR model before the P4P incentives
were introduced and who therefore became eligible for the P4P incentives only after they had

                                               19
participated for some time in a PCR model. This group of GPs pertains to the majority of
physicians who were entitled with the incentives in this study. Using this group of physicians
as the treatment group can mitigate the problem of confounding: because these physicians
chose to participate in PCR before (and with no expectation of future P4P incentives) the
introduction of the P4P incentives, the incentive effect is not perfectly confounded by the
other PCR-model features. Second, we use alternative treatment groups in the comparison to
mitigate confounding from some specific PCR attributes. This approach is possible for this
study since we can exploit the variation on several dimensions across different PCR models to
conduct falsification tests on the effect of some specific confounders over the P4P incentive
effect. For example, to rule out the possibility that the difference in general payment scheme
is causing the difference in response, we restrict the treatment GPs as those PCR GPs who
were also compensated mainly by fee-for-service scheme and compare their behaviour with
the FFS control group GPs. If we still observe the difference in response, we can conclude
that it is likely not the general payment scheme causing the observed P4P incentive effects.

        Our identification is complicated by potential confounding effects of separate
initiatives that could influence the level of utilization of preventive care services during the
study period. Potential confounding from such other initiatives is of greatest concern for
senior flu shot, breast cancer screening and colorectal screening. The province has invested
heavily in its universal flu vaccination program since 2000, both in making the flu shot
available through special clinics and in promoting the up-take of the flu shot. Flu shots
obtained through a flu-shot clinic rather than in the GP office are not recorded in the OHIP
database. Similarly, women can obtain a mammogram through the Ontario Breast Screening
Program, which offers specialized clinics for mammograms. Mammograms obtained through
these clinics are also not recorded in the OHIP claims database, though, as noted above, we
are able to capture such utilization by integrating data from Cancer Care Ontario, the
provincial agency that oversees the breast screening program. Finally, beginning in 2004
Ontario launched a pilot program to encourage colorectal cancer screening, and in 2007
launched a population-based colorectal cancer screening program (“ColonCancerCheck”) in
collaboration with Cancer Care Ontario.

        However, none of these initiatives are specific to patients in PCR practices: they offer
services to all eligible Ontario residents. Consequently, the inclusion of the fee-for-service
control group controls for the general impact of these programs on the receipt of the
respective services through GP offices as long as they affected provision equally for
physicians in the control and treatment groups. A problem arises only if there is an interaction
effect between these programs and treatment/control status. One concern for flu shots and
mammograms is that physicians eligible for incentive payments may have differential

                                              20
incentive to encourage their patients to receive the service through the GP office (and
captured by the OHIP database) rather than one of the specialized clinics (not captured by
OHIP). Because we capture all mammogram utilization (that included in OHIP and that from
Cancer Care Ontario) this does not pose a problem for mammogram. But for flu shot we do
not capture shots provided in specialized clinics, and in the presence of a differential incentive,
this omission would lead to an over-estimate of the effect of the incentive payment.

        Finally, the identification of the difference-in-differences with individual-fixed
effects approach is based on the assumption of a parallel trend between treatment and control
groups. In order to control for the different time trends across treatment group and control
group, we use the difference-in-differences adjusting for differential trends approach as
suggested by Bell, Blundell and Reenen (1999). This model relaxes the assumption of parallel
trends between the control and treatment group GP when these differential trends have
different impact on the outcome between P4P system and non-P4P system.



5.3 Empirical specifications

We employ the following empirical approaches to evaluate the impact of the P4P incentives.



5.3.1 Simple difference-in-differences with pooled OLS

The effect of each P4P incentives can be estimated by comparing the treatment and
comparison group in the behaviour change before- and after- the exposure to the incentives.
Consider the model:

                                                                             1

where      is the utilization score of service j for physician i in fiscal year t; Xit is a set of
covariates; Tt is a treatment dummy equal to 1 if this is post-period and 0 otherwise; Di is a
treatment dummy equal to 1 if this physician is in treatment group and 0 other wise; Tt*Di is
the interaction term taking on a value of 1 if GP i was exposed to the P4P incentives at time t.
The estimated coefficient of this term,    indicates the difference-in-differences P4P incentive
effect. θtj is a set of year dummies; µitj is the idiosyncratic term. The above equation is
estimated by a pooled linear or nonlinear panel data model.

        In order to account for possibly serial correlation of the dependent variable over time,
we adjust the standard errors by clustering on individual physician level in the above simple
DID estimation and for all the DID models below. This would mitigate the over-rejection



                                               21
problem for DID estimates (see Bertrand, Duflo and Mullainathan 2004) when the inference
of the regular t-statistic is based on unadjusted standard errors11.



5.3.2 Difference-in-differences with individual fixed effects

In order to control for fixed unobserved factors that could influence both selection into a PCR
model and provision of the targeted services, we add in a set of individual-specific fixed
effects:

                                                                                        2

where        is a set of physician dummies;          is the idiosyncratic term. The above equation is
estimated by a fixed effect linear or nonlinear panel data model.



5.3.3 Difference-in-differences with differential trend model

           To relax the parallel trend assumption we use the difference-in-differences with
differential trend model suggested by Bell, Blundell and Reenen (1999). This specification
assumes that:

                                                                           1
                                                                                  3
                                                                           0

where        captures the unobservables and the noise.             is an unobserved trend. If the P4P GPs
and non-P4P GPs have different trends, the impact of these trends is allowed to differ across
                                                              12
the two groups, which is captured by                 and           .   This paper follows the regression
operationalization of Wagstaff and Moreno-Serra (2009). Incorporating the assumption
described in (3), we get the following model:



                                           4

which can be estimated by a fixed effects model including year dummies and year dummies
interacted with the treatment dummy, i.e.



11
  We use the “cluster” option in STATA estimation commands to adjust for standard errors for
intragroup correlation among observations over time for each physician. As Bertrand et al. noted
(Bertrand, Duflo and Mullainathan 2004), this type of adjustment works well when the number of
clusters is large (e.g. N is greater than 50). Our sample size (number of physicians) is sufficiently big
for this adjustment to mitigate this problem.
12
     Note that P is the subscript for “P4P” group trend; N is the subscript for “Non-P4P” group trend.


                                                     22
                                    5

         In the above model the impact of P4P incentives varies over time, but the average
impact of P4P incentives can be estimated as:

                                                          ∑
                                 Mean P4P impact =                    (6)

         Because the parallel trend assumption implies            , this assumption can be tested
by testing the nonlinear restriction:

               ∑                                     ∑        ∑
                                                                        0       7
                   ∑                         ∑                ∑

Non-rejection of the hypothesis would suggest that                and provide evidence in favor
of the parallel trend assumption and the difference-in-differences with individual fixed effects
model.

         It should be noted that we could only run a full set of regression analyses described
above for the five bonuses, but not for the six special payments. As indicated by table 5,
because the eligibility scope and implementation dates for the 11 P4P incentives are different
for the four PCR models, the composition and the final sample size of the treatment and
control groups vary by the P4P incentives. Most of our P4P GPs became eligible for the five
preventive care bonuses in 2006, except colorectal cancer screening, for which most of our
P4P GPs became eligible in 2005. For the six special payments, most of the P4P GPs became
eligible in 2005, 2006 and 2007, except palliative care special payment, for which most of the
P4P GPs became eligible in 2003, 2004 and 2005. Accordingly, for the six special payments,
we estimate the difference-in-differences models separately for three subsets of P4P GPs
based on the year they became eligible for the payments. Moreover, as the five bonuses were
provided to all four PCR models considered in the study while the six special payments were
provided to only some of the PCR models (e.g. FHNs and FHOs), there are much fewer GPs
constituting the treatment groups in the analysis for the six special payments than for the five
cumulative bonuses. As a result, we could estimate the full set of difference-in-differences
models and conduct the robustness checks and sensitivity analyses for the five bonuses, but
could only estimate the simple pooled difference-in-differences model with the full sample
for the six special payments. For the same reason, we could only conduct subgroup analyses
for the five bonuses, but not for the six special payments.




                                                23
   6. Empirical Results
6.1 Descriptive trends of physician responses

We can only document the extent to which GPs contacted patients to arrange the receipt of
preventive services for the period after the identifying codes were introduced in the fee
schedule. Table 7 presents the proportion of eligible physicians who submitted at least one
claim for contacting a patient to arrange an appointment to deliver a preventive care service.
Two things are notable: (1) the rate of uptake is relatively low — with the exception of a
couple of years for the senior flu shot, less than 45% of eligible physicians submitted even a
single claim; (2) and there is no noticeable upward trend — in fact, the proportion has been
falling in recent years for 4 of the 5 services. Figure 2 presents the mean number of claims per
eligible physician for each service. For all services except senior flu shot, the mean number
of claims per eligible physician is fewer than 20; even for senior flu shots the mean exceeds
100 for only one year during this period. Overall, there appears to have been little response
to these contact incentive payments.

        The main outcome measures for this study are the utilization rates of the services that
are targeted by the 11 P4P incentives. The unadjusted time paths of compliance level of all
the targeted services are shown in Figure 3 to Figure 13. The horizontal axis represents the
years from March 31, 1999 to March 31, 2008. For the preventive care services, the vertical
axis is the mean proportion of patients who received the targeted services. For the special
payments the vertical axis is the proportion of physicians who achieved the targeted
performance level. The lines represent the time trends for the control group, and for treatment
groups defined in terms of the year when a GP first became eligible for the incentive. For
example, incent2003 represent GPs who were first eligible during fiscal year 2002-2003. We
can detect a specific pattern of change in trend to the introduction of the P4P incentives for
Pap Smear, colorectal cancer screenings, and palliative care. For these services, compared to
the control group, provision in the incentive groups started to increase and diverge at the time
of exposure to the incentives. This suggests possible effects of the P4P incentive payments for
these services. The trend for mammogram displays equivocal evidence. We could not detect
any specific pattern in the trend for senior flu shot, toddler immunizations, obstetrical
deliveries, hospital services, office procedures, prenatal care and home visits. For most of
these 11 services, incentive group GPs started with higher baseline compliance levels so it is
possible that selection effect exists in the means of the compliance levels for treatment group
versus control group.



6.2 Estimation results for the preventive care bonuses

                                              24
6.2.1 Estimates for the full sample

Table 8 presents the estimates of the P4P incentive effects for the five preventive care
bonuses based on three difference-in-differences models for the full sample. Column (a) lists
the baseline compliance level of each targeted service, which is defined as the average
utilization rate of this service in 2003. Panel (b), (c) and (d) of Table 8 present the estimates
of the P4P incentive effects based on difference-in-differences with pooled OLS model,
difference-in-differences with individual fixed effects model, and difference-in-differences
with differential trend model, respectively. The marginal effects estimates indicate the
percentage change of the service provision due to the introduction of each bonus payment. In
order to account for possible correlation of the observations over time for each physician, we
calculated the robust standard errors by clustering by individual physician. The results based
on difference-in-differences with fixed individual effects model show that the bonus payment
had a statistically significant effect on the provision of senior flu shot, Pap Smear,
mammogram and colorectal cancer screening, while its effect on the provision of toddler
immunization is not statistically significant13. The absolute level of increase in compliance is
2.8%, 4.1%, 1.8% and 8.5% for senior flu shot, Pap smear, mammogram and colorectal
cancer screening, respectively. It is notable that the marginal effect estimates based on
difference-in-differences with pooled OLS model are similar to the above figures, except that
the incentive effect estimates are not significantly different from zero for senior flu shot and
mammogram in the pooled OLS model. The estimates based on difference-in-differences with
differential trend model are consistent with those from the individual fixed effects model
while indicating slightly larger effects for all five services.

         Panel (e) of Table 8 presents the test statistic and the p-value from the nonlinear
restriction test on the parallel-trend assumption as described in equation (7). The results
indicate that the null hypothesis of a common trend between the P4P GPs and non-P4P GPs is
not rejected at the 5% level for senior flu shot, toddler immunization and mammogram but is
rejected for Pap smears and colorectal cancer screening. Therefore, the parallel trend
assumption is reasonable for flu shot for senior flu shot, toddler immunization and
mammogram. For these services, we can trust the regression results from the difference-in-


13
  As noted by Moulton (1986, 1990), and Donald and Lang (2007), in regression models with mixture
of individual and grouped data, the failure to account for the presence of common group errors can
generate estimated standard errors that are biased downward dramatically. Our DID estimates may
suffer from this problem, under the assumption that physicians in the same practice may have
correlated standard errors. Accordingly, adjusting the standard errors for clustering by practice (instead
of clustering by individual physician) could correct for the over-rejection problem with our DID
estimates. However, we have not done so because we could not properly identify physician practice for
FFS GPs and CCM GPs. As a result, our current estimates overstate the statistical significance of the
P4P incentive effects, and adjustment for clustering would weaken the evidence of an incentive effect.


                                                   25
differences with fixed individual effects model, while we prefer the results from the
differential trend model to the results from the difference-in-differences with fixed individual
effects model for pap smears and colorectal cancer screening. Even though the parallel trend
assumption does not hold for some services, the magnitude of the estimated incentive effects
is similar across these two models.



6.2.2 Robustness checks with alternative samples

The above results may be subject to bias due to the confounding from other PCR model
characteristics. As a robustness check we restrict the treatment group to PCR GPs who joined
PCR practices before becoming eligible for P4P incentives. This robustness check is
conducted only for the five preventive care bonuses. Panel (b) in Table 9 presents the
estimated P4P incentive effects from difference-in-differences with individual fixed effects
model based on the sample of GPs who joined PCR practices before becoming eligible for
P4P incentives. Column (a) lists the baseline compliance level of each targeted service in
2003 for this sample. The regression results show that the estimated P4P incentive effects are
robust to this refinement of the treatment group. Therefore, we conclude that the estimated
P4P incentive effects are unlikely to be generated by other PCR practice characteristics.

        We also used a falsification test to check whether the observed incentive effects are
linked to the general payment scheme, which differs between most treatment and control
physicians. As a second robustness check we restrict the treatment group to GPs working in
PCR practices that are paid primarily by FFS. If we observe the response of this subgroup of
GPs is not significantly different from those in traditional FFS practices, we have evidence
that compromises the estimated P4P incentive effects. Panel (d) of table 9 presents the
estimates of P4P incentive effects based on the sample of GPs in PCR models funded
primarily by FFS. The results indicate that refining the treatment group in this way does not
change the estimates of the incentive effects from those based on the full sample. This is
consistent with the full sample estimation and first robustness check. Overall, the results from
these two robustness checks reassure us that the full-sample estimates do not suffer from the
possible confounding of other PCR attributes.



6.2.3 Sensitivity analyses on the study design

In order to test the sensitivity of the regression results, we conducted four sensitivity analyses
to address limitations on the study design and assumptions.




                                                 26
        As noted above, one complication with the current study design is that PCR
physicians can bill a “tracking code” for patients who receive a flu shot at specialized clinics
rather than the GP’s office, an option not available to FFS physicians. We conduct sensitivity
analyses regarding the use of such codes to define flu shot uptake among PCR practices to
test the sensitivity of the findings to this potential problem. In the first sensitivity analysis,
we redefined the dependent variables for the incentive payments by excluding the claims from
the PCR doctors with these shadow-billed tracking Q-codes. This would give us a lower
bound of the true estimates of the incentive effects. Table 10 presents the estimated marginal
effects based on difference-in-difference with individual fixed effects model for the full
sample and the two alternative samples we used above. The results from this sensitivity
analysis indicate that the base case estimates are robust to this change of definition in that the
significance level of the incentive effects stays the same while the magnitude is slightly
smaller (as we would expect). The basic conclusions from the main analysis hold.

       The second sensitivity analysis aims to test for the consistency of different methods
we used to calculate the performance level for the FFS doctors and the PCR doctors. As
discussed previously, the dependent variable could not be defined identically for the PCR and
the FFS GPs: for PCR GPs, this variable is constructed using data from rostered patients only
because Ministry’s criterion for payment of the bonus is defined in reference to rostered
patients only. Therefore, we added in the non-rosterd patients for the PCR doctors in the
calculation of dependent variables and compare the performance level based both rostered
and non-rostered patients against that of the FFS doctors. Table 11 presents the estimated
marginal effects for this sensitivity analysis based on difference-in-difference with individual
fixed effects model for the full sample and the two alternative samples we used above. The
results show that the estimates are robust to this change of dependent variable definition. The
magnitude of the estimated incentive effect is slightly larger under the second sensitivity
analysis. We interpret this as the selection effect introduced by our algorithm of assigning the
patients—the non-rostered patients within a PCR doctor’s patient population that are assigned
by our algorithm are utilizers of the services thus are more likely to get preventive care
services from this doctor.

       One additional rule for the FHG and CCM doctors to get the bonus payment is that
they need to reach a minimum threshold of patient roster size. In the third sensitivity analysis,
we estimate the incentive effects over only the subset of FHG and CCM doctors with rosters
over the minimum threshold at the time of bonus introduction. The results from this
sensitivity analyses represent short-run responses as opposed to long-run responses
represented by the base case results, because the patient roster size could be endogenized over
time. Table 12 presents the estimated marginal effects for the third sensitivity analysis based

                                               27
on difference-in-differences with individual fixed effects model for the full sample and the
two alternative samples we used above. The results from this sensitivity analysis confirm the
significance of the incentive effects and show a slightly larger response from the doctors who
had already achieved the minimum roster size.

        At the beginning of the bonus payment introduction, physicians might be just starting
to enroll patients into their practice or ramping up for the incentive payment. So the
calculated performance level might be noisy in the sense that the targeted performance is
based on the proportion of patients who received the services. In the fourth analyses we
dropped the observation of transition year, i.e. the first year that the treatment group GPs
became eligible for the bonuses, from the empirical analyses to remove the potential noise in
the observed behavior in the first period of transition. Table 13 presents the estimated
marginal effects for this sensitivity analysis based on difference-in-difference with individual
fixed effects model for the full sample and the two alternative samples we used above. The
estimated marginal effects of incentives are not sensitive to this change and are slightly larger
in size than the base case results.



6.3 Estimation results for the special payments

Table 14 presents the P4P incentive effects for the six special payments from estimating
difference-in-differences with pooled logit model. Column (a) lists the baseline compliance
level of each targeted service, which is defined as the proportion of GPs whose pattern of
service provision in 2003 exceeded the special payment target level. We present the results
separately for the subsets of GPs who became eligible for these incentives in 2005, 2006 and
2007 14 in panel (b), (c) and (d) respectively. The marginal effect estimate indicates the
absolute change in the proportion of physicians whose service provision is predicted to
exceed the target level as a result of the special payments. There is no statistically significant
incentive effect that is consistent over these three subsamples for any of these special
payments15. Overall, the results suggest little if any response to the special payments: all the
estimates are small and not statistically different from zero.



6.4 Estimates of the P4P incentive effects for subgroup analysis


14
  For the palliative care payment, the results are presented separately for the subsets of GPs who
became eligible for the incentive since 2003, 2004 and 2005 instead.
15
  Statistically significant results are found only for one subsample for office procedures and prenatal
care.


                                                   28
There are reasons to expect that responses may differ by physician age, practice size, and
baseline level of compliance. To investigate this we conduct three sets of subgroup analyses
and present the results in this section16. The subgroup analyses are conducted only for the five
bonuses due to the small sample sizes for the six special payments.

         The first panel of Table 15 presents the estimates from the difference-in-differences
with individual fixed effects model for the subgroup analyses by physician age for the five
preventive care bonuses. We see a clear age gradient for Pap smear, mammograms and
colorectal cancer screening in which younger physicians respond more to the P4P bonuses
than do older physicians. An age-gradient is not discernable for senior flu shot and toddler
immunization. For senior flu shot, we observe that only middle-age physicians responded to
the incentives. This indicates the possibility that the relatively weak incentive effect from the
whole sample analysis for senior flu shot is driven by the response of the middle-age
physicians. We only detect a statistically significant incentive effect in the oldest age group
for toddler immunization bonus, but this effect is only weakly significant at the 10% level.

         The second panel of Table 15 presents estimates by practice size. Overall, the results
indicate that physicians with larger practices tend to be more responsive to the P4P incentives.
For Pap smear there is essentially no difference in magnitude of the estimated effects across
categories of practice size. For mammogram and senior flu shot, there is a statistically
significant incentive effect only for the biggest practices but no effect for the small-size or
mid-size practices. For colorectal cancer screening, the pattern is clear that the incentive
effect is larger for bigger practices.

         The third panel of Table 15 present the difference-in-differences estimates for the
subgroup analysis by baseline level of compliance. For three of the five preventive services,
the response is the greatest for those physicians with the lowest levels of baseline provision
(senior flu shot and mammogram) or for physicians with the lowest and middle levels
(colorectal cancer screening)17. This is consistent with the hypothetic pattern that physicians
with lower baseline compliance level tend to respond more, except that for Pap smear, for
which physicians in the middle quartiles responded the most.



     7. Discussion and conclusions

16
  A hypothesis that response is associated with the size of the group a GP works cannot be tested with
our data due to the missing information on group size for the control group GPs.
17
  Note that for mammogram, the incentive effects for middle-quartile and top quartile are about the
same; while for colorectal cancer screening, the incentive effects for the lowest quartile and the middle
quartile are about the same.


                                                   29
Our estimates of the incentive effects indicate that the cumulative preventive care bonus
payments for pap smears, mammograms, senior flu shot and colorectal cancer screening have
modestly improved the performances of GPs in the provision of these targeted services. The
bonus on toddler immunizations and the special payments on obstetrical deliveries, hospital
services, palliative care, office procedures, prenatal care and home visits, had no effect on the
provision of these targeted services. The regression results are consistent and similar in
magnitude across the series of difference-in-differences models that we use in sequence to
partly control for “selection on observables” and “selection on unobservables”. The results
from the robustness checks with alternative study samples suggest that it is unlikely the
baseline estimates are driven by confounding between P4P incentives and other features of
PCR practices. The sensitivity analyses also indicate that the main regression results are
robust to different definitions of dependent variables and alternative estimation samples,
reassuring the validity of our study design.

        In general, our empirical results agree with the empirical literature, which indicates
little effect of employing P4P incentives to improve the quality of health care. Among the
eleven incentives we considered, seven of them did not result in significant improvement of
service provision, while the other four only slightly increased the utilization of the targeted
services. As noted above, because we could not adjust the standard errors for possible
clustering on practice in estimating the difference-in-differences models, our current estimates
would overstate the statistical significance of the P4P incentive effects, reinforcing the
general conclusion that these incentives were not very effective. Unlike evidence based on
P4P programs in the U.S., our findings are derived from observations in a public-funded
single-payer system, so the effect of P4P incentives is not confounded by the institution of
multiple-payers. Moreover, we found that even for the incentives that generated responses,
the magnitude of the response rates varies across targeted services, across physician
characteristics and across practice settings. Specifically, physicians responded to the bonuses
for preventive care services but not the special payments. Physician responses differ
significantly across physician age and initial service provision level.

        The different physician responses to the preventive service bonuses and the special
payments may be due to a number of factors. First, the costs of complying are different for
these two sets of incentives. The preventive care services targeted by the five bonuses do not
require special costs in provision and are within the expected competency of a GP. Some
preventive care services even can be provided by non-physician staff. However, the services
targeted by the six special payments often require a fixed cost. Services like obstetrical
deliveries often incur some cost related to insurance premiums and require a commitment to
be available for deliveries at all hours of the day. Also, providing services like hospital visits

                                               30
and home visits involves additional time cost and re-organization costs (i.e. re-organizing
one’s schedule for visits). Therefore, relatively larger financial incentives are required to
cover these costs and to generate desired behaviors by GPs. Second, providing preventive
care is well documented to be effective and are well established as consistent with high-
quality care, but services subject to special payments in Ontario have no strong link to quality
of care. Lastly, the preventive care bonuses are complementary to other attributes of the PCR
models while this is not true for the special payments. For example, unlike the physicians
remaining in FFS practice, the physicians who participated in PCR models were eligible for
financial support to adopt electronic medical record systems that can provide automatic
reminders when a patient should receive regularly scheduled services. This feature is not as
important for the provision of special services as for the provision of preventive care services.

        The general take-away message from our empirical results is that physicians do not
automatically respond to performance-based financial incentives as we expected. Although
the principal-agent theory has suggested the potential to employ P4P incentive to motivate
physicians for providing high-quality care, physician responses to such incentives are not
easily predicted. The heterogeneity of physician responses found in our study suggests that
physician behaviors may be constrained by a complex set of objectives that we do not directly
observe. Therefore, more refined positive analyses on physician health care delivery are
warranted for future implementations of employing different forms of incentives to elicit
desired physician behaviors.

        Overall, our results deliver a cautionary message regarding the effectiveness of
employing pay-for-performance to increase the quality of health care. The overall small
physician responses to the introduction of P4P incentives in Ontario indicate the rather low
power of using these incentives to motivate high quality care. One possible reason is that the
absolute size of the financial incentives for these services in general is too small to generate
desired response from the physicians. After all, the income increase related to these incentives
is only a small proportion relative to the total income for most of the GPs, so the increase of
marginal utility related to this income increment only works very marginally in physician’s
service provision decisions. Nonetheless, we would then expect that it will be even more
costly to achieve the pre-specified improvement of service provision if we continue to employ
the same incentive structure. As indicated in the recent literature of pay-for-performance, the
P4P incentives need to be more carefully designed (Christianson et al. 2008; Epstein 2006;
Hutchison 2008). As noted above, the cost of complying may vary substantially among
different types of procedures. Therefore, tailoring the absolute size of financial incentives for
different targeted services according to the relative costs of complying may provide us a more
cost-effective solution. Furthermore, our findings also suggest that there is only limited scope

                                               31
of using P4P incentives to increase the provision of targeted services. The employment of P4P
incentives is only effective when the targeted performance or tasks are strongly linked to
professional standard of high quality care. This is reflected in the fact that physicians tend to
be more responsive to P4P incentives targeted on preventive care services, which are
unquestionably consistent with medical guidelines of providing high-quality care. Therefore,
future implementations of P4P incentives could be confined only to these services. Finally,
the P4P incentives should be redesigned so that the target measures are more closely related
to real standards of high quality care. For example, financial incentives can be linked to
quality indicators that aim to increase the access of health care, or to those representative of
evidence-based health care.

        Further studies on the performance payment incentives can be extended to several
directions. Like much of the current literature on P4P, we could not obtain any patient health
outcome measures, so we only rely on utilization rates or the provision levels for the analyses.
These measures may not be representative for the health care quality per se and patient health
outcomes would be better indicators of quality. Therefore, it will be important to document
the effect of P4P incentives on patient health outcomes if such data become available in the
future. Moreover, it is interesting to test whether there is a “spill-over” effect of only
rewarding the provision of a small subset of services. It is likely that physicians only
reallocate their time or other resources from the unrewarded services to the rewarded services
to obtain more income. Finally, exploring other factors that might be complementary to the
P4P incentives will help us to design better P4P programs to elicit the optimal behaviour of
physicians.




                                               32
References

Amundson, G., L. I. Solberg, M. Reed, E. M. Martini, and R. Carlson. (2003) “Paying for
quality improvement: Compliance with tobacco cessation guidelines”, Joint Commission
Journal on Quality and Safety 29 (2): 59-65.

Armour B, Pitts M, Maclean R, et al. (2001) “The Effect of Explicit Financial Incentives on
Physician Behavior,” Archives of Internal Medicine;161:1261-6.

Baker, G. (1992) “Incentive contracts and performance measurement”. The Journal of
Political Economy, Vol. 100. no. 3, pp. 598-614

Baker G. (2004) “Pay for performance incentive programs in healthcare: market dynamics
and business process”. San Francisco, CA: Med-Vantage;

Baker G., Carter B. (2005) “Provider Pay-for-performance incentive programs: 2004 National
Study Results”. San Francisco, Calif: Med-Vantage;

Beaulieu, ND, Horrigan, DR. ( 2005) "Putting smart money to work for quality
improvement." Health Services Research. 2005 Oct; 40(5 Pt 1):1318-34

Bell, B., Blundell, R., Van Reenen, J. (1999) “Getting the unemployed back to work: the role
of targeted wage subsidies.” International Tax and Public Finance, 6 (3), 339-360.

Bertrand M., Duflo E. and Mullainathan S., (2004) "How Much Should We Trust
Differences-in-Differences Estimates?" Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 119(1), pages
249-275, February.

Blomqvist, A., (1991). "The doctor as double agent: Information asymmetry, health insurance,
and medical care," Journal of Health Economics, Elsevier, vol. 10(4), pages 411-432

Blundell, R., Costa Dias, M. (2000) "Evaluation Methods for Non-experimental Data." Fiscal
Studies, 21 (4), 427-468.

Boland GW, Halpern EF, Gazelle GS. (2010) "Radiologist Report Turnaround Time: Impact
of Pay-for-Performance Measures" AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2010 Sep;195(3):707-11.

Campbell S, Reeves D, Kontopantelis E, Middleton E, Sibbald B, Roland M. (2007) “Quality
of primary care in England with the introduction of pay for performance”, New England
Journal of Medicine 2007 Jul 12; 357(2):181-90.

Campbell S, Reeves D, Kontopantelis E, Sibbald B, and Roland D.M. (2009) "Effects of Pay
for Performance on the Quality of Primary Care in England" New England Journal of
Medicine; 361:368-378

Christianson, J. B., Leatherman S., Sutherland K. (2008). "Lessons From Evaluations of
Purchaser Pay-for-Performance Programs: A Review of the Evidence." Medical Care
Research and Review, 65(6_suppl): 5S-35.

Chung S, Palaniappan LP, Trujillo LM, Rubin HR, Luft HS.(2010) "Effect of physician-
specific pay-for-performance incentives in a large group practice." Am J Manag Care. 2010
Feb 1;16(2):e35-42.

Coleman, Katie.,Reiter, Kristin L.,Fulwiler, Daniel. (2007) "The Impact of Pay-for-
Performance on Diabetes Care in a Large Network of Community Health Centers" Journal of

                                             33
Health Care for the Poor and Underserved, Volume 18, Number 4, November 2007, pp. 966-
983

Conrad, D. A., Christianson, J. B. (2004) "Penetrating the "Black Box": Financial Incentives
for Enhancing the Quality of Physician Services." Medical Care Research and Review, 61 (3),
37S-68S.

Cutler TW, Palmieri J, Khalsa M, Stebbins M.(2007) "Evaluation of the relationship between
a chronic disease care management program and california pay-for-performance diabetes care
cholesterol measures in one medical group" J Manag Care Pharm. 2007 Sep;13(7):578-88.

Donald S. and Lang K., (2007) "Inference with Difference-in-Differences and Other Panel
Data," Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 89(2), pages 221-233, 03.

Doran, T., C. Fullwood, et al. (2006). "Pay-for-performance programs in family practices in
the United Kingdom." The New England Journal of Medicine, 355(4): 375-84.

Eisenberg JM. (1985) “Physician utilization: The state of research about physicians’ practice
patterns.” Med Care. 23:461-83.

Eisenberg JM. (1986) “Doctors' Decisions and the Cost of Medical Care”. Ann Arbor, MI:
Health Administration Press

Ellis R. and McGuire T. (1990) “Optimal payment systems for health services” Journal of
Health Economics, vol. 9, issue 4, pages 375-396

Epstein, A. M. (2006) “Paying for performance in the United States and abroad,” New
England Journal of Medicine, 355:406-8.

Fairbrother, G., K. L. Hanson, S. Friedman, and G. C. Butts. (1999), “The impact of physician
bonuses, enhanced fees, and feedback on childhood immunization coverage rates”, American
Journal of Public Health 89 (2): 171-175.

Fairbrother G, Siegel MJ, Friedman S, Kory PD, Butts GC. (2001) “Impact of financial
incentives on documented immunization rates in the inner city: results of a randomized
controlled trial”, Ambulatory Pediatrics 2001 Jul-Aug; 1(4):206-12.

Felt-Lisk S, Gimm G and Peterson S. (2007) "Making Pay-For-Performance Work In
Medicaid" Health Affairs, 26, no. 4 : w516-w527

Frolich, A., Talavera, J. A., Broadhead, P. and Dudley, R. A. (2007) "A behavioral model of
clinician responses to incentives to improve quality." Health Policy, 80 (1), 179-193.

Gavagan T, Du H, Saver B, Adams G, Graham D, McCray R, and Goodrick K (2010) "Effect
of Financial Incentives on Improvement in Medical Quality Indicators for Primary Care" J
Am Board Fam Med, September-October 2010; 23: 622 - 631.

Gosden, T., F. Forland, et al. (2000). "Capitation, salary, fee-for-service and mixed systems of
payment: effects on the behaviour of primary care physicians (Cochrane Review)." Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews(3).

Gosden, T., F. Forland, et al. (2001). "Impact of payment method on behaviour of primary
care physicians: a systematic review." Journal of Health Services Research & Policy 6(1): 44-
55.


                                              34
Grady KE, Lemkau JP, Lee NR, Caddell C. (1997), “Enhancing mammography referral in
primary care”, Preventive Medicine, 1997 Nov-Dec; 26(6):791-800.

Guido W. Imbens, (2004) "Nonparametric Estimation of Average Treatment Effects Under
Exogeneity: A Review," The Review of Economics and Statistics, MIT Press, vol. 86(1),
pages 4-29, 06.

Heckman, J., Ichimura, H., and Todd, P., (1997) "Matching as an Econometric Evaluation
Estimator: Evidence from Evaluating a Job Training Programme," Review of Economic
Studies, Blackwell Publishing, vol. 64(4), pages 605-54, October.

Hickson, G., Altemeier, W., and Perrin J., (1987) “Physician Reimbursement by Salary or
Fee-for-Service: Effect on Physician Practice Behavior in a Randomized Prospective
Study,” Pediatrics Vol. 80 No. 3, pp. 344-350

Hillman, AL, Ripley, K, Goldfarb, N, Nuamah, I, Weiner, J, Lusk, E. (1998) "Physician
financial incentives and feedback: failure to increase cancer screening in Medicaid managed
care." American Journal of Public Health, 88 1699-1701.

Hillman, A. L., K. Ripley, N. Goldfarb, J. Weiner, I. Nuamah, and E Lusk. (1999), “The use
of physician financial incentives and feedback to improve pediatric preventive care in
Medicaid managed care”, Pediatrics 104 (4): 931-935.

Hurley, J., R. Labelle and T. Rice (1990), “The relationship between physician fees and the
utilization of medical services in Ontario”, Advances in Health Economics and Health
Services Research 11:49-78

Hurley, J., DeCicca,P., Li J. and Buckley G. (2011), “The response of Ontario primary care
physicians to pay-for-performance incentives.” Final Report (Janurary 26,2011) submitted to
the Ontario Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care (MOHLTC)

Hutchison, B. (2008). "Pay for Performance in Primary Care: Proceed with Caution, Pitfalls
Ahead (Editorial)." Healthcare Policy, 4(1): 5.

Hutchison, B., S. Birch, et al. (1996). "Do physician-payment mechanisms affect hospital
utilization? A study of Health Service Organizations in Ontario." CMAJ, 154(5): 653-661.

Hutchison, B., J. Hurley, et al. (1997). "Defining the Practice Population in Fee-for-Service
Practice." Health Services Research, 32 (1): 55-70.

Kouides, RW, Bennettm, NM, Lewis, B, Cappuccio, JD, Barker, WH, LaForce, FM. (1998)
"Performance-based physician reimbursement and influenza immunization rates in the
elderly.The primary-care physicians of Monroe County." American Journal of Preventive
Medicine, (14), 89-95.

Krasnik, A., P.P. Groenewegen , P.A. Pedersen, P. von Scholten , G. Mooney, A. Gottschau,
H.A. Flierman and M.T. Damsgaard (1990), “Changing remuneration system: effects on
activity in general practice”, British Medical Journal, 300 (6741), 1698-701

Lawrence C. A., James H. B., Steven S. F., Nina L. A., Colleen M. K., Bruce A. C., William
S. N., Mark E. L., Jasjit S. A., Marc W. M.,(2008) "A Randomized Trial of a Pay-for-
Performance Program Targeting Clinician Referral to a State Tobacco Quitline", Arch Intern
Med. 2008;168(18):1993-1999.




                                              35
Lester H, Schmittdiel J, Selby J, Fireman B, Campbell S, Lee J, Whippy A, Madvig P. (2010)
"The impact of removing financial incentives from clinical quality indicators: longitudinal
analysis of four Kaiser Permanente indicators" BMJ; 340:c1898

Levin-Scherz J, DeVita N and Timbie J. (2006) "Impact of Pay-for-Performance Contracts
and Network Registry on Diabetes and Asthma HEDIS Measures in an Integrated Delivery
Network" Medical Care Research and Review, 2006 February vol. 63 no. 1 suppl 14S-28S

Lewis, S. (2009). "Pay for Performance: The Wrong Time, the Wrong Place?" Healthcare
Quarterly,12(3):8-9.

Ma, Ching-to Albert & McGuire, T. (1997). "Optimal Health Insurance and Provider
Payment," American Economic Review, vol. 87(4), pages 685-704

Mandel K, Kotagal U. (2007) "Pay for Performance Alone Cannot Drive Quality." Arch
Pediatr Adolesc Med. ;161(7):650-655.

Maynard, A. (2008). “Payment for Performance (P4P): International experience and a
cautionary proposal for Estonia”, World Health Organization Europe - Health Financing
Policy Paper, Division of Country Health Systems: 30.

McGuire, T. G., and M.V. Pauly (1991), “Physician response to fee changes with multiple
payers”, Journal of Health Economics 385-410

McGuire, Thomas G., (2000) “Physician agency”, Handbook of Health Economics, in: A. J.
Culyer & J. P. Newhouse (ed.), Handbook of Health Economics, edition 1, volume 1, chapter
9, pages 461-536 Elsevier.

Meyer, B., (1995) “Natural and quasi-experiments in economics” Journal of Business and
Economic Statistics, vol. 13, 2 (April) pp. 151-161Millett C, Gray J, Saxena S, Netuveli G
and Majeed A, (2007) “Impact of a pay-for-performance incentive on support for smoking
cessation and on smoking prevalence among people with diabetes” CMAJ, June 5, 2007; 176
(12).page 1705-1710

Moulton, Brent R., (1986)"Random group effects and the precision of regression estimates,"
Journal of Econometrics, vol. 32(3), pages 385-397, August.

Moulton, Brent R, (1990) "An Illustration of a Pitfall in Estimating the Effects of Aggregate
Variables on Micro Unit," Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 72(2), pages 334-38, May.

Mullen K. J., Frank R.G., Rosenthal M. B. (2010) “Can You Get What You Pay For? Pay-
For-Performance and the Quality of Healthcare Providers”, RAND Journal of Economics,
41: 64–91

Newhouse, J. (1996). "Reimbursing Health Plans and Health Providers: Efficiency in
Production versus Selection," Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 34(3), pages 1236-1263

Nguyen, N.X., and F.W. Derrick (1997), “Physicians behavioral response to a Medicare price
reduction”, Health Services Research 32: 283-298

Pearson S, Schneider E, Kleinman K, Coltin K and Singer J. (2008) "The Impact Of Pay-For-
Performance On Health Care Quality In Massachusetts, 2001–2003" Health Affairs, 27, no. 4:
1167-1176



                                            36
Peterson L., Woodard L., Urech T., Daw C., Sookanan S. (2006) “Does pay-for-performance
improve the quality of health care”. Annals of Internal Medicine, 145(4):265-272

Predengast C. (1999) “The provision of incentives in firms” Journal of Economic Literature,
vol. 37, issue 1, pages 7-63

Richards, J. (2009). "Is there an elephant in the room?" British Journal of General Practice,
59: 376-377.

Robinson, J. C. (2001), “Theory and practice in the design of physician payment incentives”,
Milbank Quarterly, 79(2), 149-77

Rockville, M.D. (2004), “Strategies to Support Quality-based Purchasing: A Review of the
Evidence”, Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality 2004:04-P024. U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services. Public Health Service.

Rosenthal, M. B. and A. Dudley (2007). “Pay-for-Performance: will the latest payment trend
improve care?” Journal of the American Medical Association, 297 (7): 740-44.

Rosenthal, M. B. and R. G. Frank (2006). “What Is the Empirical Basis for Paying for Quality
in Health Care?” Medical Care Research and Review 63(2): 135-157.

Rosenthal MB, Frank RG, Li Z, Epstein AM. (2005) “Early experience with pay-for-
performance: from concept to practice.” Journal of the American Medical Association, 294
(14), 1788-93.

Rosenthal MB, Landon BE, Normand SL, Frank RG, Epstein AM. (2006) “Pay for
performance in commercial HMOs.” The New England Journal of Medicine, 355: 1895-1902

Roski, J., Jeddeloh R., An, L., Lando, H., Hannan, P., Hall, C. and Zhu, SH. (2003) "The
impact of financial incentives and a patient registry on preventive care quality: increasing
provider adherence to evidence-based smoking cessation practice guidelines." Preventive
Medicine, Volume 36, Issue 3: 291-299

Scott A. (2001) “Eliciting GP’s preferences for pecuniary and non-pecuniary job
characteristics.” Journal of Health Economics. 20:329-47

Scott, A. and A. Shiell (1997), “Do fee descriptors influence treatment choices in general
practice: a multi-level discrete choice model”, Journal of Health Economics 16: 323-342

Shen, Y. (2003) “Selecition incentives in a performance-based contracting system,” Health
Services Research, 38 (2), 535-552

Steel N, Maisey S, Clark A, Fleetcroft R, Howe A. (2007)"Quality of clinical primary care
and targeted incentive payments: an observational study." British Journal of General Practice,
2007 June; 57 (539). pp. 449-454.

Stiglitz, Joseph E, (1974). "Incentives and Risk Sharing in Sharecropping," Review of
Economic Studies, Blackwell Publishing, vol. 41(2), pages 219-55, April

Town R., Wholey D.R., Kralewski J., Dowd B. (2004) “Assessing the influence of incentives
on physicians and medical groups.” Medical Care Research and Review, 2004 Sep; 61(3
Suppl):80S-118S.



                                               37
Town R., Kane R., Johnson P., Butler M. “Economic Incenives and physicians’ deliveary of
preventive care: a systematic review”. American Journal of Preventive Medicine. 2005;
28(2):234-240

Vaghela P, Ashworth M, Schofield P, and Gulliford M. (2009) "Population Intermediate
Outcomes of Diabetes under Pay-for-Performance Incentives in England from 2004 to 2008."
Diabetes Care, March 2009 vol. 32 no. 3 427-429

Wagstaff, A., Moreno-Serra, R. (2009) “Europe and central Asia’s great post-communist
social health insurance experiment: Aggregate impacts on health sector outcomes”. Journal of
Health Economics. 28: 322-340

Wennberg JE, Barnes BA, Zubkoff M. (1982) “Professional uncertainty and the problem of
supplier-induced demand.” Social Science & Medicine, 16:811-24

Wilson, R. (2006). “Primary Care Renewal in Ontario- Focus on Remuneration”, Presented at
the Primary Care Forum, November 26-27, 2006. Airport Marriott, Toronto Ontario.
http://toolkit.cfpc.ca/en/remuneration/appendix-2.php

Wooldridge, J.M., (2002) “Econometric analysis of cross section and panel data.” MIT Press,
Cambridge.

Yip, W. (1998), “Physician responses to medical fee reductions: changes in the volume and
intensity of supply of Coronary, Artery Bypass Graft (CABG) surgeries in the Medicare
private sectors”, Journal of Health Economics 17: 675-700

Young G, Meterko M, Beckman H, Baker E, et al. (2007) "Effects of Paying Physicians
Based on their Relative Performance for Quality", Journal of General Internal Medicine 2007;
Volume 22, Number 6, 872-876




                                            38
Figure 1. Groups of physicians with different timing in PCR participation and P4P incentive
exposure




Figure 2: Mean Number of Claims for Contact Incentive Payments per Eligible Physician




                                             39
Figure 3: Share of Target Practice Population Receiving Targeted                                                                         Figure 4: Share of Target Practice Population Receiving Targeted
Service-- Senior Flu Shot                                                                                                                Service-- Toddler Immunzation
  M e a n p ro p o rtio n o f p a tie n ts w ith s e rv ic e




                                                                                                                                           M e a n p ro p o rtio n o f p a tie n ts w ith s e rv ic e
   0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1




                                                                                                                                            0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1
                                                               1998   2000        2002             2004        2006          2008                                                                       1998   2000        2002             2004        2006          2008
                                                                                            year                                                                                                                                     year

                                                                        Control (n=433)               incent2002 (n=8)                                                                                           Control (n=433)               incent2002 (n=8)
                                                                        incent2003 (n=14)             incent2004 (n=19)                                                                                          incent2003 (n=14)             incent2004 (n=19)
                                                                        incent2005 (n=39)             incent2006 (n=1,597)                                                                                       incent2005 (n=39)             incent2006 (n=1,597)
                                                                        incent2007 (n=44)                                                                                                                        incent2007 (n=44)




                                                                                                                                    40
Figure 5: Share of Target Practice Population Receiving Targeted                                                                         Figure 6: Share of Target Practice Population Receiving Targeted
Service -- Pap Smear                                                                                                                     Service -- Mammogram
  M e a n p ro p o rtio n o f p a tie n ts w ith s e rv ic e




                                                                                                                                           M e a n p ro p o rtio n o f p a tie n ts w ith s e rv ic e
   0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1




                                                                                                                                            0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1
                                                               1998   2000        2002             2004        2006          2008                                                                       1998   2000        2002             2004        2006          2008
                                                                                            year                                                                                                                                     year

                                                                        Control (n=433)               incent2002 (n=8)                                                                                           Control (n=433)               incent2002 (n=8)
                                                                        incent2003 (n=14)             incent2004 (n=19)                                                                                          incent2003 (n=14)             incent2004 (n=19)
                                                                        incent2005 (n=39)             incent2006 (n=1,597)                                                                                       incent2005 (n=39)             incent2006 (n=1,597)
                                                                        incent2007 (n=44)                                                                                                                        incent2007 (n=44)




                                                                                                                                    41
Figure 7: Share of Target Practice Population Receiving Targeted
Service — Colorectal cancer screening
    .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1
  M e a n p ro p o rtio n o f p a tie n ts w ith s e rv ic e
                             0




                                                               1998   2000        2002             2004        2006          2008
                                                                                            year

                                                                        Control (n=426)               incent2005 (n=1,602)
                                                                        incent2006 (n=81)             incent2007 (n=44)




                                                                                                                                    42
Figure 8: Proportion of Physicians Achieving the Targeted                                                                                   Figure 9: Proportion of Physicians Achieving the Targeted
Performance Level of Service — Obstetrical deliveries                                                                                       Performance Level of Service — Hospital services
  P ro p o rtio n o f G P s a c h ie v in g ta rg e te d le v e l




                                                                                                                                              P ro p o rtio n o f G P s a c h ie v in g ta rg e te d le v e l
      0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1




                                                                                                                                                  0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1
                                                                    1998   2000        2002          2004           2006        2008                                                                            1998   2000        2002          2004           2006        2008
                                                                                              year                                                                                                                                        year

                                                                              Control (n=1,960)             incent2002 (n=8)                                                                                              Control (n=1,960)             incent2002 (n=8)
                                                                              incent2003 (n=14)             incent2004 (n=19)                                                                                             incent2003 (n=14)             incent2004 (n=19)
                                                                              incent2005 (n=39)             incent2006 (n=66)                                                                                             incent2005 (n=39)             incent2006 (n=66)
                                                                              incent2007 (n=69)                                                                                                                           incent2007 (n=69)




                                                                                                                                       43
Figure 10: Proportion of Physicians Achieving the Targeted                                                                                   Figure 11: Proportion of Physicians Achieving the Targeted
Performance Level of Service — Palliative care                                                                                               Performance Level of Service — Office procedures
  P ro p o rtio n o f G P s a c h ie v in g ta rg e te d le v e l




                                                                                                                                               P ro p o rtio n o f G P s a c h ie v in g ta rg e te d le v e l
      0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1




                                                                                                                                                   0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1
                                                                    1998   2000        2002          2004          2006          2008                                                                            1998   2000        2002          2004           2006        2008
                                                                                              year                                                                                                                                         year

                                                                             Control (n=561)                incent2002 (n=12)                                                                                              Control (n=1,960)             incent2002 (n=8)
                                                                             incent2003 (n=517)             incent2004 (n=386)                                                                                             incent2003 (n=14)             incent2004 (n=19)
                                                                             incent2005 (n=543)             incent2006 (n=84)                                                                                              incent2005 (n=39)             incent2006 (n=66)
                                                                             incent2007 (n=49)                                                                                                                             incent2007 (n=69)




                                                                                                                                        44
Figure 12: Proportion of Physicians Achieving the Targeted                                                                                  Figure 13: Proportion of Physicians Achieving the Targeted
Performance Level of Service — Prenatal care                                                                                                Performance Level of Service — Home visits
  P ro p o rtio n o f G P s a c h ie v in g ta rg e te d le v e l




                                                                                                                                              P ro p o rtio n o f G P s a c h ie v in g ta rg e te d le v e l
      0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1




                                                                                                                                                  0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1
                                                                    1998   2000        2002          2004           2006        2008                                                                            1998   2000        2002          2004           2006        2008
                                                                                              year                                                                                                                                        year

                                                                              Control (n=1,960)             incent2002 (n=8)                                                                                              Control (n=1,960)             incent2002 (n=8)
                                                                              incent2003 (n=14)             incent2004 (n=19)                                                                                             incent2003 (n=14)             incent2004 (n=19)
                                                                              incent2005 (n=39)             incent2006 (n=66)                                                                                             incent2005 (n=39)             incent2006 (n=66)
                                                                              incent2007 (n=69)                                                                                                                           incent2007 (n=69)




                                                                                                                                       45
                          Table 1. Description of Eleven Financial Incentives under Analysis

#        Financial
                                               Eligibility condition                               Bonus Payment
         incentive
                                  Preventive Care Service Enhancement Payments
Contact Payment
       -- payment of $6.86 for each documented contact for eligible patients to obtain the preventive service
Cumulative Care Preventive Service Bonus
 1 Seniors’ influenza Bonus payment based on the proportion of the physician’s               $220 (60% of patients)
    immunizations       eligible (aged 65 or more) and rostered patients on March 31         $440 (65% of patients)
                        who received the flu shot in the previous flu season.                $770 (70% of patients)
                                                                                             $1,100 (75% of patients)
                                                                                             $2,200 (80% of patients)
2 Pap smear             Bonus payment based on the proportion of the physician’s             $220 (60% of patients)
                        eligible(females aged 35 to 69) and rostered patients on March       $440 (65% of patients)
                        31 who received a pap smear for cervical cancer screening            $660 (70% of patients)
                        during the last 30 months.                                           $1,320 (75% of patients)
                                                                                             $2,200 (80% of patients)
3 Mammogram             Bonus payment based on the proportion of the physician’s             $220 (55% of patients)
                        eligible (females aged 50 to 69) and rostered patients on March      $440 (60% of patients)
                        31 who received a mammogram for breast cancer screening              $770 (65% of patients)
                        during the last 30 months.                                           $1,320 (70% of patients)
                                                                                             $2,200 (75% of patients)
4 Toddler               Bonus payment based on the proportion of the physician’s             $440 (85% of patients)
    immunizations       eligible (children aged 30 to 42 months) and rostered patients       $1,100 (90% of patients)
                        on March 31 who received 5 immunizations by the age of 30            $2,200 (95% of patients)
                        months.
5 Colorectal cancer Bonus payment based on the proportion of the physician’s                 $220 (15% of patients)
    screening           eligible (aged 50 to 74) and rostered patients on March 31 who       $440 (20% of patients)
                        was administered a colorectal screening test by Fecal Occult         $1,100 (40% of patients)
                        Blood Testing during the last 30 months.                             $2,200 (50% of patients)
                                                Annual Special Payments
6    Obstetrical         Payment if 5 or more obstetrical services were delivered to 5 or    $3,200 (increased to $5,000
     deliveries          more patients in a fiscal year.                                     in October 2007)
7    Hospital services   Payment if hospital services provided to all patients are totaled   $5,000 (increased to $7,500
                         at least $2,000 in a fiscal year                                    in April 2005 for those with
                                                                                             a Rurality Index of Ontario
                                                                                             score greater than 45)
8    Palliative care     Payment if palliative care services are delivered to four or more   $2,000
                         patients in a fiscal year.
9    Office procedures   Payment if office procedures provided to enrolled patients are      $2,000
                         totaled at least $1,200 in a fiscal year
10   Prenatal care       Payment if prenatal care services are provided to five or more      $2,000
                         enrolled patients in a fiscal year
11   Home visits         Payment if 100 or more home visits are provided to enrolled         $2,000
                         patients in a fiscal year.




                                                           46
      Table 2: Eligibility for Preventive Care Bonuses and Special Payments
                       2002        2003        2004        2005        2006         2007         2008
                                       Preventive Care Bonuses
Senior Flu Immunization. Toddler Immunization, Pap Smear and Mammogram
 FHN                  April
 FHG                                                                               April
 CCM                                                                               April
 FHO                                                                               April
Colorectal Cancer Screening
 FHN                                                              April
 FHG                                                              April
 CCM                                                              April
 FHO                                                                               April


                                           Special Payments
Obstetrical Services, Hospital Services, Office Procedures, Prenatal Care and Home Visits
 FHN                   April
 FHG                                                       - never eligible -
 CCM                                                       - never eligible -
 FHO                                                                        November
Palliative Care
 FHN                   April
 FHG                                 July
 CCM                                                       - never eligible -
 FHO                                                                        November
Note: Date PCR models introduced: FHN: April 2002; FHG: July 2003; CCM: October 2005; FHO: November 2006.




                                                   47
                                  Table 3: Key Characteristics of Primary Care Models Included in This Study

Model
                    Size/Rostering             Funding
(Year Introduced)
Traditional
                    No size regulation
Fee-for-service                                 Fee-for-service
                    No rostering
(whole period)
                    Physician:
                                               Blended Capitation:
                     At least 3 GPs
                                                Age-sex adjusted capitation for rostered patients for 57 core services (about 80% of gross income)
                    Rostering:
Family Health                                   10% of FFS rate for core services to rostered patients
                     Minimum total roster      Access Bonus: 20.65% of the base capitation payment less value of outside use by rostered patients
Network (2002)        of 2400 for group of 3
                                                Monthly comprehensive care capitation payments for formally rostered patients
                     Financial penalty for
                                                100% of FFS rate for core services to non-rostered patients up to $45,000 per physician
                      average rosters > 2400
                                                100% of FFS rate for excluded services to either rostered or non-rostered patients
                      per GP
                                               Blended fee-for-service:
                    Physician:                  100% FFS as usual
Family Health        At least 3 GPs            10% premium on FFS rate for specified comprehensive care services provided to rostered patients
                    Rostering:                   (Ministry-assigned and formally rostered)
Group (2003)
                     Voluntary                 Comprehensive care premium
                                                Monthly comprehensive care capitation payments for formally rostered patients
                                                Some premiums/ bonuses paid only for formally rostered patients
                    Physician:
Comprehensive        Solo practice            Blended fee-for-service:
Care Model          Rostering                   100% FFS as usual
(2005)                Required                 Monthly comprehensive care capitation for rostered patients
                      No size regulation
                                               Blended capitation:
Family Health       Physician:                  Capitation for core services to enrolled patients
Organization         At least 3 GPs            Access bonus: maximum of 18.59% of the base rate payment less outside use by rostered patients
                    Rostering                   100% FFS for excluded services to all patients and for non-enrolled patients
(2006)
                      Required                 Monthly comprehensive care capitation payments for formally rostered patients
                      No size regulation       100% of FFS rate for core services to non-rostered patients up to $45,000 per physician
                                                100% of FFS rate for excluded services to either rostered or non-rostered patients
                              Note: Some of these elements were present for different periods for the different PCR model



                                                                         48
                           Table 4. Criteria for Selecting the Sample of GPs for Analysis


                                                                                                               Resulting
Criterion                                                Rationale
                                                                                                              Sample Size
All Ontario physicians present in claims data at
                                                                                                                 37,422
any point between April 1998 and March 2008
                                                         Exclude physicians who interrupted their
Exclude physicians not present in all 10 years of                                                               - 21,415
                                                         practice or who left province during the
the study period                                                                                                = 16,007
                                                         study period
Exclude physicians whose specialty is not                Only GPs are eligible for incentives; we
                                                                                                                 - 8,533
general/family practice during entire study              exclude those billing as GP while attaining
                                                                                                                 = 7,474
perioda                                                  specialization
Exclude physicians who billed less than $30,000                                                                  - 1,304
                                                         Exclude part-time physicians
annually                                                                                                         = 6,170
Exclude physicians without two consecutive               Exclude new GPs who are newly
                                                                                                                 - 3,835
years of practice before start of study (i.e., April     establishing their practice at the start of the
                                                                                                                 = 2,335
1996 to March 1998)                                      study period
Exclude GPs for which billings for A001, A003,
and A007 constitute less than 70% of activity,
                                                         Exclude GP specialists whose main
and GPs for which billings for A001, A003 and                                                                     - 95
                                                         activity is other than providing traditional
A007 constitute less than 50% of all activity and                                                                = 2,240
                                                         family medicine visits and consultationsb
a single "non A-code" category constitutes over
15% of activityc
                                                                                                                  - 19
Exclude locumsd                                          Locums are not eligible for the incentivese
                                                                                                                 = 2,221
                                                         Such GPs did not submit claims data or
Exclude GPs affiliated with the following
                                                         submitted only shadow billing claims;                    - 32
primary care groups: RNPGA, HSO, PCN,
                                                         available data are insufficient for the                 = 2,189
SEAMO, GHC or ICHAf
                                                         analysis
Exclude GPs who converted between FFS and
                                                         Such GPs do not represent typical                         -4
PCR practices for more than one time during the
                                                         observations in service provision behavior              = 2,185
study period
         a
           A physician’s specialty was defined as the specialty under which the largest share of services were
         billed (based on the fee approved).
         b
           An additional criterion whereby a GP with more than 25% of billings for K-codes was classified as a
         GP psychotherapist was rendered superfluous by this 70% rule.
         c
           The following ophthalmology codes are treated as a “non A” category: A009A, A110A, A111A,
         A112A, A114A, A115A, A237A, A238A, A239A, A240A, E077A.
         d
           Locums were identified using information on the Group Type in the Corporate Provider Database.
         We were able to identify locums only imperfectly.
         e
           GPs in walk-in-clinics do not regularly provide the services eligible for the financial incentives under
         study and should therefore be excluded from the analysis. We considered excluding GPs with a high
         proportion of billings for code A888 (Emergency Department Equivalent – Partial Assessment);
         however, once all of the above criteria were applied, this criterion was redundant.
         f
           RNPGA: Rural and Northern Physician Group Agreement; HSO: Health Service Organization; PCN:
         Primary Care Network; SEAMO: Southeastern Ontario Medical Organization; GHC: Group Health
         Care; IHCA: Inner City Health Associates.



                                                             49
       Table 5: Definitions and Sample Sizes of Control and Treatment Groups for each
                                     Performance Incentive

                                  Preventive Care Incentives

Senior Flu Shot, Toddler Immunization, Pap Smear, Mammogram

Control Group            FFS                                            433 physicians

                         FHN starting from April 2002
Treatment Group          FHG starting from April 2007
                                                                        1,722 physicians
                         CCM starting from April 2007
                         FHO starting from April 2007

Colorectal Cancer Screening

Control Group            FFS                                            427 physicians

                         FHN starting from April 2006
                         FHG starting from April 2006
Treatment Group                                                         1,730 physicians
                         CCM starting from April 2006
                         FHO starting from April 2007

                                       Special Payments


Obstetrical Care, Hospital Services, Office Procedures, Prenatal Care, and Home Visits


                         FFS
Control Group            FHG                                           1,962 physicians
                         CCM
                         FHN starting from April 2002
Treatment Group          FHO starting from November                     218 physicians
                          2006

Palliative Care

                         FFS
Control Group                                                            560 physicians
                         CCM
                         FHN starting from April 2002
                         FHG starting from July 2003
Treatment Group                                                         1,596 physicians
                         FHO starting from November
                          2006




                                                50
             Table 6. Descriptive Statistics in pre-intervention period: Control and Incentive Groups


                                   Control Group                         Incentive Group             Equal       Equal
                                                                                                    Means       Variance
                          Mean       Median    St. Dev           Mean       Median    St. Dev       p-value     p-value

Preventive Care Incentives for Senior Flu Shot, Toddler Immunization, Pap Smear, Mammogram, Colorectal
     Cancer Screening and Special Payment for Palliative Care

Physician Characteristics
 Age                       54.0        54.0        10.8           49.0        49.0         8.4          0.000    0.000
 Female                   0.213         -           -            0.270         -            -             -        -
 Years Licensed            22.1        20.0        11.6           18.1        16.0         8.8          0.000    0.000
Practice
  Size                    1,408       1,345         668          1,605       1,572      573             0.000    0.000
  Patient Age              39.7       39.3          8.5           38.6        38.0      6.2             0.000    0.000
  Proportion Female       0.528       0.493        0.121         0.544       0.506     0.111            0.000    0.000
  Proportion Infants      0.016       0.014        0.014         0.023       0.021     0.014            0.000    0.009
  Proportion Elderly      0.144       0.119        0.111         0.135       0.119     0.079            0.000    0.000
Workload
 Annual Workdays          250.6       249.8     44.2             263.7       261.8      38.8            0.000    0.000
 Annual Visits           7,663.0     7,337.8   3,531.0          8,466.2     8,307.5    3066.3           0.000    0.000
 Visits/Workday            30.3       29.1      12.8             31.9         31.0      10.2            0.000    0.000

Special Payments for Obstetrical Care, Hospital Services, Office Procedures, Prenatal Care, and Home Visits

Physician Characteristics
 Age                       50.2        50.0         9.3           47.8        47.0         8.1          0.000    0.000
 Female                   0.255         -            -           0.284         -            -             -        -
 Years Licensed            19.1        17.5         9.6           17.8        15.0         8.8          0.000    0.000
Practice
  Size                    1,571       1,526         608          1,497       1,491      478             0.000    0.000
  Patient Age              38.8       38.2          6.9           39.1        38.8      5.3             0.091    0.000
  Proportion Female       0.538       0.500        0.114         0.565       0.528     0.102            0.000    0.000
  Proportion Infants      0.021       0.019        0.014         0.027       0.025     0.013            0.000    0.000
  Proportion Elderly      0.136       0.117        0.088         0.151       0.147     0.069            0.000    0.000
Workload
 Annual Workdays       260.8      260.3        40.4             264.2     261.8         38.9          0.000      0.018
 Annual Visits         8,392      8,209        3,230            7,424     7,383        2,415          0.000      0.000
 Visits/Workday         31.9      31.0         10.9              27.8      27.8         7.4           0.000      0.000
          Notes: the null hypothesis of the t-tests on the equality of means is that the variable has the
          same mean for the treatment and control groups; the null hypothesis of the F-tests for the
          homogeneity of variances is that the variable has the same standard deviation for the
          treatment and control groups.




                                                           51
Table 7: Proportion of Eligible Family Physicians who Submitted at Least One Claim for a
“Contact Incentive Payment”

                                                                                                    Colorectal
                                                          Senior Flu           Toddler
                 Pap Smear         Mammogram                                                         Cancer
                                                           Vaccine           Immunization
                                                                                                    Screening
 2003-04             0.43                0.30                 0.22                 0.17                 -
 2004-05             0.28                0.19                 0.62                 0.13                  -
 2005-06             0.44                0.36                 0.62                 0.06                 0.02
 2006-07             0.37                0.27                 0.47                 0.06                 0.18
 2007-08             0.30                0.25                 0.40                 0.04                 0.19

Note: Only physicians in FHNs were eligible from 2003-04 to 2005-06 for the contact incentive
payments; FHN and FHO physicians were eligible for 2006-07 and 2007-08; FHGs and CCMs were
never eligible during the study period; they became eligible April 1, 2008. FFS physicians were never
eligible and remain ineligible.




                                                 52
                  Table 8: Main Results: Preventive Care Bonuses, Estimated Marginal Effects, Difference-in-Difference Models-- Full Sample

                                                                                   DID with physician-specific              DID with differential trend
                                         DID with pooled OLS model                                                                                                 Specification test
                                                                                      fixed effects model                            model

                        (a)                           (b)                                       (c)                                      (d)                               (e)
                                                      Sample                                    Sample                                   Sample
                    Baseline           Marginal                                   Marginal                                 Marginal                                Wald
                                                        size:                                     size:                                    size:
                   Compliance           Effect                       R2            Effect                      R2           Effect                    R2           Test          P-value
                                                       # obs                                     # obs                                    # obs
                    in 2003           (St. Error)                                (St. Error)                              (St. Error)                            Statistics
                                                      (# GPs)                                   (# GPs)                                  (# GPs)
Senior Flu                               0.013        19,866                     0.028***        19,866                    0.036***      19,866
                      0.554                                         0.371                                    0.470                                   0.469          2.71         0.100
Shot                                    (0.010)       (2,029)                     (0.007)        (2,029)                    (0.009)      (2,029)

Toddler                                 -0.007        16,826                       0.011         16,826                      0.004       16,826
                      0.543                                         0.278                                    0.356                                   0.356          0.66         0.417
Immunization                            (0.013)       (1,999)                     (0.011)        (1,999)                    (0.014)      (1,999)

                                      0.031***        19,926                     0.041***        19,926                    0.050***      19,926
Pap Smear             0.589                                         0.433                                    0.115                                   0.115         12.17         0.001
                                       (0.006)        (2,029)                     (0.004)        (2,029)                    (0.006)      (2,029)

                                         0.004        19,888                     0.018***        19,888                    0.022***      19,888
Mammogram             0.646                                         0.351                                    0.158                                   0.158          1.44         0.230
                                        (0.007)       (2,029)                     (0.005)        (2,029)                    (0.006)      (2,029)
Colorectal
                                      0.095***        19,918                     0.085***        19,918                    0.113***      19,918
Cancer                0.150                                         0.217                                    0.373                                   0.379         66.30         0.000
                                       (0.009)        (2,027)                     (0.005)        (2,027)                    (0.006)      (2,027)
Screening

  *** Indicates statistical significance at the 1% level; ** indicates statistical significance at the 5% level; * indicates statistical significance at the 10% level.




                                                                                          53
         Table 9: Robustness checks: Preventive Care Bonuses, Estimated Marginal Effects, Difference-in-Difference Estimator with Physician-specific
         Fixed Effects—Alternative estimation samples

                                             GPs who joined PCR before introduction                                     GPs in PCR models funded primarily by fee-
                                                 of bonuses as treatment group                                                 for-service as treatment group

                           (a)                                  (b)                                  (c)                                     (d)
                        Baseline                                Sample size:                      Baseline                                  Sample size:
                                             Marginal Effect                                                          Marginal Effect
                       Compliance                                   # obs          R2            Compliance                                    # obs              R2
                                               (St. Error)                                                              (St. Error)
                        in 2003                                   (# GPs)                         in 2003                                     (# GPs)

                                                0.028***           19,073                                                 0.024***             18,550
 Senior Flu Shot           0.561                                                  0.468             0.554                                                        0.471
                                                 (0.007)           (1,948)                                                 (0.007)             (1,893)

 Toddler                                          0.010            16,162                                                   0.010              15,669
                           0.548                                                  0.356             0.543                                                        0.352
 Immunization                                    (0.011)           (1,919)                                                 (0.011)             (1,863)

                                                0.041***           19,130                                                 0.040***             18,607
 Pap Smear                 0.591                                                  0.117             0.589                                                        0.111
                                                 (0.004)           (1,948)                                                 (0.004)             (1,893)

                                                0.017***           19,093                                                 0.018***             18,569
 Mammogram                 0.653                                                  0.152             0.646                                                        0.163
                                                 (0.005)           (1,948)                                                 (0.005)             (1,893)
 Colorectal
                                                0.079***           13,158                                                 0.085***             17,778
 Cancer                    0.144                                                  0.364             0.150                                                        0.355
                                                 (0.006)           (1,341)                                                 (0.006)             (1,808)
 Screening

*** Indicates statistical significance at the 1% level; ** indicates statistical significance at the 5% level; * indicates statistical significance at the 10% level.




                                                                                    54
   Table 10: Sensitivity analysis 1: Preventive Care Bonuses, Estimated Marginal Effects, Difference-in-Difference Estimator with Physician-specific Fixed
              Effects—excluding Q-codes/exclusion codes

                                                                                                    GPs who joined PCR before                 GPs in PCR models funded primarily
                                                             Full Sample                             introduction of bonuses                              by FFS

                            (a)                                  (b)                                            (c)                                             (d)
                          Baseline              Marginal       Sample size:                      Marginal      Sample size:                     Marginal      Sample size:
                        Compliance in          Effect (St.          # obs                       Effect (St.        # obs                         Effect           # obs
                           2003                  Error)           (# GPs)          R2             Error)         (# GPs)           R2          (St. Error)      (# GPs)       R2

                                                 0.013*           19,866                          0.013*          19,073                         0.011           18,550
    Senior Flu Shot          0.554                                               0.469                                           0.468                                       0.471
                                                 (0.007)          (2,029)                         (0.007)         (1,948)                       (0.007)          (1,893)

    Toddler                                       0.008           16,826                           0.007          16,162                         0.007           15,669
                             0.543                                               0.352                                           0.352                                       0.349
    Immunization                                 (0.011)          (1,999)                         (0.011)         (1,919)                       (0.011)          (1,863)

                                                0.024***          19,926                         0.024***         19,130                       0.024***          18,607
    Pap Smear                0.589                                               0.084                                           0.085                                       0.084
                                                 (0.004)          (2,029)                         (0.004)         (1,948)                       (0.004)          (1,893)

                                                0.017***          19,888                         0.017***         19,093                       0.017***          18,569
    Mammogram                0.653                                               0.162                                           0.156                                       0.167
                                                 (0.005)          (2,029)                         (0.005)         (1,948)                       (0.005)          (1,893)
    Colorectal
                                                0.068***          19,918                         0.061***         13,158                       0.067***          17,778
    Cancer                   0.150                                               0.341                                           0.334                                       0.325
                                                 (0.005)          (2,027)                         (0.005)         (1,341)                       (0.006)          (1,808)
    Screening

*** Indicates statistical significance at the 1% level; ** indicates statistical significance at the 5% level; * indicates statistical significance at the 10% level.




                                                                                           55
   Table 11: Sensitivity analysis 2: Preventive Care Bonuses, Estimated Marginal Effects, Difference-in-Difference Estimator with Physician-specific Fixed
              Effects—adding in non-rostered patients

                                                                                                    GPs who joined PCR before                 GPs in PCR models funded primarily
                                                             Full Sample                             introduction of bonuses                              by FFS

                            (a)                                  (b)                                            (c)                                             (d)
                          Baseline              Marginal       Sample size:                      Marginal      Sample size:                     Marginal      Sample size:
                        Compliance in          Effect (St.          # obs                       Effect (St.        # obs                         Effect           # obs
                           2003                  Error)           (# GPs)          R2             Error)         (# GPs)           R2          (St. Error)      (# GPs)       R2

                                                0.043***          20,207                         0.044***         19,398                       0.041***          18,847
    Senior Flu Shot          0.554                                               0.466                                           0.465                                       0.468
                                                 (0.006)          (2,029)                         (0.007)         (1,948)                       (0.007)          (1,893)

    Toddler                                       0.007           17,416                           0.006          16,732                         0.007           16,200
                             0.543                                               0.372                                           0.372                                       0.367
    Immunization                                 (0.010)          (1,999)                         (0.010)         (1,919)                       (0.010)          (1,863)

                                                0.042***          20,245                         0.043***         19,435                       0.041***          18,885
    Pap Smear                0.589                                               0.099                                           0.102                                       0.094
                                                 (0.004)          (2,029)                         (0.004)         (1,948)                       (0.004)          (1,893)

                                                0.027***          20,228                         0.028***         19,419                       0.027***          18,868
    Mammogram                0.646                                               0.150                                           0.147                                       0.153
                                                 (0.004)          (2,029)                         (0.004)         (1,948)                       (0.004)          (1,893)
    Colorectal
                                                0.089***          20,217                         0.085***         13,364                       0.089***          18,029
    Cancer                   0.150                                               0.365                                           0.365                                       0.344
                                                 (0.005)          (2,027)                         (0.005)         (1,341)                       (0.005)          (1,808)
    Screening

*** Indicates statistical significance at the 1% level; ** indicates statistical significance at the 5% level; * indicates statistical significance at the 10% level.




                                                                                           56
   Table 12: Sensitivity analysis 3: Preventive Care Bonuses, Estimated Marginal Effects, Difference-in-Difference Estimator with Physician-specific Fixed
              Effects—only FHGs and CCMs achived minimum roster size
                                                                                                    GPs who joined PCR before                 GPs in PCR models funded primarily
                                                             Full Sample                             introduction of bonuses                              by FFS

                            (a)                                  (b)                                            (c)                                             (d)
                          Baseline              Marginal       Sample size:                      Marginal      Sample size:                     Marginal      Sample size:
                        Compliance in          Effect (St.          # obs                       Effect (St.        # obs                         Effect           # obs
                           2003                  Error)           (# GPs)          R2             Error)         (# GPs)           R2          (St. Error)      (# GPs)       R2

                                                0.031***          18,156                         0.030***         17,706                       0.028***          16,956
    Senior Flu Shot          0.560                                               0.469                                           0.469                                       0.471
                                                 (0.007)          (1,843)                         (0.007)         (1,798)                       (0.007)          (1,720)

    Toddler                                       0.010           15,480                           0.011          15,094                         0.009           14,423
                             0.548                                               0.370                                           0.370                                       0.366
    Immunization                                 (0.011)          (1,814)                         (0.011)         (1,770)                       (0.011)          (1,691)

                                                0.043***          18,212                         0.043***         17,762                       0.043***          17,010
    Pap Smear                0.591                                               0.120                                           0.120                                       0.116
                                                 (0.004)          (1,843)                         (0.004)         (1,798)                       (0.004)          (1,720)

                                                0.029***          18,179                         0.028***         17,729                       0.029***          16,977
    Mammogram                0.649                                               0.183                                           0.181                                       0.188
                                                 (0.005)          (1,843)                         (0.005)         (1,798)                       (0.005)          (1,720)
    Colorectal
                                                0.091***          17,877                         0.083***         12,443                       0.090***          15,918
    Cancer                   0.154                                               0.380                                           0.367                                       0.363
                                                 (0.006)          (1,806)                         (0.006)         (1,262)                       (0.006)          (1,607)
    Screening

*** Indicates statistical significance at the 1% level; ** indicates statistical significance at the 5% level; * indicates statistical significance at the 10% level.




                                                                                           57
   Table 13: Sensitivity analysis 4: Preventive Care Bonuses, Estimated Marginal Effects, Difference-in-Difference Estimator with Physician-specific Fixed
              Effects—dropping transition year/first year of incentive exposure
                                                                                                    GPs who joined PCR before                 GPs in PCR models funded primarily
                                                             Full Sample                             introduction of bonuses                              by FFS

                            (a)                                  (b)                                            (c)                                             (d)
                          Baseline              Marginal       Sample size:                      Marginal      Sample size:                     Marginal      Sample size:
                        Compliance in          Effect (St.          # obs                       Effect (St.        # obs                         Effect           # obs
                           2003                  Error)           (# GPs)          R2             Error)         (# GPs)           R2          (St. Error)      (# GPs)       R2

                                                0.037***          18,329                         0.036***         17,607                       0.033***          17,136
    Senior Flu Shot          0.554                                               0.475                                           0.473                                       0.476
                                                 (0.009)          (2,029)                         (0.009)         (1,948)                       (0.009)          (1,893)

    Toddler                                       0.002           15,365                           0.001          14,760                         0.001           14,328
                             0.543                                               0.318                                           0.318                                       0.316
    Immunization                                 (0.015)          (1,999)                         (0.015)         (1,919)                       (0.015)          (1,863)

                                                0.049***          18,389                         0.050***         17,665                       0.050***          17,193
    Pap Smear                0.589                                               0.106                                           0.107                                       0.102
                                                 (0.006)          (2,029)                         (0.006)         (1,948)                       (0.006)          (1,893)

                                                0.035***          18,352                         0.035***         17,628                       0.034***          17,156
    Mammogram                0.646                                               0.173                                           0.169                                       0.177
                                                 (0.006)          (2,029)                         (0.006)         (1,948)                       (0.006)          (1,893)
    Colorectal
                                                0.111***          18,381                         0.105***         12,259                       0.112***          16,457
    Cancer                   0.150                                               0.390                                           0.377                                       0.372
                                                 (0.006)          (2,027)                         (0.007)         (1,341)                       (0.007)          (1,808)
    Screening

*** Indicates statistical significance at the 1% level; ** indicates statistical significance at the 5% level; * indicates statistical significance at the 10% level.




                                                                                           58
Table 14: Main Results: Special Payments, Estimated Marginal Effects, Difference-in-Difference Estimator (no physician-specific fixed effects)
                                GPs Eligible for Special Payments in           GPs Eligible for Special Payments in    GPs Eligible for Special Payments in
                                                2005                                           2006                                    2007
                   (a)                            (b)                                              (c)                                   (d)
                Baseline         Marginal     Sample size:                      Marginal       Sample size:             Marginal     Sample size:
                                                               Pseudo                                         Pseudo                                Pseudo
               Compliance         Effect         # obs                           Effect           # obs                  Effect         # obs
                                                                 R2                                             R2                                    R2
                in 2003         (St. Error)     (# GPs)                        (St. Error)       (# GPs)               (St. Error)     (# GPs)
Obstetrical                      -0.0004        19,934                            -0.004          20,187                 0.013         20,196
Services          0.043                                          0.302                                        0.308                                 0.302
                                 (0.005)        (1,998)                          (0.004)          (2,025)               (0.024)        (2,028)
Hospital                           -0.013       19,777                            -0.005          20,052                 -0.019        20,138
Services          0.272                                          0.481                                        0.482                                 0.482
                                  (0.035)       (1,985)                          (0.074)          (2,012)               (0.037)        (2,021)
Office                             0.006        19,897                            0.075           20,175               -0.141***       20,209
Procedures        0.405                                          0.167                                        0.171                                 0.165
                                  (0.064)       (1,995)                          (0.127)          (2,022)               (0.053)        (2,026)
Prenatal                         0.314***       19,857                            0.106           20,109                 0.184         20,151
Care              0.544                                          0.295                                        0.295                                 0.294
                                  (0.107)       (1,991)                          (0.070)          (2,016)               (0.127)        (2,020)
Home Visits                        0.007        18,814                            0.003           19,251                 0.084         19,557
                  0.045                                          0.225                                        0.230                                 0.226
                                  (0.007)       (1,893)                          (0.012)          (1,934)               (0.078)        (1,961)

                                GPs Eligible for Special Payments in           GPs Eligible for Special Payments in    GPs Eligible for Special Payments in
                                                2003                                           2004                                    2005
Palliative                         0.009         9,681                            0.004            8,495                 0.032          9,928
Care              0.011                                          0.305                                        0.347                                 0.301
                                  (0.012)       (1,078)                          (0.005)           (946)                (0.031)        (1,104)


                                                  *** Indicates statistical significance at the 1% level.




                                                                               59
  Table 15: Estimated Marginal Effects: Preventive Care Bonuses by Physician Age, Practice Size, and Baseline Level of Compliance, Difference-
                                         in-Difference Estimator with Physician-specific Fixed Effects
                                    By Age                                              Practice Size                                            Baseline Compliance
                  GP       Baseline    Marg. eff.     # obs.     R2       Size      Baseline Marg. eff.           #        R2       Quartile      Baseline Marg. eff.        # obs. (#   R2
                  Age      in 2003      (St Err)     (# GPs)                        in 2003       (St Err)      obs.(#                             in 2003    (St Err)         GPs)
Senior Flu        < 40      0.549        0.024        2,320               < 1K        0.547          0.025      3,270             Q1 (Lowest)       0.304      0.036***       4,887
                                                                0.48                                                      0.44                                                           0.42
Shot                                    (0.022)       (237)                                         (0.016)     (336)                                           (0.014)       (503)
                 40-55      0.577      0.049***      10,508             1K-1.5K       0.572          0.017      5,935              Q2 and Q3        0.593      0.027***       9,908
                                                                0.47                                                      0.46                                                           0.51
                                        (0.010)      (1,073)                                        (0.012)     (606)                                           (0.010)      (1,009)
                  > 55      0.537                                        > 1.5K       0.557
                                         -0.001       7,038     0.47                               0.031***    10,661     0.49    Q4 (Highest)      0.747        0.020        5,071      0.49
                                        (0.010)       (719)                                         (0.010)    (1,087)                                          (0.015)       (517)
Toddler           < 40      0.527        0.027        2,044               < 1K        0.496         0.014       2,402             Q1 (Lowest)       0.217        0.026        3,810
                                                                0.56                                                      0.28                                                           0.40
Immunization                            (0.026)       (234)                                        (0.034)      (313)                                           (0.025)       (455)
                 40-55      0.577        -0.010       9,095             1K-1.5K       0.560         0.004       5,042              Q2 and Q3        0.558        0.012        8,795
                                                                0.39                                                      0.32                                                           0.44
                                        (0.015)      (1,065)                                       (0.021)      (601)                                           (0.014)      (1,023)
                  > 55      0.503                                        > 1.5K       0.552
                                        0.037*        5,687     0.26                                0.021       9,382     0.43    Q4 (Highest)      0.838        0.015        4,221      0.30
                                        (0.020)       (700)                                        (0.014)     (1,085)                                          (0.024)       (521)
Pap Smear         < 40      0.620      0.059***       2,334               < 1K                     0.040***     3,289             Q1 (Lowest)       0.374      0.024**        4,929
                                                                0.20                  0.630                               0.10                                                           0.18
                                        (0.013)       (237)                                         (0.011)     (335)                                           (0.010)       (503)
                 40-55      0.612      0.053***      10,503             1K-1.5K                    0.038***     5,926              Q2 and Q3        0.594      0.050***       9,904
                                                                0.14                  0.617                               0.12                                                           0.13
                                        (0.006)      (1,069)                                        (0.007)     (604)                                           (0.006)      (1,009)
                  > 55      0.549                                        > 1.5K
                                       0.019***       7,029     0.09                  0.564        0.037***    10,651     0.14    Q4 (Highest)      0.800      0.038***       5,033      0.14
                                        (0.007)       (717)                                         (0.006)    (1,084)                                          (0.010)       (511)
Mammogram         < 40      0.653      0.045***       2,322               < 1K                       0.017      3,284             Q1 (Lowest)       0.438      0.034***       5,031
                                                                0.26                  0.682                               0.11                                                           0.25
                                        (0.016)       (237)                                         (0.011)     (336)                                           (0.009)       (515)
                 40-55      0.671       0.016**      10,532             1K-1.5K                      -0.003     5,937              Q2 and Q3        0.672      0.018***       9,873
                                                                0.16                  0.673                               0.20                                                           0.16
                                        (0.007)      (1,073)                                        (0.008)     (606)                                           (0.006)      (1,007)
                  > 55      0.625                                        > 1.5K
                                       0.014***       7,034     0.16                  0.632        0.028***    10,667     0.19    Q4 (Highest)      0.829        0.014        4,984      0.17
                                        (0.007)       (719)                                         (0.006)    (1,087)                                          (0.010)       (507)
Colorectal        < 40      0.187      0.147***       2,197               < 1K        0.159        0.068***     3,243             Q1 (Lowest)       0.015      0.091***       4,918
                                                                0.48                                                      0.37                                                           0.41
Cancer                                  (0.019)       (224)                                         (0.015)     (330)                                           (0.007)       (502)
Screening        40-55      0.164      0.081***      10,744             1K-1.5K       0.145        0.079***     6,059              Q2 and Q3        0.078      0.102***       9,938
                                                                0.39                                                      0.38                                                           0.45
                                        (0.008)      (1,092)                                        (0.010)     (617)                                           (0.007)      (1,012)
                  > 55      0.116                                        > 1.5K       0.150
                                       0.067***       6,977     0.30                               0.090***    10,616     0.39    Q4 (Highest)      0.428      0.071***       5,062      0.43
                                        (0.008)       (711)                                         (0.007)    (1,080)                                          (0.015)       (513)
         *** Indicates statistical significance at the 1% level; ** indicates statistical significance at the 5% level; and * indicates statistical significance at the 10% level.
                                                                                              60
                                                            Appendix 1-- Empirical Studies on Physician Response to P4P incentives

   Study                 Study design                Incentives involved      Incentive           Results                    Context             Intervention    Sample size
 (Authors)                                           (Form of incentives,       level                                                              duration     / scale of the
                                                      targeted services)                                                                                         experiment

Grady et al.   RCT, random assignment               Reward with education    Physician    No effect               U.S.                           6 months       95
1997           3 arms: 20 education and                                                                           61 primary care practices in                  physicians in
               reward; 18 education; 23 control     Mammography                                                   greater Dayton, Ohio and                      total
               (61 practices in total)              referrals                                                     Springfield, Massachusetts

Kouides et     RCT, non-random assignment           Bonus                    Provider     Positive effect in      U.S.                           4 months       62 physician
al. 1998       2 arms: 27 practices in                                       group        immunization rate in    For Medicare population                       in treatment,
               treatment, 27 practices in control   Influenza                             a Medicare                                                            82 in control
                                                    immunization rates                    population

Hillman et     RCT, random assignment               Bonus(based on the       Provider     No effect in            U.S.                           18 months      52 primary
al. 1998       2 arms: 26 PC sites intervention;    part of capitation       group        compliance scores       Medicaid HMO (contract with    period         care
               26 PC sites control                  payment)+ feedback                                            numerous other health plans)                  practices,
                                                    regarding compliance                                                                                        relatively
                                                    with guidelines;                                                                                            small sample

                                                    Cancer screening
                                                    guidelines:
                                                    mammography, breast
                                                    cancer, pap smear,
                                                    colorectal screening

Hillman et     RCT, random assignment               Bonus(based on the       Provider     No effect in            U.S.                           18 months      53 pediatric
al. 1999       3 arms: control, feedback of         part of capitation       group        compliance scores       Medicaid HMO (contract with    period         practices,
               performance only, feedback+          payment)+ feedback                                            numerous other health plans)                  relatively
               bonus payment                                                                                                                                    small sample
                                                    Pediatric immunization




                                                                                             61
Fairbrother    RCT, random assignment              Bonus with             Physician   Partial effect: only      U.S.                         12 months   60
et al. 1999    4 arms: 15 doctors in control, 15   performance feedback   level       feedback+bonus            A low-income urban                       physicians in
               feedback, 15 feedback+ bonus,                                          improved childhood        population                               total
               15 enhanced FFS+ bonus              Childhood                          immunization rate,
                                                   immunization rate                  but primarily
                                                                                      achieved through
                                                                                      better documentation

Fairbrother    RCT, random assignment              Bonus                  Physician   Partial effect:           U.S.                         16 months   57
et al. 2001    3 arms: 24 bonus, 12 FFS, 21                               level       significant increase in   A low-income urban                       physicians in
               control                             Pediatric                          coverage levels, but      population                               total
                                                   immunizations                      the increase is
                                                                                      primarily due to
                                                                                      better documentation
                                                                                      not to better
                                                                                      immunizing practices

Roski et al.   RCT, random assignment              Bonus                  Provider    Partial effect:           U.S.                         12 months   40 clinics in
2003           3 arms: 15 clinics control; 15                             group       improved in                                                        total
               bonus; 10 bonus + computerized      Smoking cessation                  adherence to
               patient registry                                                       guidelines
                                                                                      (documentation of
                                                                                      smoking status and
                                                                                      providing advice to
                                                                                      quit), but no effect in
                                                                                      quitting rate

Amundson       Observational                       Bonus + performance    Provider    Positive effect           U.S.                         3 years     20 medical
et al. 2003    Before-after analysis               feedback               group       improve physician         HealthParterners system in               groups
               No control group                                                       compliance with the       Minneapolis
                                                   Tobacco cessation                  tobacco treatment
                                                                                      guideline




                                                                                         62
Beaulieu       Observational                     Performance bonus +      Physician   Partial effect: patients   U.S.                            8 months    21
and            Before-after analysis with        offered with diabetic    level       treated by the doctors     New York.                                   physicians
Horrigan       control group                     registry and group                   contracted with the                                                    as treatment
2005           Treatment group: 21 primary       discussion process                   program had                                                            group
               care doctors contracted with                                           improvement on 7
               Independent Health in upstate     Process and outcome                  out of 9 measures
               New York;                         measures for diabetic
               Control group: provider groups    care
               in the Pacific Northwest

Rosenthal et   Observational                     Bonus in Quality         Provider    Partial effect:            U.S.                            10 months   163medical
al. 2005       Before-after analysis with        Incentive Program        group       improved only in           A large network HMO,                        groups
               control                                                                cervical cancer            PacifiCare Health System                    eligible for
               Treatment group: 163 provider     Process measures:                    screening, not             introduced Quality Incentive                the bonus
               groups contracted with            cervical cancer                      improved in                Program to contracted medical
               PacifiCare Health systems in      screening,                           mammography,               groups in California in March
               California;                       mammography,                         haemoglobin A1c test       2002
               Control group: 42 provider        Haemoglobin A1c test
               groups contracted with
               PacifiCare in the Pacific
               Northwest

Doran et al.   Observational                     Performance              Physician   Positive effect: high      U.K. Large scale, national      1 year      8,105
2006           Cross-sectional regression, Not   contracting:             level       levels of reported         level pay-for-performance                   phyisicians
               Before-after analysis             performance w.r.t. 146               achievement                contract in 2004
                                                 quality indicator




                                                                                         63
Levin-           Observational                      P4P contracts: bonus      Network     Positive effect:        U.S.                            2001-2003     18-75 health
Scherz et al.    Retrospective cohort study using   based on network          level       improvement             Beginning in 2001, a provider                 plans in
2006             before-after trend comparison      performance compared                  compared to state and   network Partners Community                    PCHI as
                 Treatment group: health plans      to previously agreed                  national level          HealthCare, Inc (PCHI) and                    treatment
                 participating in PCHI P4P          targets                                                       the health plans began P4P                    group
                 contracts; Comparison group:                                                                     contracts with bonus
                 national and Massachusetts State   Adult diabetes and                                            payments.
                 measures                           pediatric asthma
                                                    HEDIS scores
Campbell et      Observational                      Performance               Physician   Partial effect:         U.K.                            1998, 2003,   42 family
al. 2007         Before-after analysis,             contracting:              practices   improved in asthma,     Large scale, national level     2005          practices,
                 No comparison group                                                      type 2 diabetes         pay-for-performance scheme                    national
                                                    Clinical indicators on                measures.               for family practice in 2004                   representativ
                                                    coronary heart disease,               Not improved in                                                       e
                                                    asthma, type 2 diabetes               coronary heart
                                                                                          disease measures

Millett et al.   Observational                      Performance               Physician   Positive effect:        U.K.                            2003, 2005    36 primary
2007             Before-after analysis,             contracting: smoking      practices   increased the           Large scale, national level                   care
                 No comparison group                cessation among                       provision of support    pay-for-performance scheme                    practices
                                                    patients with diabetes                for smokers with        for family practice in 2004
                                                                                          diabetes in primary
                                                    Proportion of patients                care settings
                                                    with documented
                                                    smoking cessation
                                                    advice, prevalence of
                                                    smoking among
                                                    patients with diabetes




                                                                                            64
Steel et al.   Observational                   Performance                Physician   Positive effect:          U.K.                            2003, 2005   18 primary
2007           Before-after analysis,          contracting: quality of    practices   significant increase      Large scale, national level                  care
               No comparison group             care for two common                    for the six indicators    pay-for-performance scheme                   practices
                                               chronic                                referred to asthma        for family practice in 2004
                                               conditions: asthma and                 and hypertension
                                               hypertension                           linked to incentive
                                                                                      payments
                                               Six quality indicators
                                               referred to asthma and
                                               hypertension subject to
                                               incentive payments
Mandel and     Observational                   Pay for performance        Primary     Positive effect:          U.S.                            2003-2006    44 pediatric
Kotagal        Before-after mean comparison,   coupled with additional    care        The initiative resulted   The Physician-Hospital                       practices
2007           No control group                improvement                practices   in substantive and        Organization (PHO) affiliated
                                               interventions related to               sustainable               with Cincinnati Children’s
                                               the collaborative.                     improvement in all        Hospital
                                                                                      measures                  Medical Center launched an
                                               Flu shot percentage,                                             asthma improvement
                                               controller                                                       collaborative in October 2003
                                               medication percentage
                                               for children with
                                               persistent asthma,
                                               written self-
                                               management plan
                                               percentage.




                                                                                         65
Felt-Lisk et   Observational                      Bonus payments for          Health       Partial effect: only       U.S                              2002 versus   7 health
al. 2007       Before-after mean comparison       improving the measure       plans        small effect in some       A collaborative P4P effort       2003–05       plans
               with comparison group                                                       of the plans               among seven Medicaid-
               Treatment group: five              A HEDIS measure for                                                 focused
               Medicaid-focused health plans in   “well-baby visits” that                                             health plans in California
               California participating the       requires six visits by                                              during 2003–2005, known as
               LIRR Collaborative                 age fifteen months                                                  the Local Initiative Rewarding
               Comparison groups: national and                                                                        Results (LIRR) Collaborative
               state benchmarks, and two plans                                                                        Demonstration.
               that were part of the
               collaborative but no incentives
Young et al.   Observational                      Incentive program           Individual   Partial effect: modest     U.S.                             1999-2004     334 primary
2007           Retrospective cohort study using   placing physicians at       physician    effect provider            A pay-for-performance                          care
               before-after trend comparison      financial risk to receive                adherence to quality       program of the Rochester                       physicians
               Treatment group: physicians        rewards based on their                   standards for a single     (New York) Individual
               participating in the program;      performance relative to                  measure of diabetes        Practice Association (RIPA)
               Comparison group: national and     other physicians in the                  care                       between 2000 and 2001.
               New York State RIPA scores         program.

                                                  4 diabetes performance
                                                  measures
Coleman et     Observational                      Performance-based           Physician    Partial effects:           U.S.                             2002-2004     46
al. 2007       Before-after regression analysis   compensation                level        dramatic                   A performance-based provider                   physicians
               No comparison group                                                         improvements in rate       compensation program
                                                  HbA1c testing for                        of patients receiving      implemented in January
                                                  diabetes care                            recommended                2004 at Access Community
                                                  in a low-income patient                  number of HbA1c            Health Network (ACCESS), a
                                                  population                               tests; no effect on rate   large system of federally
                                                                                           of physicians              qualified health centers
                                                                                           providing first            (FQHCs) in Chicago.
                                                                                           HbA1c test, nor
                                                                                           improvement in
                                                                                           patient outcomes




                                                                                              66
Cutler et al.   Observational                     P4P incentive            Medical     Positive effect:         U.S.                              2003-2004      165 patients
2007            Before-after mean comparison      payments                 groups      Higher rates of          Chronic disease care                             in the
                with comparison group;                                                 performance in the       management (CDCM)                                incentive
                Treatment group: patients with    Percent of eligible                  P4P program              program received by the                          program,
                diabetes who were followed by     patients received an                                          Mercy Medical Group                              1,694
                the P4P program (CDCM);           LDL-C test and                                                (MMG), which is a 160-                           patients as
                Comparison group: patients        attained LDL-C                                                provider, multispecialty                         control
                followed by routine care group    control                                                       medical group and has
                                                                                                                participated in the California
                                                                                                                P4P initiative
Lawrence et     RCT, random assignment            Bonus payment            Clinics     Positive effect:         U.S.                              September      24 clinics as
al. 2008        2 arms: 24 clinics with P4P       intervention based on                increased referrals      A P4P program targeting           2005 to June   treatment, 25
                payments, 25 usual care clinics   tobacco quitline                     rates compared to        clinician referral to statewide   2006           clinics as
                                                  referrals;                           usual care clinics       quitline services in Minnesota.                  control
                                                  Rates of referrals
Pearson et      Observational                     Multiple P4P programs    Physician   No significant effect:   U.S.                              2001-2003      154
al. 2008        Before-after mean comparison      introduced               groups      no distinguishable       Multiple P4P programs                            physician
                with comparison group             into physician group                 different trends         introduced into physician                        groups in
                Treatment group: physician        contracts during 2001–               among the treatment      group contracts during 2001–                     total
                groups that receive incentives    2003 by the five major               and the matched          2003 by the five major
                Groups                            commercial health                    comparison group.        commercial health plans
                Comparison group: groups that     plans operating in                                            operating in Massachusetts.
                were matched with incentivized    Massachusetts;
                groups on their baseline
                performance but that did not      13 Health Care
                subsequently receive any          Employer Data And
                incentive                         Information Set
                                                  (HEDIS) Measures




                                                                                          67
Campbell et   Observational                     Performance               Physician   Partial effect: by        U.K. Large scale, national       1998, 2003,   42 family
al. 2009      Before-after interrupted time-    contracting:              practices   2005, improvement         level pay-for-performance        2005, 2007    practices,
              series analysis,                                                        quality for asthma        scheme for family practice in                  national
              No control group                  Clinical indicators on                and diabetes but not      2004                                           representativ
                                                coronary heart disease,               for heart disease. By                                                    e
                                                asthma, type 2 diabetes               2007, the rate of
                                                                                      improvement
                                                                                      had slowed for all
                                                                                      three conditions.
Vaghela et    Observational                     Performance               Physician   Positive effect:          U.K.                             2004-2005,    Around
al. 2009      Before-after analysis,            contracting               practices   significant increase      Large scale, national level      2007-2008     8,423
              No comparison group                                                                               pay-for-performance scheme                     practices
                                                3 measures related to                                           for family practice in 2004
                                                diabetes outcomes
Lee et al.    Observational                     Financial                 Physician   Positive effect: P4P      Taiwan                           2005-2006     12,499
2010          Before-after mean comparison      Incentives for            level       program for diabetes      A pay-for-performance                          patients as
              with comparison group;            increasing                            was associated with a     (P4P) program for diabetes                     intervention
              Treatment group: patients         comprehensive follow-                 significant increase in   care operated by the Bureau of                 group;
              with diabetes who were enrolled   up visits for diabetes                regular follow-up         National Health Insurance                      26,172
              in the P4P program;               care                                  visits and evidence-      (NHI) in                                       patients as
              Comparison group: randomly                                              based services, and       Taiwan.                                        comparison
              sampled patients with diabetes    Number of essential                   significantly lower                                                      group
              who had never joined the P4P      exams/tests; numbers                  hospitalization costs.
              program                           of diabetes-related
                                                physician visits and
                                                hospital admissions
Gavagan et    Observational                     Financial incentive for   Physician   No significant effect:    U.S.                             2002          6 clinics as
al. 2010      Before-after mean comparison      achieving group targets   level       no significant effect     In 2002, 11 public community                   treatment
              with comparison group;            in preventive care;                   on performance of         health centers in                              group; 5
              Treatment group: clinics          Cervical cancer                       preventive care           Houston/Harris County were                     clinics as
              received incentives;              screening,                                                      provided performance                           comparison
              Comparison group: clinics with    mammography, and                                                incentives on 3 quality                        group
              no incentives                     pediatric immunization                                          indicators in preventive care




                                                                                         68
Chung et al.    Observational                    Bonus payment to           Physician    No significant effect:   U.S.                              2007         179
2010            Before-after mean and trend      physicians: based on       level        no evident effect of     In 2007, all primary care                      physicians
                comparison;                      individual physicians’                  physician-specific       physicians at Palo Alto
                No comparison group              performance on 15                       incentives               Medical Clinic (PAMC),
                                                 ambulatory quality                                               California participated in the
                                                 measures, with a                                                 physician incentive program.
                                                 composite
                                                 score
Boland et al.   Observational                    Bonus payments were        Provider     Positive effect:         U.S.                              July 2006–   81
2010            Before-after mean comparison;    to be made if the          individual   significant decrease     Massachusetts                     March 2009   radiologists,
                No comparison group              radiologists met goals.    level        in turnaround time       General (MGPO) Physicians                      11
                                                                                         after the program        Organization at the                            subspecialty
                                                 Three radiologist report                                         Massachusetts General                          divisions
                                                 turnaround times                                                 Hospital (MGH) initiated a
                                                 (RTAT)                                                           hospital wide department
                                                 Components                                                       specific radiologist PFP
                                                                                                                  initiative.
Lester et al.   Observational                    Financial incentive        Medical      Positive effect:         U.S. (and U.K.)                   1999-2007    35 outpatient
2010            Before-after trend comparison;   related to quality         facilities   upward trend when        Four of original financial                     medical
                No comparison group              indicator;                              incentives were in       incentives removed for 35                      facilities
                                                                                         place and downward       outpatient facilities owned and
                                                 Screening for cervical                  trend when incentives    operated by Kaiser
                                                 cancer, control of                      were removed.            Permanente Northern
                                                 hypertension, diabetes                                           California.
                                                 control, and screening
                                                 for diabetic retinopathy




                                                                                            69
Mullen et al.   Observational                      Bonus in Quality        Provider   Partial effect:    U.S.                            2002-2004   Treatment
2010            Before-after regression analysis   Incentive Program,      group      improved only in   A large network HMO,                        groups size
                with control (DID)                                                    cervical cancer    PacifiCare Health System                    (77-186)
                Treatment group: provider          Another annual bonus               screening, not     introduced Quality Incentive                medical
                groups contracted with             program by the                     improved in        Program to contracted medical               groups;
                PacifiCare Health systems in       Integrated Healthcare              mammography,       groups in California in March               Control
                California;                        Association (IHA),                 haemoglobin A1c    2002;                                       group size:
                Control group: provider groups     bonus based on                     test, asthma       One year later, PacifiCare                  (7-32)
                in the Pacific Northwest           cervical cancer                    medication         with five other big health                  medical
                                                   screening,                                            plans introduced another                    groups
                                                   mammography,                                          larger P4P program by the
                                                   Haemoglobin A1c test,                                 Integrated Healthcare
                                                   asthma medication                                     Association (IHA).




                                                                                        70
                Appendix 2-- All data sources and main relevant variables

        Data Source                                 Relevant information
Ontario Health Insurance      Claim records to calculate the services provided by
Program (OHIP) physician      physicians;
claims data                   Basic provider information;
                              Basic patient information;
                              Fee paid/billed;
                              Patient encrypted health number as linking variable;
                              Provider encrypted number as linking variable
Corporate Provider Database   Physician demographic variables;
(CPDB) data                   Physician practice variables;
                              Physician PCR group participation, effective dates;
                              Provider encrypted number as linking variable
Client Agency Program         Patient member status;
Enrollment (CAPE) data        Patient roster dates;
                              Patient encrypted health number as linking variable;
                              Provider encrypted number as linking variable
Registered Persons Database   Demographics of registered persons;
(RPDB) data                   Postal code of residence;
                              Patient encrypted health number as linking variable




                                           71
Appendix 3-- Assigning Patients to Primary Care Physicians' Practices

The Hutchison methodology (Hutchison, Hurley, Birch, Lomas, & Stratford-Devai, 1997)

was implemented for all FPs in the province, not just those in the analysis sample. This

ensured that an individual was assigned to an FP as called for by the algorithm, regardless of

whether the FP was included in the analysis (if we focused only on the analysis sample, we

would have falsely assigned some patients to sample physicians when the individual’s real

family physician was not included in the sample). A FP’s practice population is defined as:

   All persons for whom the physician billed OHIP for at least one visit (see below for how

    a visit was defined) during the previous fiscal year; and

   All additional patients for whom the physician billed OHIP for at least one visit in each of

    the two preceding fiscal years.

   Patients who met these criteria for more than one physician were assigned to the

    physician who billed for the largest number of visits in the most recent year.

   When an equal number of visits were made to more than one physician in the most recent

    year, assignment is made to the made to the physician who billed for the most recent visit.

A service is defined as a FP visit if:

The attending physician is a FP and the fee code is one of the following 74 visit codes from
the Ontario Schedule of Benefits

Fee
Schedule     Description
Code
A001A        Minor assessment
A003A        General assessment
A004A        General re-assessment
A005A        Consultation
A006A        Repeat consultation
A007A        Intermediate assessment or well baby care
A008A        Mini assessment
A110A        Periodic oculo-visual assessment, aged 19 years and below
A112A        Periodic oculo-visual assessment, aged 65 years and above
A115A        A major eye examination
A888A        Emergency department equivalent – Partial assessment
A901A        House call assessment – First patient seen
A902A        House call assessment – Pronouncement of death in the home
A903A        Pre-dental/operative general assessment (maximum of 2 per 12-month period)
A905A        Limited consultation


                                               72
Fee
Schedule   Description
Code
A933A      On-call admission assessment
A945A      Special palliative care consultation
E070A      Geriatric Geriatric Age Premium: Gen. Practice - Geriatic Gen. Assess. Premium - 75 or
E071A      Older
           Geriatric general assessment premium – patient aged 75 or older (maximum 1 per 12
E075A
           month period)
E077A      Identification of patient for a Major Eye Examination
           Diagnostic and Therapeutic Procedure – Hyposensitisation, including assessment and
G212A
           supervision – When sole reason for visit
           Diagnostic and Therapeutic Procedure – Cardiovascular – Anticoagulant supervision –
G271A
           long-term, telephone advice
G365A      Diagnostic and Therapeutic Procedure – Papanicolaou Smear – periodic
           Diagnostic and Therapeutic Procedure – Intramuscular, subcutaneous or intradermal –
G372A
           With visit (each injection)
           Diagnostic and Therapeutic Procedure – Intramuscular, subcutaneous or intradermal –
G373A
           Sole reason (first injection)
G538A      Active immunization – Injection of unspecified agent – with visit (each injection)
G539A      Active immunization – Injection of unspecified agent – sole reason (first injection)
G590A      Active Immunization – Injection of influenza agent – With visit
G591A      Active Immunization – Injection of influenza agent – Sole reason
K004A      Family psychotherapy – 2 or more family members in attendance at the same time
K005A      Primary mental health care - Individual care – Per half hour
K006A      Hypnotherapy – Individual care – Per half hour
K007A      Psychotherapy – Individual care – Per half hour
K010A      Psychotherapy – Additional units per member (maximum 6 units per patient per day)
           Hypnotherapy – Group – for induction and training for hypnosis (maximum 8 people),
K011A
           per member, per half hour
K012A      Psychotherapy, Group – Per member of a group of 4, first 12 units per day
K013A      Counselling – Individual care – Per half hour
K017A      Annual health or annual physical examination – Child after second birthday
K019A      Psychotherapy, Group – Per member of a group of 2, first 12 units per day
K020A      Psychotherapy, Group – Per member of a group of 3, first 12 units per day
K022A      HIV Primary Care – Individual care per half hour
K023A      Palliative care support – Individual care per half hour
K024A      Psychotherapy, Group – Per member of a group of 5, first 12 units per day
K025A      Psychotherapy, Group – Per member of a group of 6 to 12, first 12 units per day
           Family Practice & Practice in General - Certification of medical eligibility for Ontario
K026A
           Hepatitis C Assistance Program
           Family Practice & Practice in General – Certification of medical eligibility for Ontario
K027A
           Hepatitis C Assistance Program (OHCAP)
K028A      Family Practice & Practice in General – Sexually transmitted disease management
K030A      Family Practice & Practice in General – Diabetic management assessment
           Health Protection and Promotion Act – Physician Report – Completion of Physician
K031A
           Report in accordance with Section 22.1 of the Health Protection and Promotion Act.
           Counselling – Individual care – Additional units per patient per provider per 12-month
K033A
           period
K040A      Group counselling – 2 or more persons
K041A      Group counseling – 2 or more persons – Additional units
K070A      Home care application – Application


                                               73
Fee
Schedule   Description
Code
           Home care supervision – Acute Home Care Supervision (maximum 1 every 2 weeks for
K071A
           the first 12 weeks following admission to home care program).
           Home care supervision – Chronic Home Care Supervision (maximum 1 per month
K072A
           commencing in the 13th week following admission to the home care program).
           Certification of mental illness – Form 1 – Application for psychiatric assessment in
K623A      accordance with the Mental Health Act – includes necessary history, examination,
           notification of the patient, family and relevant authorities and completion of form.
P004A      Obstetrics, prenatal care – Minor prenatal assessment
           Non-emergency long-term care in-patient services – Subsequent visits – Chronic care or
W001A
           convalescent hospital – additional subsequent visits (maximum 4 per patient per month)
           Non-emergency long-term care in-patient services – Subsequent visits – Chronic care or
W002A
           convalescent hospital – first 4 subsequent visits per patient per month
           Non-emergency long-term care in-patient services – Subsequent visits – Nursing home or
W003A
           home for the aged – first 2 subsequent visits per patient per month
           Emergency or Out-Patient Department (OPD) & Non-Emergency Long-Term Care In-
W004A
           Patient Services – General re-assessment of patient in nursing home
           Non-emergency long-term care in-patient services – Subsequent visits – Nursing home or
W008A
           home for the aged – additional subsequent visits (maximum 2 per patient per month)
           Emergency or Out-Patient Department (OPD) & Non-Emergency Long-Term Care In-
W102A
           Patient Services – Admission assessment – Type 1
           Emergency or Out-Patient Department (OPD) & Non-Emergency Long-Term Care In-
W104A
           Patient Services – Admission assessment – Type 2
           Emergency or Out-Patient Department (OPD) & Non-Emergency Long-Term Care In-
W105A
           Patient Services – Consultation
           Emergency or Out-Patient Department (OPD) & Non-Emergency Long-Term Care In-
W106A
           Patient Services – Repeat Consultation
           Emergency or Out-Patient Department (OPD) & Non-Emergency Long-Term Care In-
W109A
           Patient Services – Admission assessment – Annual physical examination
           Non-emergency long-term care in-patient services – Subsequent visits – Nursing home or
W121A
           home for the aged – Additional visits due to intercurrent illness
           Emergency or Out-Patient Department (OPD) & Non-Emergency Long-Term Care In-
W107A
           Patient Services, Admission assessment – Type 3
           Emergency or Out-Patient Department (OPD) & Non-Emergency Long-Term Care In-
W777A
           Patient Services – Intermediate assessment - Pronouncement of death
           Non-emergency long-term care in-patient services – Subsequent visits – Nursing home or
W872A
           home for the aged – Palliative care
           Non-emergency long-term care in-patient services – Subsequent visits – Chronic care or
W882A
           convalescent hospital – Palliative care
           Emergency or Out-Patient Department (OPD) & Non-Emergency Long-Term Care In-
W903A      Patient Services – Pre-dental/pre-operative general assessment (maximum of 2 per 12-
           month period)




                                              74
                             Appendix 4-- Independent Variable Specification


Variable Name                                           Variable Description

  treatment     Treatment dummy indicating whether the GP was eligible for the financial incentive on that date.
      post      Pre- & post- dummy indicating whether it is post-intervention period
    treated     Treated & untreated dummy indicating whether the this physician was entitled to collect
                bonus/special payment during out study period
     ffsd       PCR dummies indicating the physician was affiliated with the model on that date
    fhgd        ffsd: 1 if FFS, 0 otherwise
    fhnd        fhgd: 1 if FHG, 0 otherwise
    ccmd        fhnd: 1 if FHN, 0 otherwise
    fhod        ccmd: 1 if CCM, 0 otherwise
                fhod: 1 if FHO, 0 otherwise
   doc_age      Age of physician in years on March 31 2002
  doc_ageg1     Physician age-- four categories
  doc_ageg2     doc_age1: physician age < 45; doc_age2: 45 ≤ physician age < 50; doc_age3: 50 ≤ physician age <
  doc_ageg3     60;
  doc_ageg4     doc_age4: 60 ≤ physician age
  doc_male      Physician sex: 1 if male; 0 if female
    cmaca       Practice locationS: metropolitan area influence measured by Metropolitan Influence Zone (five
                categories: 0 if CMA, 4 levels otherwise: strong, medium, weak, no influence)
   riotype      Practice locationS: urban/rural level measured by RIO score (Rurality Index of Ontario)
                riotype =0 if RIO score > 45; riotype =1 if RIO score ≤ 45
   yrslicyr     Years since licensing year as of March 31 2008
   lnbsbill     Log of billings: log of total value (fee approved) of claims submitted in 1998-99
  workdays      Days of working: total number of days billed in this fiscal year
  sum_visit     Number of visits: total # of patient visits in this year
 sum_visitg1    Total # of patient visits in this year: four categories
 sum_visitg2    sum_visitg1: < 5,000; sum_visitg2: 5,000 ≤ x < 7,500; sum_visitg3: 7,500 ≤ x < 10,000;
 sum_visitg3    sum_visitg4: ≥ 10,000
 sum_visitg4
   visitpd      Number of patient visits per working day: the number of visits divided by number of days worked in
                this year
   sum_pt       Practice size: number of assigned patients seen per year
  sum_ptg1      Practice size: number of assigned patients seen per year, four categories
  sum_ptg2      sum_ptg1: < 1,000; sum_ptg2: 1,000 ≤ x < 1,500; sum_ptg3: 1,500 ≤ x < 2,000; sum_ptg4: ≥ 2,000
  sum_ptg3
  sum_ptg4
   meanage      Average practice age: average age of eligible patient population on each snapshot date
  fmpercent     Proportion of females in the practice: proportion of female patients as of eligible patient population
                on each snapshot date
  clpercent     Proportion of children patients: Proportion of the eligible patients that are under 2 years of age
  elpercent     Proportion of elderly patients: Proportion of the eligible patients that are over 65 years of age
    year        Year fixed effects:10 dummy variables for each snapshot year from March 31 1999 to March 2008
   cdname       Geographical fixed effects: 49 dummy variables defined by Census Division codes




                                                        75
