                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     ECONOMICS OF INDIVIDUALIZATION IN COMPARATIVE EFFECTIVENESS
       RESEARCH AND A BASIS FOR A PATIENT-CENTERED HEALTH CARE

                                           Anirban Basu

                                       Working Paper 16900
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w16900


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2011




This work was supported by the Alan Williams Health Economics Fellowship from the University
of York and a National Institute of Mental Health Research grant 1R01MH083706. The author is grateful
to Karl Claxton, James Heckman, Thomas McGuire, David Meltzer, Harold Pollack, Rena Conti, Mark
Sculpher, Sergio Urzua and two anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments on a previous
draft or presentations of this work. The opinions expressed here are those of the author only, and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Anirban Basu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Economics of Individualization in Comparative Effectiveness Research and a Basis for a Patient-
CenteredHealth Care
Anirban Basu
NBER Working Paper No. 16900
March 2011
JEL No. C11,D61,I18

                                              ABSTRACT

The United States aspires to use information from comparative effectiveness research (CER) to reduce
waste and contain costs without instituting a formal rationing mechanism or compromising patient
or physician autonomy with regard to treatment choices. With such ambitious goals, traditional combinations
of research designs and analytical methods used in CER may lead to disappointing results. In this paper,
I study how alternate regimes of comparative effectiveness information help shape the marginal benefits
(demand) curve in the population and how such perceived demand curves impact decision-making
at the individual patient level and welfare at the societal level. I highlight the need to individualize
comparative effectiveness research in order to generate the true (normative) demand curve for treatments.
I discuss methodological principles that guide research designs for such studies. Using an example
of the comparative effect of substance abuse treatments on crime, I use novel econometric methods
to salvage individualized information from an existing dataset.


Anirban Basu
Department of Health Services
School of Public Health
University of Washington
1959 NE Pacific St
Box - 357660
Seattle WA 98195
and NBER
basua@uw.edu
1. Introduction

       Decisions in health care policy and clinical medicine most often involve
evaluation of alternatives: Which treatment will produce the optimal clinical
outcome in a given patient? What type of insurance coverage will maximize social
welfare? The fundamental problem of ex-ante evaluation is to predict outcomes
under alternative policies or interventions. A large literature, dating from the early
1920s, focuses on developing methods to address such problems of evaluation
(Neyman, 1923; Fisher, 1935). In recent years, health care–related methods and
applications that belong to this genre of evaluation have been broadly grouped
under the umbrella term “comparative effectiveness research” (CER). CER conducts
head-to-head comparisons to determine which drugs, devices, and procedures are
most effective and carry the lowest risk. The 2009 American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act dedicates $1.1 billion to this end.

        The Congressional Budget Office, the Medicare Payment Advisory
Commission (MedPAC), and other independent stakeholders define comparative
effectiveness research as “a rigorous evaluation of the impact of different options
that are available for treating a given medical condition for a particular set of
patients” (MedPAC Report, 2008). Notably, “the set of patients” is usually defined by
broad and easily observable criteria. In a recent report submitted to the President
and Congress, the Federal Coordinating Council on Comparative Effectiveness
Research states: “Clinicians and patients need to know not only that a treatment
works on average but also which interventions work best for specific types of
patients (e.g. the elderly, racial and ethnic minorities)” (FCC Report, June 30, 2009).
Addressing heterogeneity in outcomes and especially in the comparative effects of
alternative treatments is becoming increasingly popular in such evaluations
(Sculpher, 2008).

        Recent legislation,1 however, calls for pursuing even finer levels of
heterogeneity, including "genetic and molecular sub-types or quality of life
preferences", through CER. Such an approach may be the key to the success of
translating comparative effectiveness information into practice. The popular
mantra of “what works” associated with CER may not take us far enough unless we
try to discover “what works for whom” in an individualized manner. In this paper, I



1
    Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2009, H.R. 3590, 111th Congress §6301 (2010).
highlight the economics of individualization in CER and discuss methodological
principles behind individualization.

       In our analysis, the economics of CER information is driven by the physician-
patient dyad. This dyad is assumed to work together and choose among alternative
treatments based on its perceived comparative information on benefits of
treatments (throughout the paper, I regard benefits to represent benefits net of
harms). Comparative effectiveness and other evaluative research reveal
information on the benefits of treatments, which helps the physician-patient dyads
form perceptions of comparative effects and guides their treatment choice behavior.
At the population level, aggregate demand is affected. In line with the goals of
comparative effectiveness research, the question we will ask is how the alternative
treatments in question will be utilized and how optimal co-insurance rates would
vary from a social insurer's perspective under alternative informational regimes of
CER.

       The benefits anticipated by the physician-patient dyad before taking a
treatment may not always coincide with the true benefits experienced by a patient.
Anticipated benefits rely on CER results, which reveal incomplete information, such
as average benefits. In contrast to anticipated benefits, a normative ("true")
marginal benefits curve can be defined by the actual realization of the benefits of
treatments across individuals. Therefore, unless CER generates information to
precisely predict these ex-post outcomes for each patient, the true marginal benefit
schedule will differ from market demand.

      In Section 2, I highlight the link between CER information and decision-
making and discuss the potential deadweight losses induced by different levels of
information arising out of CER.

       In Section 3, I discuss methodological approaches to CER that can generate
more nuanced2 comparative information than what is typically produced by this line
of research. Specifically, I argue and provide rationale for an explicit and intensive
program within CER that is devoted towards discovering effects at the individual
level.

       To highlight the potential of novel econometric approaches to identify
individual heterogeneity in treatment effects, I draw from the economics literature


2
    That is, richer information on heterogeneity rather than higher precision of the average effects.
on program evaluation (Heckman and Robb, 1985; Heckman 1990, 1992; Manski
and Garfinkel, 1992; Heckman and Smith, 1998; Dehejia, 2005) and present an
illustrative example of the comparative effectiveness of substance abuse treatments.
I discuss how CER programs can build on such analyses by collecting additional data
that can help target specific treatments to patients. A broader discussion on how
individualized comparative effects can be generated follows in Section 4.



2. Comparative effectiveness information and decision making

        Let us begin with a problem of evaluating the comparative effectiveness of a
new treatment compared to a control/standard treatment for a population of N
patients indexed by i. Standard treatment may also include the do-nothing option.
Let the individual-level true treatment effect represent the benefits (net of harms)
of the new treatment over the control and is denoted by bi.3 Let p denote the price of
the new treatment which is also the marginal cost for manufacturing the new
treatment.4 (We will later relax the assumption of a constant marginal cost curve
and allow the price to be endogenous and vary with aggregate demand.)

          Patients are members of risk classes, Ωk , k ≤ N, which determine
heterogeneity in treatment effects across individuals through a production function
b(), i.e. bi = b(Ωk ). Risk classes may be defined by the combination of various risk
factors such as severity of illness, patient demographics, their genetic makeup,
preferences and many others factors. In order to predict an individual-level
treatment effect, one requires knowledge about both the patient's risk class Ωk and
the production function b(). CER is responsible for estimating the production
function.

       There are two types of decision makers, 1) the patient-physician dyad, which
we will refer to as the individual decision maker, is assumed to always have
knowledge about their risk class; and 2) an insurer or social planner who decides
the coinsurance rate for providing health insurance coverage for the new treatment.



3
  bi is composed of two parts, one that represents the potential health benefits of treatment and the
other that represents the potential harms of treatment including adverse events and the costs of
accessing the treatment (e.g. time costs etc). This is also in line with the Net Health Benefit's
approach in cost-effectiveness analysis (Stinnett and Mullahy, 1998 ).
4
  Here p can be seen as a normalized price, where the price of the standard/control treatment is assumed to
be zero.
2.1. The First best scenario

        Under complete information, both the insurer and the individuals are aware
of the risk classes and the production function and are able to perfectly predict bi.
Here, individuals will choose treatment only if bi - p ≥ 0, when they are exposed to
the full price of treatments. This is efficient. If individuals had full insurance they
would choose treatment if bi ≥ 0. Since the insurer can fully anticipate this
individual behavior, she can provide full coverage for treatment only for those
individuals who would experience benefits greater than cost and not provide
coverage for the rest. Thus, there is no efficiency loss due to moral hazard.

       Difficulties in achieving the first best scenario are mostly driven by three
conditions or their combinations. These conditions are the asymmetry of
information between decision makers, imperfect information to the decision makers
and incomplete information.



2.2. Scenario with asymmetry of information

        Asymmetry of information arises when individuals are assumed to be aware
of Ωk and b() and to be able to combine them to predict bi perfectly, but the insurer
cannot. Pauly and Blavin (2008) discuss the case of insurer having no information
on Ωk . In our terms, the insurer cannot identify individuals who belong to specific
risk classes even when they are aware of the production function b(). Consequently,
the insurer cannot exclude patients from coverage who would get treatment
benefits lower than the cost of treatment (i.e. bi - p < 0). This leads to moral hazard
(Pauly, 2008) and the insurer may offer coverage with a fractional conisurance rate
(c), which is the fraction of price a patient must pay in order to receive treatment.
Figure 1 illustrates this situation. The coinsurance rate is designed to deter
individuals (i.e. for whom bi - c∙p < 0) from taking treatments so that the resulting
moral hazard is traded off with the benefits of risk protection that insurance
coverage will provide (Manning and Marquis, 1996).

       One important aspect, which is typically kept implicit is most analyses under
asymmetry of information, is that patients who perceive bi < 0 (i.e. the patients at
the extensive margin), would automatically decline treatment even when such
treatment is offered for free.
                        $




                                                                                    p=MC

                      c.p




                      0


                                                                              # Patients


                                          Complete information demand curve
                                          Potential demand curve for bi<0
                                          Moral Hazard




Figure 1: Moral hazard with asymmetric information.



In Figure 1, the potential demand curve for patients with bi < 0 is shown with dotted
lines. Theoretically, it corresponds to having to pay patients money to accept
treatments that produce negative benefits. Such behavior is documented in the
literature on compensating wage-differentials where consumers accept higher
wages to accept riskier jobs (Thaler and Rosen 1975). However, in health care, such
behavior is non-existent and therefore when individuals have complete information
about bi, there is no demand for treatment among those with bi < 0. That is patients
will be demand-responsive to treatment (Chakley and Khalil, 2005). The
implications of such self-selection will be apparent below when these patients fail to
make such selections based on available information. 5


2.2. Scenario with imperfect information

       Pauly and Blavin (2008) extends their analyses to study the scenario where
patients do "not have demand curves that map the marginal benefit curves
generated by clinical evidence". That is, even though knowledge on b() is available,
patients have imperfect information and are unable to precisely predict bi.
Individuals end up either under or overestimating the benefits of treatment


5
 Such self selection behavior is studied extensively in the literature on program evaluation and
structural modeling (Heckman and Robb 1985; Heckman 1992; Manski and Garfinkel 1992;
Heckman and Smith 1998 ). In the context of health care, Meltzer et al. (2003) discuss how such self-
selection behavior based on patient preference heterogeneity may affect cost-effectiveness analyses.
conditional on their risk class. Pauly and Blavin show how optimal coinsurance
rates varies under these conditions and discuss potential ways to address the
inefficiency, which includes value-based insurance designs that can lower
copayments when patients underestimate benefits (Pauly and Held 1990) and vice
versa.



2.3. Scenarios with incomplete information

       Building on Pauly and Blavin's analyses, we study the case when clinical
evidence reveals incomplete information about the true (normative) marginal
benefit curve. We assume that individuals possess perfect information on clinical
evidence, but this evidence may be incomplete.6 We argue that moral hazard due to
insurance coverage is aggravated when clinical evidence only produces information
on average benefits.

        CER estimating average effects: Let individuals and the insurer rely on a CER
study that reveals information about the average incremental benefits of the new
treatment over control: B = Ei{b(Ωk )}. This expectation is over all patients including
those who would be harmed by treatment (bi < 0). Individuals and the insurer do
not have any additional information about the variability of comparative
effectiveness in the population. Consequently, individuals have a demand curve that
is simply an indicator, I(B>c∙p), and that is same for all individuals. If new
treatment is cost-effective on average, (i.e. B > p), then for any co-pay c≤1, all
patients will choose to receive the new treatment producing a large aggregate
demand for the treatment and an associated large amount of moral hazard as shown
in Figure 2.

        Since average comparative effectiveness information leads to higher demand
responsiveness to price and lower demand responsiveness to treatments,
outcomes-based payments may not be worthwhile (Chakley and Khalil, 2005).
Consequently, value-based insurance designs, which promote the use of treatments
that are cost-effective on average (Fendrick et al., 2001), will also promote this
inefficiency due to moral hazard.




6
 This assumption can be relaxed and results from Blavin and Pauly (2008) and Pauly and Held (1990) can
be applied over and above the results we obtain here.
                    $




                    B
                                                                                     p=MC

                  c.p




                   0

                                                                               # Patients


                               Incomplete (Average) information demand curve
                               Invisible full-information demand curve
                                Moral Hazard




Figure 2: Moral hazard with incomplete (average) CER information.

         Given various constraints on time and production and restricted market
entry for medical treatments, the marginal cost curve may be increasing over
quantity in many realistic situations. In such a scenario, the moral hazard loss is
worsened by the increase in equilibrium prices that accompanies the increase in
aggregate demand (Jena and Philipson, 2009; Basu and Philipson, 2010) (Figure 3).
In fact, the equilibrium price may end up being higher than p and even B.
Consequently, besides a larger moral hazard, a portion of the consumer surplus and
wealth will be transferred to the producers. Combined together, they would incur a
large strain on the demand of health insurance due to the high premiums that the
insurer needs to charge in order to offset such inefficiencies.

                       $

                                                                                      MC

                    B



                   c.p
                   0




                                                                               # Patients


                               Incomplete (Average) information demand curve
                               Invisible full-information demand curve
                                Moral Hazard




Figure 3: Moral hazard with incomplete (average)                                  CER information and
upward sloping marginal cost curve.
        Individualization using nuanced subgroup-specific CER: If CER can evolve to
reveal more information on risk classes and their associated treatment effects,
individual demand curves will begin to map to the true normative marginal benefit
curves. At the limit, when sufficient heterogeneity in comparative effects is revealed
it is possible to approach the first best solution described above.

        Thus with individualized information, expected demand curves begin to be
less price responsive and more responsive to treatments. This enhances the role of
VBID both as an outcome-based payment mechanism (Chakley and Khalil, 2005)
and also in scenarios when clinical evidence map the true marginal benefits curve
but the patients have imperfect information and their perception of benefits fall
short of it (Pauly and Blavin, 2008).



2.3. Scenarios with combinations of incomplete, imperfect and asymmetry of
information

       Consider the situation when the insurer relies on a CER that reveals
incomplete information about the average benefits of alternative treatments, B. The
insurer also believes that individuals do not possess any private information that
can enable them to predict individualized treatment effects. However, individuals
may have additional information on b() so that that can anticipate bi based on their
own risk class. This creates asymmetry of information between insurer and
individuals. Two specific situations where such anticipation is plausible are: 1)
where medical knowledge and experience enable physicians to help patients
anticipate bi , rather imperfectly, based on levels of their risk classes, even though no
formal CER estimates on such heterogeneity exist. 2) Individuals have an
opportunity to reveal bi perfectly, using trial and error methods on both treatments
within a short period of time, without any noticeable effects on their long-term
benefits (i.e. costless trial and error method) and then self-select into treatments
that maximize their individual benefit. Such situations are quite common in the use
of pharmaceutical treatments for chronic diseases, in which clinicians help patients
navigate through a series of choices to select a drug that can provide the maximum
benefit to that individual.

       Under either of these situations, the expected demand curve perceived by
the insurer is generally flatter (typical of that in Figure 2) than the empirical
expected demand curve in the population set by individual -level behavior. Since the
insurer then anticipates higher levels of moral hazard than would be true with
complete information, she is more likely to charge a higher co-insurance rate and/or
demand a higher premium in this population. At the limit, an insurer may be
reluctant to provide any coverage in some of these situations even though providing
it would lead to Pareto improvement.

        A corollary for this result is that when the insurer is faced with the decision
of whether to curb coverage on certain products, it will often be useful to learn
about how individuals are making treatment choices in the presence of coverage
and the benefits they are realizing on choosing or not choosing a treatment. This
will enable the insurer to align her perceived expected demand curve with the
information set (which may include imperfect information to the individuals) on
which individual treatment choices are based. Not only the insurer would benefit
from knowing the complete marginal schedule of benefits but also from learning
about whether individuals have imperfect anticipations of these benefits (Dehejia,
2005). Our empirical example on the comparative effects of substance abuse
treatments on crime highlights the role of econometric methods in enabling such
alignment. It can also help generate and disseminate more nuanced comparative
effectiveness information that could help in individualization.



3. Econometrics for individualized comparative effectiveness research (iCER)

       Substance abuse treatments (SATs) can reduce crime, improve health, increase
employment, and reduce spread of infectious diseases such as HIV (IOM 2000). There is
strong evidence that SATs are effective in lowering abuse of various substances over
relatively long periods of time (McClellan et al., 1996; Simpson et al., 2002). Crime
reductions, however, account for much of the economic benefits of SAT (French et al.
2002; McCollister and French 2003; Dismuke et al. 2004; Sindelar et al. 2004). Types of
SAT vary.

       The goal of our empirical analysis is to generate information about the benefits
(reduction in the number of armed robberies) of one treatment over another at the
individual level. This is in contrast to the goals of a traditional comparative effectiveness
study that aims to ascertain which treatment would produce the largest reduction in
crime on average. The distribution of the estimated individualized incremental benefits
between two treatments can be used to create the marginal benefits schedule across all
patients. We can also identify patients on this schedule who choose to receive specific
treatments and therefore form an alternative schedule of marginal benefits only among
patients who chose a particular treatment. Comparing the schedule of marginal benefits
across all patients versus that among patients who choose a specific treatment can help
an insurer learn about the level of imperfect information that individuals possess and
therefore help her to make a more efficient decision on coverage.



3a Data

        The individual-level data comes from the 1992-97 National Treatment
Improvement Evaluation Study (NTIES), a large sample size of voluntary (i.e. those
who are not mandated to receive treatments by the judicial system) SAT clients
across three principal modalities. NTIES has a higher follow-up response rate (82%)
than any comparable client-level follow-up treatment survey (Gerstein and Johnson
2000; Flynn et al. 2001; Gerstein and Johnson 2001). The sample is drawn from
units supported by the Center for Substance Abuse Treatment. Compared with
nationally representative client surveys, NTIES included a higher percentage of
criminal justice clients. It is therefore well suited to analyses of a criminally active
client population (Zarkin et al. 2002).

       NTIES is especially useful because its pre-SAT and post-SAT measures record
whether respondents have committed armed robbery and other offenses, and the
number of any such offenses based on a self-report, in ranges (0, 1, 2-5, 6-20, 21-
100, 100+). We convert this into a count variable using the mid-points of the
intervals (0=0; 1=1; 2-5 = 3.5; 6-20=13.5; 21-100 = 60; 100+ = 100).

        In line with our previous analyses with this data (Basu et al., 2008), we
restricted our analysis to self-volunteering clients. Other clients include referrals
from judicial systems and it is not clear which criteria were used to make SAT
selections. We dropped observations from one long-term treatment modality, which
included only 8 respondents. We compare three treatment modalities: residential
short-term (N=675), residential long-term (N=854), and ambulatory outpatient
(N=1,580) treatment.



3b Potential outcomes and treatment effects between two treatments
      We built on the potential outcomes literature in economics and statistics (Roy
1951; Rubin 1974, 1978; Holland, 1986) and write a structural model for pre and post
outcomes. Let Yt=0 = pre-period outcomes; Ytk==10,1 = post–period potential outcomes with
treatment k, and the production functions for these outcomes be:7
                                                             Y10 = Xα10 + θλ10 + ε 10
            Y0 = Xα0 + θλ0 + ε 0                                                               ( 1 )
                                                             Y11 = Xα11 + θλ11 + ε 11

X represents a vector of observed characteristics (factors) and θ represents a vector
of unobserved characteristics (factors). Treatment selections occur between the pre
and post periods. Both X and θ affect treatment selection and therefore are
represent observed and unobserved confounders respectively . Combinations of
levels of X and θ represents the risk classes denoted by Ωk in Section 2.
            The parameter vectors α and λ represent the coefficients (factor loadings) on
the observed and unobserved factors respectively. By construction,
(λ10 − λ0 )& (λ11 − λ0 ) represent the within-treatment (over time) heterogeneity in
outcomes while (λ11 − λ10 ) represents the between-treatment heterogeneity effects
in the post period (or how the over-time effects on outcome vary across
treatments).
      The main parameter of interest to the traditional CER literature has been the
Average Treatment Effect (ATE) or the Conditional Average Treatment Effect
(CATE) that is conditional on the levels (x) of observed confounders X (Vanness and
Mullahy 2006) .
           CATE(x) = E(Y11 − Y10 | X = x ) = x(α11 − α10 )

           ATE =    ∑ CATE( x ) ⋅ f ( x ) = ∑
                        x                         x
                                                      x(α11 − α10 ) ⋅ f ( x )                  ( 2 )

Other relevant mean treatment effect parameter from a policy perspective involves
the Conditional Effect on the Treated (CTT) and the Conditional Effect on the
Untreated (CTUT).
           CTT(x) = E(Y11 − Y10 | D = 1, X = x ) = x(α11 − α10 ) + E(θ (λ11 − λ10 )| D = 1)

           CTUT(x) = E(Y11 − Y10 | D = 0, X = x ) = x(α11 − α10 ) + E(θ (λ11 − λ10 )| D = 0) ,         ( 3 )




7
    Here, linearity is assumed for simplicity, without losing the general point of the discussion.
where D =I(treatment choice). Population average or unconditional versions of the
Effect on the Treated (TT) and the Untreated (TUT) can be obtained by integrating
over the distribution of observed characteristics (Heckman and Robb 1985).
      Finally, individualized mean effect parameter is given by the marginal
treatment effect parameter, which conditions on levels, x and ɵ, of both observed
and unobserved confounders (Heckman and Vytlacil 1999):
       MTE(X = x, θ=ɵ) = E(Y11 − Y10 ) = x(α11 − α10 ) +ɵ (λ11 − λ10 )             ( 4 )

MTEs represent average effects for thinner margins in the population defined by
levels of both X and θ. They represent bi, the building blocks for the normative
marginal benefits curve, described in Section 2.
      It is clear from the above expressions that in the absence of between-
treatment heterogeneity, i.e., λ11 = λ10 , all of the TT(x), TUT(x) and the MTE(x, ɵ)
parameters converge to the CATE(x) parameter. This is an important condition as
it simplifies the evaluation problem considerably. Meeting this condition implies
that treatment effects are not heterogeneous over unobserved confounders and
treatment-effect heterogeneity can be studied entirely based on observed
confounders.


3c Traditional econometric approach
        The most popular method to analyze such pre-post data is to use fixed effects
modeling, which works under the assumption that durable and unobserved client
characteristics that may be correlated with treatment selection are eliminated
through a difference-in-difference (DID) approach (Bertrand et al . 2004). However,
it is not clear, what parameter a DID estimator ends up estimating.
    More generally, observed outcome in the post-period is given
by Y1 = DY11 + (1 − D)Y10 . This representation is Quandt's switching regression
framework (Quandt 1958, 1972). Therefore, a difference-in-difference estimator,
which estimates the expected difference between pre and post outcomes for each
treatment will produce:
E(Y1 − Y0 | X = x , D = 1) − E(Y1 − Y0 | X = x , D = 0)
= E(Y11 − Y0 | X = x , D = 1) − E(Y10 − Y0 | X = x , D = 0)
  (               )                                          (     )
= xα11 − xα0 + E(θ (λ11 − λ0 )| D = 1) − xα10 − xα0 − E(θ (λ10 − λ0 )| D = 0)
= ( xα   1
         1   − xα ) + E(θ (λ
                   0
                   1
                                  1
                                  1   − λ0 )| D = 1) − E(θ (λ10 − λ0 )| D = 0)
= ( xα   1
         1   − xα ) + E(θ (λ
                   0
                   1
                                  1
                                  1   − λ10 )| D = 1) + (λ10 − λ0 ) ⋅ {E(θ | D = 1) − E(θ | D = 0)}

≠CTT(x) or CTUT(x) or CATE(x) or MTE(x,ɵ)                                                                ( 5 )

Thus, in the presence of both within- and between-treatment effect heterogeneity, the
DID estimator produces results with no clear interpretations (LaLaonde, 1986; Heckman,
1978; 1990). In the absence of within-treatment heterogeneity ( λ10 = λ0 ), CTT(x) is
identified. While in the absence of both within- & between-treatment heterogeneity
( λ11 = λ10 = λ0 ), CATE(x) is identified.



3d A structural model based approach to analyzing comparative effectiveness of SATs
    To address the limitations of the traditional econometric approach, we directly
estimate parameters from a structural model for potential outcomes that allows for
both within- and between-treatment heterogeneity in outcomes. When self-
selection is present, a patient's choice of treatment is based on his anticipation of
benefits conditional on the idiosyncratic levels of his observed and unobserved
characteristics. This anticipation may be imperfect and not always coincide with the
realized (potential) benefits. On average, however, such anticipation would lead
more patients to choose the better treatment for themselves. We use a latent factor
to represent the unobserved durable characteristics of the patients, based on which
patients select treatments. We specify a model for treatment choice that is based on
patient's anticipated benefits and models for potential outcomes that are based on
the patient's realized benefits.
Treatment choice model:
    Individuals (i) maximize a latent random utility in order to choose
treatment: Di = Argmax k { Lik } ; k = 0 (Outpatient), 1(Short-term), 2 (Long-term).
Following the traditional random utility model in economics (MacFadden, 1974,
Manski, 1975), the treatment specific random utility is given as:
             Lik = β k1 + β k2 ⋅ X i + β k3 ⋅ θ1i + ν ik ,                                       ( 6 )
                           
where each coefficient in ( β21 , β22 , β23 ) is normalized to zero. X represent the vector
                                                                    
of observed characteristics. We have added the '~' to differentiate the notation of a
vector for a scalar quantity. For example, the unobserved characteristics (to the
analyst) are scaled to be represented by one latent factor θ1 , and ν k denotes the
random error.8


Pre-SAT outcomes model:
Yi 0 = exp(α10 + α 20 ⋅ X i + α30 ⋅θ1i ) + ε i 0 ,                                              ( 7 )
                  
where we use a log-linear model for the non-negative outcomes.9
Post-SAT outcomes model:
Yi k1 = exp(α11
             k
                + α 21
                    k
                       ⋅ X i + α31
                                k
                                   ⋅θ1i ) + ε ik1 ,      k = Treatments; 0, 1, 2;               ( 8 )
                         
      The goal of our analysis is to recover the joint distribution of pre-post
changes in crime under alternative treatments: F ( Δ 0i , Δ1i , Δ 2i ) , where Δ ki = Yi1k − Yi 0 ,
which would require us to identify F (Yi 0 ,Yi1k ) , k=1, 2, 3. Note, however, that we do
not directly observe Yi k1 , but only Yi 1 = I( Di = k ) ⋅ Yi1k . Therefore, we only observe the
conditional joint distributions F (Yi 0 ,Yi1k | Di = k ) , which are different than the
unconditional distributions F (Yi 0 ,Yi1k ) due to confounders that affect these outcomes
and also determine selection into treatment. In our above formulations, we
represent a reduced form of these confounders using the latent factor θ1i. Once we
identify θ1i and account for its effect on outcomes, we can not only solve the
selection bias (i.e. make ν k ╨ ε 0 ╨ ε 1k |θ1 , X , ╨ denoting statistical independence) but
                                                 
can also recover the unconditional distribution F (Yi 0 ,Yi1k ) or F ( μi 0 , μik1 ) , where
 μi 0 = E(Yi 0 | X i ,θi ,α0 ) and μik1 = E(Yi1k | X i ,θi ,α1k ) . However, in order to identify θ1i
                                                           
independent from its effects ( α30 and α31              k
                                                           ) on outcomes, we must rely on the
observed conditional joint distribution of F (Yi 0 , Lik | Di = k ) and F (Yi1k , Lik | Di = k ) , for k
= 0, 1. These added conditional covariances help us identify the following vector of
parameters: { β31 , β32 ,α30 ,α31
                               0
                                  ,α31
                                    1
                                       ,α31
                                         2
                                            ,Var(θ1 )} . These parameters, along with the
regression coefficients on observed covariates, which are identified using traditional

8
  The dependence of choices on pre-SAT outcomes is accounted for by the structural model of pre-SAT
outcomes in (20) that is also dependent of X and θ1 .
9                                             
  This is in line with standard statistical models used for count data. In fact, the specification in a structural
model for potential outcomes is usually not driven by theory, as is the case for any standard outcomes
regression model. Therefore, goodness of fit tests are conducted by testing the adequacy of fit.
regression approaches, can be used to construct the unconditional distribution
F ( μi 0 , μik1 ) . The semi-parametric identification strategy is detailed in Appendix A.

       For estimation, we let Yi 0 ~ Poisson( μi 0 ) , Yi 1 ~ Poisson( I( Di = k ) ⋅ μik1 ) , and gave
non-informative priors on all parameters: θi 1 ~ Normal(0,σ θ21 ),σ θ1 ~ Uniform(0,10)
and all regression coefficients ~ Normal (0, 10E-6). Treatment choice model was
estimated using: Di ~ Multinomial(π0, π1, π2) with logit link, β32 = 1 . All other logit
coefficients ~ Normal (0, 10E-6). For sensitivity analysis, we also analyzed with
alternative prior specifications for θi1 ~ Uniform( −10,10) . Posterior distribution of
parameters was obtained via MCMC (Gibbs-Metropolis-Hastings) using WinBUGs
software. Three independent chains were generated using an MCMC sampling
technique. Each of these chains was started with random starting values dispersed
across the support of the parameter space. The first 10,000 iterations were
discarded (burn-ins).


3f Results
    Table 1 presents the descriptive statistics for individuals who were enrolled in
different SATs. Patients who chose outpatient treatments were slightly older than
the other two modalities. Long-stay patients were more likely to be females, while
short-stay patients were less likely to be blacks. Various other differences in
observed characteristics exist between the modalities. The baseline number of
robberies committed was much higher for patients choosing long-stay treatment
than for either outpatient or short-stay treatments.
    The MCMC results show reasonably quick convergence (assessed via the
Gelman-Rubin statistic (Gelman and Rubin, 1992) and good mixing of the
independent chains. Moderate autocorrelation was found between subsequent
draws for each chain, and consequently thinning of 20 was applied to obtain our
posterior samples. The posterior means for the latent factor were -0.0001 for the
overall data and 0.0005, 0.005 and -0.008 for subjects selecting outpatient, long-
term and short-term treatments respectively. The posterior standard deviation was
0.08 and by design, the same in all groups. Correlation between the latent factor and
the observed covariates ranged from -0.05 (primary addiction to alcohol) to 0.06
(primary addiction to cocaine). Results were found to be robust to alternative
specification of priors for the latent factor.
    Table 2 presents the estimated coefficients from the treatment choice model.
Among other factors predicting choice, we find that patients with higher levels of
the latent factor are significantly more likely to choose short-stay treatment over
outpatient treatment (given that higher levels of the latent factor are artificially
made to associate with a greater likelihood of choosing long-stay treatment over
outpatient treatment). Table 2 also presents coefficient estimates from the
outcomes models. We find that the latent factor significantly affects outcomes in
both the pre and the post period and under all treatment modalities. We find
significant within-treatment (over time) heterogeneity in effects under outpatient
treatment. We also find significant between-treatment heterogeneity in effects.
    Table 3 shows a cross-table for the predicted number of robberies. The rows
signify the observed treatment groups while the columns signify the potential
treatment groups. That is, outcomes in cell (A, B) represent what would have
happened if the group of individuals who had originally received treatment A had
received treatment B instead. First we find that the model predictions tally well with
the observed quantities both in the subgroups and also overall. The pre-period
goodness of fit is especially a testament for the validity of our model, as the
predictions on armed robbery were able to discriminate between the three
treatment groups without a treatment-specific indicator or treatment-specific
coefficients in the pre-period model. That is, this discriminatory ability is entirely
generated by the latent factor.
    Interesting and policy-relevant comparative effectiveness results (TT and ATE)
come out of this analysis that would have been masked using the traditional
econometric approaches (Table 3). Among patients choosing outpatient treatment,
outpatient treatment produces the largest reduction in armed robberies per patient
(-0.57 (0.02), p< 0.0001).10 Compared to the second best treatment in this group,
the short-stay treatment, these reductions were bigger by -0.10 (se = 0.19, p=0.60)
robberies per patient.
    Among patients choosing short-stay residential treatment, the short-stay
treatment produces the largest reduction in robberies per patient (-0.53 (0.03) p <
0.0001). However, it is estimated that outpatient treatment could have also
produced a similar magnitude of reductions, the difference between the two
modalities being not significant. Figure 4a illustrates the different marginal benefits

10
     Note that the p-value reported is the Bayesian analog of the frequentist p-value.
curves for short-stay versus outpatient under alternative information regimes.
Based on average benefit (incomplete) information, the curve perceived by the
insurer would be flat and indicate that on average short-stay treatment would
prevent fewer robberies that outpatient treatment. However, current analyses may
help the insurer realize that the normative marginal benefits curve (formed using
estimated MTEs) is downward sloping. Moreover, the individualized marginal
benefits curve realized amongst those who select short-stay treatment (presumably
based on imperfect information on MTEs) indicates that a majority of subjects who
would have obtained small benefits or negative benefits from short-stay treatment
over outpatient do not choose short-stay. Nevertheless, there remain opportunities
to improve.
    Finally, among patients choosing the long-stay residential treatment, outpatient
treatment (-1.06 (0.04) p < 0.0001)) and not the long-stay treatment (-0.87 (0.04), p
< 0.0001) is expected to produce the biggest reduction in robberies per patient on
average, the difference being statistically significant (-0.20 (0.03), p < 0.0001). The
average treatment effect was highest for the outpatient treatment, signifying that if
one treatment were to replace all other treatments in this population, it must be the
outpatient modality. In fact, based on the current choices that these patients are
making, the average “as-treated” effect, which produces a reduction of -0.64
robberies per patient, is less (by 0.05 robberies per patient, (se= 0.01, p < 0.0001))
than the reductions that could be achieved by having outpatient treatment as the
only treatment available. From the SP's point of view, if heterogeneity is not
revealed, the average effects argue for a restriction on coverage on short-term and
long-term residential treatment. However, looking at the treatment effects on
treated for individual treatments, it is apparent that the inefficiency in “as-treated”
results compared to the average treatment effect is generated solely by patients
choosing long-term residential treatment. Interestingly, however, not all patients
choosing the long-term treatment are making suboptimal choices.
                                                                   Marginal Benefits Curves



                                        2
                                                                                Individualized for ALL
                                                                                Realized for those receiving short-stay
            Marginal Armed Robberies Prevented                                  Average Treatment Effect
                                         1                                      Average Effect on the Treated
                  (Short Stay - Outpatient
                 -1          0          -2




                                                 0                  1000                   2000                    3000
                                                                           Number of patients


                                                                             (a)

                                                                   Among Long-stay Users
                         100




                                                 with Outpatient
                                                 with Short-stay
                         75  25 50
             E(change with other Trt)
            -50 -25    0 -100 -75




                                        -100            -75         -50        -25          0           25           50
                                                                      E(change with Long-stay)


                                                                             (b)

Figure 4: (a) Marginal benefits curve for short-stay versus outpatient under alternative
information regimes. (b) Distribution of individual level treatment effects among patients
who chose to receive long-stay residential treatment.
    Figure 4b shows the joint distribution of predicted individual-level effects
(MTEs) under the three treatment modalities for patients who in practice chose the
long-term treatment. Each dot represents a patient and dots below the 45-degree
line represent a patient who made suboptimal choices by selecting long-term
treatment. As evident from the figure, there is considerable heterogeneity in effects.
In fact, we estimate that 52% of patients receiving long-term treatment make
suboptimal choices and that the value of achieving individualization that could
overcome these inefficient choices is about 0.36 robberies per person.
Corresponding numbers for patients choosing outpatient or short-term treatment
are 98% and 0.08 or 59% and 0.08 respectively. In these later modalities, even
though patients appear to make suboptimal choices, the net gain achieved if
individualization could be attained is relatively low. Overall, the value of
individualized care over all treatment modalities could achieve a further reduction
in 0.16 robberies per patient. Compare that to a policy that only relies on the
average treatment effect and offers outpatient treatment to everyone, and achieves
only an additional reduction of 0.05 robberies per patient compared to the average
as-treated effects.


4. Discussions

        The $2.5 trillion in health care costs in United States constituted
approximately 18 percent of GDP in 2009, and at current rates of growth, health
care will exceed one-fourth of GDP by 2025 (Sisko et al., 2009; CBO, 2008). As part
of a portfolio of innovative public policies that are aimed to address this challenge,
public investments in comparative effectiveness research (CER) are viewed as
worthwhile endeavors by payers, providers and patients (ACES Testimony, 2009).
Identifying options that work on average creates winners and losers by influencing
physician decision making or through coverage decisions that favor the winners,
and may substantially induce demand for the winners (Meltzer et al. 2007). This
can, in turn, lead to increases in prices for those options, and therefore cannot
guarantee decreases in overall expenditures (Basu and Philipson, 2010). More
importantly, patient welfare may increase on average but is not likely to achieve the
full potential that can be tapped through individualization (Basu & Meltzer, 2007;
Basu, 2009).
       In this paper, it is argued that divulging individual-level heterogeneity in
treatment effects is essential to realize the full potential of CER. The core of this
argument lies in understanding how CER information influences the behavior of
individual patients and their providers, which in turn produces a market demand
curve, as well as in helping a population-level policymaker anticipate a market
demand curve for a treatment. CER focused on producing average effects results in
an empirical market demand curve and also a perceived demand curve that is flatter
or more elastic than it truly should be. Consequently, the decision making that
follows may lead to perverse results from a welfare perspective. Individualization,
on the other hand, reveals the true (normative) downward-sloping demand curve
and enables decision makers to make improved choices and policies, which can
assure that health is neither compromised nor distributed inequitably.
        The potential impact on patients' well-being due to individualized CER (i-
CER) can very well be orders of magnitude larger than is possible with the current
state of CER (Basu 2009). For example, individualization based on preference
heterogeneity in prostate cancer patients was found to produce benefits that are
worth 100 times more than identifying better treatment based on average
preferences (Basu and Meltzer 2007). Similar empirical evidence on the evaluation
of SATs are presented in this paper.
        Ideas of individualization and its appropriate uses can have strong
implications for how comparative effectiveness research is practiced in general.
Despite the growing consensus that individualization should be a central part of CER
(Garber and Tunis, 2009), there is little discussion about how such individualized
effects can be estimated. Addressing treatment effect heterogeneity using
“hypothesis testing"-driven approaches by subgroups, which has become the
traditional approach to comparative effectiveness research, can be an extremely
inefficient process of information generation. This is because, more often than not,
treatment effects vary over subgroups that are defined by the complex interactions
of many patient characteristics. Thus the number of sub-groups over which
treatment effect heterogeneity should potentially be studied are numerous and
cannot possibly be tested (even after adjustments of p-values) using a priori
specification of subgroups.
       A key approach to such a problem is to be able to develop prediction
algorithms for individual-level treatment effect heterogeneity. Such algorithms can
be constructed without identifying low-dimensional individualized characteristics
such as genomic information, but rather by collapsing multi (high)-dimensional
outcomes and behavior into individual-level latent characteristics, which can be
used to establish individualized treatment effects. These prediction algorithms can
be viewed as a hypothesis generation exercise at the individual level. However,
these algorithms have two extremely useful implications for comparative
effectiveness research. First, any attempt to individualize care based on prediction
algorithms must begin with a hypothesis generation exercise and therefore these
results can provide valuable resources to clinicians and policymakers, who in their
absence much rely on traditional comparative effectiveness results on averages. The
necessity of an algorithmic approach lies in the feasibility of translating enormous
amounts of information to the bedside, without overwhelming physicians. Second,
these results will provide key input to any confirmatory randomized trial evaluating
and improving such prediction algorithms.
        For example, although our empirical analysis reveal considerable treatment
effect heterogeneity across different SAT modalities, the cost of implementing an
individualized schedule of treatment assignment may be costly. An algorithmic
approach to CER can help reduce the cost of implementation in this regard and can
therefore produce value. Identifying the patient characteristics that lead to
suboptimal choices can help to reallocate by allowing more careful consideration of
treatment choices. Table 4 identifies the factors responsible for suboptimal
treatment choices among patients who chose the long-term modality. Note that this
information is only obtainable because we have identified individual-level treatment
effects and therefore can identify suboptimal treatment choices ex-post. Table 4
suggests that secondary addiction to alcohol or cocaine was the only factor that
predicted long-term residential treatment to be a suboptimal choice. The latent
factor was not significantly associated with suboptimal choices. However, future
research, which collects a wider range of patient-level characteristics, can identify
components of this latent factor and can further enhance the individualization of
comparative effectiveness in this field. Future research should also study the
simultaneous affect of these treatments on a multi-dimensional vector of outcomes
that are relevant for these patients (Sindelar et al., 2004).
        Current data from many observational studies and some clinical trials (such
as the NIMH sponsored CATIE trial, Stroup et al., 2003) contain information to
identify the joint distribution of potential outcomes but only when paired with novel
methods such as those that use (latent) factor models (Munkin and Trivedi, 2003;
Heckman and Navarro, 2003) and control-functions (Florens et al., 2008). The bases
for these approaches lie in using patients’ clinical history and behavior as outcomes
of underlying (latent) processes and characteristics rather than as determinants of
the comparative effects and thereby identify these latent factors and use them to
establish individualized comparative effectiveness. Investing in pragmatic trials
(Tunis et al., 2003) by focusing more on adaptive trials (Cheng and Berry, 2007),
adaptive assignments within trials (Murphy, 2005), and cross-over designs (Senn,
2002) could help generate data that potentially have the identifying information for
individual effects—but such an approach still needs to be paired with the right
analytical tools to salvage this information. Observational studies can play a crucial
role in this process as they carry rich information about choices. Investing in
longitudinal databases, measurements of cognitive and non-cognitive capabilities of
patients that are predictive of behavior, and outcomes and development of novel
methods in this field will be the key to achieving this ambitious paradigm of CER.
Therefore, a commitment to further develop and refine these methodologies seems
to be of significant scope within the CER agenda.
       A crucial challenge lies in translating the enormous volume and rich evidence
on individualized care to the bedside. Leveraging health information technology to
enable seamless translation will also be crucial for this purpose. The current
administration’s investments in both comparative effectiveness and health
information technology are a major step toward achieving a more efficient health
care system. It remains to be seen whether researchers, providers and payers can
take this opportunity to deliver on the expectations.
        Finally, individualized CER can guide research prioritization in the future. It
can identify misalignments between individual and social decision making, in terms
of anticipation of potential outcomes and behavior at both levels, and direct future
research to eliminate such misalignments and enhance social welfare. Even when
decision making at the two levels becomes aligned, it is important to understand the
dependence in potential outcomes that is driven by unobserved or non-forecastable
heterogeneity at the individual level. Future research that transforms a portion of
today’s uncertainty about comparative effects (deemed to be first-order) into
identifiable/observable heterogeneity (e.g. genetic and epigenetic factors) in
comparative effects can improve welfare through better individual and social
decision making in the future.
Identification

Identification is required for the following set of parameters:
{ β31 , β32 ,α30 ,α31
                   0
                      ,α31
                        1
                           ,α31
                             2
                                ,Var(θ1 )} . The rest of the regression coefficients are
identified based on the variances of Y, X and their covariances using traditional
regression approaches. What follows is conditional on estimating these other
regression coefficients. The following details the sequence of identification of all the
remaining parameters in the models:
                    Identification Strategy                        Normalization             Indentify
         Cov( L ,Y0 ) ∝ E( β ⋅ θ1 ⋅ exp(α30 ⋅ θ1 ))
                2             2
                              3
                                                                      1) β32 = 1            Var(θ1 ) ⋅ α30
                        ≈ β32 ⋅ Var(θ1 ) ⋅ α30
      (By 2nd order Taylor series approximation)
       Similarly, Cov( L1 ,Y0 ) ≈ β31 ⋅ Var(θ1 ) ⋅ α 30                    -                     β31
     Cov(Y10 ,Y0 | D = 0) ≈ α31
                             0
                                ⋅ Var(θ1 | D = 0) ⋅ α30    2) Var(θ1 | D = 0) = Var(θ1 )        α31
                                                                                                 0


         Cov( L1 ,Y10 ) ≈ β31 ⋅ Var(θ1 | D = 0) ⋅ α31
                                                   0                       -                Var(θ1 ),α30
         Cov( L1 ,Y11 ) ≈ β31 ⋅ Var(θ1 | D = 1) ⋅ α31
                                                   1
                                                            3) Var(θ1 | D = 1) = Var(θ1 )        α31
                                                                                                  1


            Cov( L1 ,Y12 ) ≈ β31 ⋅ Var(θ1 ) ⋅ α31
                                               2 +                         -                     α31
                                                                                                  2


+   Var(θ1 | D = 2) = Var(θ1 ) because of normalizations 2) and 3).
Table 1: Descriptives of patients under each SAT
                                               Outpatient   Short -stay   Long-stay
 Descriptives                                    N=1580       N=675        N=854

Age (years), mean (sd)                           32.41         30.97         30.27
                                                (9.15)        (7.45)        (8.04)
Female                                          27.5%         29.3%         52.2%
Non-Hispanic Black                              62.2%         44.6%         62.8%
Hispanics                                       14.6%         16.6%         10.0%
Currently married                               20.1%         25.8%         15.5%
Ever homeless in last 12 months                 16.8%         19.9%         26.0%
Released from jail/prison in last 12 months     38.1%         44.4%         34.2%
Child in Household                              24.6%         18.7%         24.8%
No income in last 12 months                     10.5%         10.4%         10.9%
No wage income in last 12 months                49.9%         34.1%         55.6%
Wage income < $3000 in last 12 months           19.2%         17.2%         19.3%
Medicaid                                        29.2%          8.9%         26.0%
Primary addiction to cocaine                    38.9%         32.6%         60.5%
Primary addiction to alcohol                    38.1%         19.9%         15.3%
Secondary addiction to cocaine/alcohol          39.3%         39.6%         53.2%
Pre-period armed robberies, mean (sd)         0.66 (6.05)   0.63 (5.34)   1.25 (7.03)
Post-period armed robberies, mean (sd)        0.09 (0.89)   0.1 (1.06)    0.38 (4.17)
Table 2: Posterior mean and standard deviation estimates for regression coefficients.

                                          Treatment Choice Model                                  Outcomes Models
                                      Short-stay vs    Long-stay vs      Pre-period         Post-period      Post-period      Post-period
                                        Outpatient       Outpatient                          Outpatient       Short-stay       Long-stay
Age (years)                           -0.03 (0.01)+    -0.003 (0.01)     -0.28 (0.04)+     -0.08 (0.02)+     -0.11 (0.06)    -0.42 (0.05)+
Female                                 1.16 (0.11)+     0.62 (0.12)+     -2.59 (0.56)+     -1.71 (0.43)+     2.41 (1.04)+     -0.16 (0.57)
Non-Hispanic Black                    -0.72 (0.13)+     -0.7 (0.13)+       0.32 (0.51)      -0.31 (0.35)      -1.2 (0.82)    -1.41 (0.54)+
Hispanics                             -0.72 (0.17)+     -0.24 (0.16)      -0.32 (0.61)       0.39 (0.39)      0.12 (1.22)      0.01 (0.7)
Currently married                      -0.13 (0.13)     0.41 (0.13)+      -0.33 (0.63)     -1.85 (0.65)+    -4.93 (1.61)+     2.74 (0.79)+
Ever homeless                          0.45 (0.12)+     0.41 (0.13)+      2.62 (0.48)+      1.76 (0.31)+       1.2 (1.01)     4.05 (0.55)+
Released from jail/prison              -0.03 (0.11)      0.05 (0.11)      1.87 (0.44)+       0.82 (0.3)+     2.46 (1.07)+     2.72 (0.49)+
Child in household                     -0.22 (0.12)    -0.33 (0.13)+      -0.69 (0.62)        0.2 (0.38)     -2.44 (1.78)      0.1 (0.69)
No income                               0.04 (0.12)    -0.86 (0.13)+      0.63 (0.52)        0.15 (0.37)     2.75 (1.23)+     3.69 (0.66)+
No wage income                          0.02 (0.14)    -0.69 (0.15)+      0.11 (0.55)       0.94 (0.38)+     4.23 (1.19)+     2.25 (0.69)+
Wage income < $3000                     0.06 (0.17)      0.11 (0.19)       0.81 (0.61)      -0.16 (0.48)     -2.57 (1.35)    -3.95 (0.72)+
Medicaid                              -0.48 (0.12)+    -1.32 (0.16)+       0.95 (0.52)       0.27 (0.33)   -24.75 (14.08)    -1.96 (0.52)+
Pr. addiction to cocaine               0.65 (0.13)+    -0.67 (0.13)+       0.22 (0.51)      -0.27 (0.35)     -0.87 (0.74)     6.25 (0.75)+
Pr. addiction to alcohol              -0.73 (0.14)+    -1.49 (0.14)+     -1.29 (0.59)+     -0.91 (0.37)+   -26.64 (13.71)     4.66 (0.73)+
Sec. addiction to cocaine/alcohol       0.44 (0.1)+      -0.06 (0.1)      1.81 (0.43)+      0.61 (0.29)+     -0.44 (1.04)      0.04 (0.47)
Theta                                 3.08 (1.06)+            1        37.09 (11.39)+     19.27 (6.03)+     33.05 (9.9)+    30.72 (9.88)+
_cons                                  -0.8 (0.17)+     0.68 (0.15)+    -11.98 (1.14)+      -6.09 (0.7)+   -13.36 (2.99)+   -19.61 (1.94)+
+: Bayes p-val <0.05                                                      diff with pre
                                                                         in Theta coeff   -17.8 (5.9)+       -4.0 (7.4)     -6.37 (3.55)
Table 3: Observed and predicted armed robberies ( posterior mean and standard deviations)
Observed                     Pre-period                              Post-period
Treatment
Received ⇓      Estimates                     Outpatient          Short-stay             Long-stay       Overall
                                                                 Residential           Residential
Outpatient      Observed         0.66             0.09                 -                      -
Drug-free       Predicted 0.66 (0.02)+       0.09 (0.007)+        0.19 (0.19)          0.49 (0.12)+
                E(change)          -         -0.57 (0.02)+      -0.47 (0.19)+           -0.17 (0.12)

Short-stay       Observed         0.63                  -            0.10                     -
Residential      Predicted    0.63 (0.03)+       0.12 (0.02)+    0.10 (0.01)+           0.31 (0.24)
                 E(change)          -            -0.51 (0.03)+   -0.53 (0.03)+          -0.32 (0.24)

Long-stay        Observed         1.24                  -              -                    0.38
Residential      Predicted    1.25 (0.04)+       0.19 (0.03)+    0.71 (0.58)            0.38 (0.02)+
                 E(change)          -            -1.06 (0.04)+   -0.54 (0.58)          -0.87 (0.04)+

OVERALL          Observed          0.81                 -               -                     -            0.17
                 Predicted      .81 (.02)+       0.12 (0.01)+     0.31 (0.23)           0.42 (.09)+    0.17 (0.01)+
                 E(change)                       -0.69 (0.02)+   -0.51 (0.23)+         -0.39 (0.09)+   -0.64 (0.02)+

+ Bayes p-value < 0.05; E(change) = Post - Pre
Table 4: Factor responsible for suboptimal choices among patients who
chose long-term residential treatment.

                                    logit(Suboptimal Choices)

                                    OR (95% CI)     [p-value]
Age (years)                         0.99 (0.98, 1.01) [0.461]
Female                              1.02 (0.74, 1.41) [0.891]
Non-Hispanic Black                  0.81 (0.55, 1.2) [0.297]
Hispanics                           0.86 (0.48, 1.55) [0.625]
Currently married                   1.23 (0.86, 1.75) [0.262]
Ever homeless                       1.07 (0.77, 1.5) [0.677]
Released from jail/prison           0.98 (0.7, 1.36) [0.897]
Child in household                  1.20 (0.83, 1.74) [0.331]
No income                           1.23 (0.75, 2.01) [0.412]
No wage income                      0.90 (0.64, 1.26) [0.529]
Wage income < $3000                 0.85 (0.55, 1.33) [0.485]
Medicaid                            1.06 (0.79, 1.43) [0.693]
Pr. addiction to cocaine            0.89 (0.59, 1.34) [0.563]
Pr. addiction to alcohol            0.84 (0.54, 1.29) [0.415]
Sec. addiction to cocaine/alcohol   1.35 (1.02, 1.78) [0.037]
Theta                               1.01 (0.21, 4.83) [0.987]
References:
ACES Testimony. Testimony on comparative effectiveness research by the Alliance
      of Comparative Effectiveness Stakeholders (ACES) to the Dr. Carolyn M.
      Clancy, Director Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ), 2009
      April 3. http://www.ahrq.gov/about/nac/aces.htm (Accessed Jan 31, 2011)

Arrow KJ, Debreu G. Existence of an equilibrium for a competitive economy.
      Econometrica1954; 22:265-290.

Arrow KJ. Uncertainty and the Welfare Economics of Medical Care. The American
      Economic Review1963; 53(5): 941-973.
Basu A. Individualization at the heart of comparative effectiveness research: The
      time for i-CER has come. Medical Decision Making 2009; 29(6): N9-N11.
Basu A, Meltzer D. Value of information on preference heterogeneity and
      individualized care. Med Decis Making. 2007; 27(2):112-127.
Basu A, Paltiel DA, Pollack HA. Social costs of robbery and the cost-effectiveness of
      substance abuse treatment. Health Economics 2008; 17(8): 926-948.
Basu A, Philipson T. Impact of comparative effectiveness research on health and
      healthcare spending. NBER Working Paper No. w15633, 2010.
Bertrand M, Duflo E, Mullainathan S. How Much Should We Trust Differences-in-
      Differences Estimates? The Quarterly Journal of Economics 2004; 119(1):
      249-275.
Chakley M, Khalil F. Third party purchasing of health services: Patient choice and
      agency. Journal of Health Economics 2005; 24: 1132 - 1153.
Cheng Y, Berry DA. Optimal adaptive randomized designs for clinical trials.
      Biometrika. 2007; 94(3): 673-689.
Chernew, ME., Rosen, A., Fendrick, AM. Value-based insurance design. Health Affairs
      2007; 26(2): w195-w203.
Congressional Budget Office. January, 2008. Technological change and the growth of
      health care spending. Available at: http://www.cbo.
      gov/ftpdocs/89xx/doc8947/01-31-TechHealth.pdf. Accessed June 30, 2009.
Dehejia RH. Program evaluation as a decision problem. Journal of Econometrics
       2005; 125: 141-173.
Dismuke, C., M. French, et al. (2004). "Out of touch or on the money: Do the clinical
     objectives of addiction treatment coincide with economic evaluation
     results?" Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment 27: 253-263.
Federal Coordinating Council for Comparative Effectiveness Research, Report to the
      President and the Congress, June 30, 2009.
      http://www.hhs.gov/recovery/programs/cer/cerannualrpt.pdf (accessed
      June 30, 2009)
Fendrick AM, Smith DG, Chernew ME, Shah SN. A benefit-based copay for
      prescription drugs: patient contribution based on total benefits, not drug
      acquisition cost. Am J Manag Care. 2001; 7:861-867
French, M., J. Salomé, et al. (2002). "Benefit-Cost Analysis of Addiction Treatment:
      Methodological Guidelines and Empirical Application Using the DATCAP and
      ASI." Health Services Research 37(2): 433-455.
Flynn P, Simpson D, Anglin M, et al. (2001). Comment on nonresponse and selection
       bias in treatment follow-up studies. Substance Use and Misuse 36(12):1753-
       1757.
Fisher RA. The Design of Experiments. Edinburgh: Oliver and Boyd, 1935.
Florens JP, Heckman JJ, Meghir C, Vytlacil E, Identification of Treatment Effects Using
      Control Functions in Models with Continuous, Endogenous Treatment and
      Heterogeneous Effects. Econometrica. 2008; 76(5): 1191-1206.
Garber AM, Tunis S. Does comparative effectiveness research threaten personalized
      medicine. The New England Journal of Medicine 2009; 360(19): 1925-1927.
Gelman A, Rubin DB. (1992). Inference from iterative simulation using multiple
      sequences (with discussion). Statistical Sciences. 7: 457-511.
Gerstein D, Johnson R. (2000). Nonresponse and selection bias in treatment follow-
       up studies. Substance Use and Misuse. 35(6-8):971-1014
Gerstein D, Johnson R. (2001). In reply to Patrick M. Flynn and colleagues. Substance
       Use and Misuse. 36(12):1753-1757
Heckman JJ. Dummy endogenous variables in a simultaneous equations system.
     Econometrica 1978; 46(4): 931-959.
Heckman JJ. Varieties of selection bias. American Economic Review 1990; 80: 313-
     318.
Heckman JJ. Evaluating welfare and training programs. In. Manski and
     Garfinkel.1992.
Heckman JJ, Robb R. Alternative methods for evaluating the impact of interventions.
     In. Heckman J, Singer B (eds), Longitudinal Analysis of Labor Market Data.
     Econometric Society Monograph No. 10. Cambridge University Press,
     Cambridge, 1985.
Heckman JJ, Smith J. Evaluating the welfare state. In storm S. (ed.), Econometrics in
     the 20th Century: The Ragnar Frisch Centenary. Econometric Society
     Monograph Series. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1998.
Heckman JJ, Navarro S. Dynamic Discrete Choice and Dynamic Treatment Effects.
     Journal of Econometrics. 2007; 136(2): 341-396.
Heckman JJ, Vytlacil EJ. Local instrumental variables and latent variable models for
     identifying and bounding treatment effects. Proceedings of the National
     Academy of Sciences 1999; 96(8): 4730-34.
Holland P. Statistics and causal inference. Journal of the American Statistical
      Association 1986; 81: 945-970.
Jena A, Philipson TJ. Endogenous Cost-Effectiveness Analysis in Health Care
        Technology Adoption. NBER Working Papers 15032, 2009.
LaLonde R. Evaluating the econometric evaluations of training programs with
      experimental data. American Economic Review 1986; 76(4): 604-620.
Manning, W.G., Marquis, M.S. Health insurance: the trade-off between risk pooling
      and moral hazard. Journal of Health Economics 1996; 15 (5), 609–639.
Manski, C. Maximum Score Estimation of the Stochastic Utility Model of Choice,
      Journal of Econometrics 1975; 3: 205-228.
Manski C, Garfinkel I. Evaluating welfare and training programs. Harvard University
      Press, Cambridge. 1992.
McLellan AT, Woody GE, Metzger D, et al. Evaluating the effectiveness of addiction
      treatments: reasonable expectations, appropriate comparisons. Milbank
      Quarterly 1996;74(1):51-85.
McCollister, K., French M. The relative contribution of outcome domains in the total
      economic benefit of addiction interventions: a review of first findings.
      Addiction 2003; 98:1647-1659.
McFadden, D. Conditional Logit Analysis of Qualitative Choice Behavior, in Frontiers
     of Econometrics. P. Zarembka, ed., New York: Academic Press, 1974.
MedPAC Report to Congress: Reforming the Delivery System. June 2008. Chapter 5:
     “Barack Obama and Joe Biden’s Plan To Lower Health Care Costs and Ensure
     Affordable, Accessible Health Coverage For All,” accessed December 5, 2008.
Meltzer D, Huang E, Jin L, Shook M, Chin M. Major bias in cost-effectiveness analysis
      due to failure to account for self-selection: impact in intensive therapy for
      type 2 diabetes among the elderly. Medical Decision Making (abstract) 2003;
      23(6): 576.
Meltzer D, Basu A, Conti R. The Economics of comparative effectiveness studies:
      Societal and private perspectives and their implications for prioritizing
      public investments in comparative effectiveness research.
      PharmacoEconomics 2010; 28(10):843-853.
Munkin MK, Trivedi PK. Bayesian analysis of self-selection model with multiple
     outcomes using simulation-based estimation: an application to the demand
     for healthcare. Journal of Econometrics 2003; 114: 197–220.
Murphy SA. An experimental design for the development of adaptive treatment
     strategies. Statistics in Medicine 2005; 24:1455–1481.
Neyman J. Sur les applications de la thar des probabilities aux experiences
     Agaricales: Essay des principle" 1923. French. [English translation of
     excerpts by Dabrowska D, Speed T. Statistical Sciences 1990; 5: 463-472]
Pauly, MV. The economics of moral hazard: Comment. The American Economic
       Review 1968; 58(3): 531-537.
Pauly MV, Held PJ. Benign moral hazard and cost-effectiveness analysis of insurance
      coverage. Journal of Health Economics 1990; 9(4): 447-461.
Pauly MV. Adverse selection and moral hazard: Implications for health insurance
      markets. In Sloan F, Kasper H (eds.), Incentives and Choice in Health and
      Health Care, MIT Press, Cambridge MA, 2008.
Pauly MV, Blavin FE. Moral hazard in insurance, value-based cost sharing, and the
      benefits of blissful ignoring. Journal of Health Economics 2008; 27: 1407-
      1417.
Quandt RE. The estimation of parameters of a linear regression system obeying two
      separate regimes. Journal of the American Statistical Association 1958;
      53(284): 873-80.
Quandt RE. A new approach to estimating switching regression. Journal of the
      American Statistical Association 1972; 67(338):306-10.
Roy AD, Some thoughts on the distribution of earnings. Oxford Economic Papers
      1951; 3: 135-146.
Rubin D. Estimating causal effects of treatment in randomized and non-randomized
      studies J. Educ. Psych 1974; 66: 688-701.
Rubin D. Bayesian inference for causal effects: The role of randomization. Annals of
      Statistics 1978; 6: 34-58.
Sculpher MJ. Subgroups and heterogeneity in cost-effectiveness analysis.
      Pharmacoeconomics 2008; 26:799-806.
Senn S, Hoboken, NJ, Cross-Over Trials in Clinical Research. (2nd ed.) Wiley, 2002.
Simpson DD, Joe GW, Broome KM. A national 5-year follow-up of treatment
      outcomes for cocaine dependence. Archives of General Psychiatry, 2002; 59,
      538-544.
Sindelar, J., M. Jofre-Bonet, et al. Cost-effectiveness analysis of addiction treatment:
       paradoxes of multiple outcomes. Drug and Alcohol Dependence 2004; 73: 41-
       50.
Sisko A, Truffer C, Smith S, Keehan S, Cylus J, Poisal JA, Clemens MK, Lizonitz JHealth
       Spending Projections Through 2018: Recession Effects Add Uncertainty to t.
       he Outlook. Health Affairs, Web Exclusive 2009; w346–w357
Stinnett AA, Paltiel DA. Mathematical programming for the efficient allocation of
       health care resources. Journal of Health Economics 1996; 15(5): 641-653.
Stroup TS, McEvoy JP, Swartz MS, Byerly MJ, Glick ID, Canive JM, McGee MF, Simpson
       GM, Stevens MC, Lieberman JA. The National Institute of Mental Health
       Clinical Antipsychotic Trials of Intervention Effectiveness (CATIE) project:
       schizophrenia trial design and protocol development. Schizophrenia Bulletin
       2003; 29(1):15-31.
Thaler R, Rosen S. The value of saving a life: evidence from the labor market. In
       Nestor E. Terleckyj, ed., Household production and consumption. National
       Bureau of Economic Research, New York, 1975.
Tunis SR, Stryer DB, Clancy CM. Practical Clinical Trials: Increasing the Value of
       Clinical Research for Decision Making in Clinical and Health Policy. Journal of
       the American Medical Association 2003; 290: 1624-1632
Vanness DJ, Mullahy J. (2006). Perspectives on Mean-based Evaluation of Health
      Care. In Jones A. (Eds) The Elgar Companion to Health Economics, Edward
      Elgar Publishing: Cheltenham.
Zarkin G, Dunlap L, Bray J, et al. The effect of treatment completion and length of
       stay on employment and crime in outpatient drug-free treatment. Journal of
       Substance Abuse Treatment 2002; 23(4):261-267
