NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HIV STATUS AND LABOR MARKET PARTICIPATION IN SOUTH AFRICA
James A. Levinsohn
Zoë McLaren
Olive Shisana
Khangelani Zuma
Working Paper 16901
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16901

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2011

Thanks to John DiNardo, Taryn Dinkelman, Justin McCrary, Nicoli Natrass, Jeff Smith, and Duncan
Thomas for especially helpful comments and suggestions. Levinsohn acknowledges support from
the NICHD. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by James A. Levinsohn, Zoë McLaren, Olive Shisana, and Khangelani Zuma. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

HIV Status and Labor Market Participation in South Africa
James A. Levinsohn, Zoë McLaren, Olive Shisana, and Khangelani Zuma
NBER Working Paper No. 16901
March 2011
JEL No. O12
ABSTRACT
Because individuals with HIV are more likely to fall into poverty, and the poor may be at higher risk
of contracting HIV, simple estimates of the effect of HIV status on economic outcomes will tend to
be biased. In this paper, we use two econometric methods based on the propensity score to estimate
the causal effect of HIV status on employment outcomes in South Africa. We rely on rich data on
sexual behavior and knowledge of HIV from a large national household-based survey, which included
HIV testing, to control for systematic differences between HIV-positive and HIV-negative individuals.
This paper provides the first nationally representative estimates of the impact of HIV status on labor
market outcomes for southern Africa. We find that being HIV-positive is associated with a 6 to 7 percentage
point increase in the likelihood of being unemployed. South Africans with less than a high school education
are 10 to 11 percentage points more likely to be unemployed if they are HIV-positive. Despite high
unemployment rates, being HIV-positive confers a disadvantage and reinforces existing inequalities
in South Africa.

James A. Levinsohn
Yale School of Management
PO Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
James.Levinsohn@yale.edu
Zoë McLaren
School of Public Health
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
zmclaren@umich.edu

Olive Shisana
Health Sciences Research Council
Pretoria, South Africa
oshisana@hsrc.ac.za
Khangelani Zuma
Health Sciences Research Council
Pretoria, South Africa
kzuma@hsrc.ac.za

1

Introduction

This paper employs an especially rich South African data set to estimate the causal impact
of HIV status on an individual’s labor market outcomes. The paper contributes to a better
understanding of the economic impact of HIV/AIDS and the role HIV/AIDS plays in
reinforcing inequality in South Africa.
The existence of an impact of HIV on labor market participation is hotly debated in South
Africa. Some argue that HIV is a severe constraint on current economic growth because
those who are too ill to work represent lost economic output. Others argue that because
unemployment is so high – in the 30 to 40 percent range according to the broad definition
which includes individuals who desired employment but had no job search activity within
the past month (i.e. discouraged workers) – HIV has minimal economic impact today.
Proponents of this view note that the sex-age cohorts with the highest unemployment are
essentially the same as those with the highest HIV prevalence rates. Our estimates speak
directly to this issue. This paper provides the first nationally representative estimates of
the impact of HIV on labor market status, certainly for southern Africa but probably also
more broadly for non-rich countries.
There are at least two reasons for the paucity or outright lack of evidence– stringent data
requirements and econometric challenges.
Obtaining estimates of the impact of HIV on labor market participation clearly requires
data on both labor market participation (which is generally available) and on an individual’s HIV status (which is collected fairly rarely).1 Our econometric methods also require
extensive data on correlates of an individual’s HIV status.
Even with our rich data set, econometric challenges arise due to econometric endogeneity.

2

In our context, endogeneity arises because an individual’s labor market status might affect
their HIV status. For example, migrating for employment opportunities may put individuals at greater risk for HIV (reverse causality bias). Alternatively, there may be factors
that affect both HIV status and labor market status, such as an individual’s age or their
willingness to invest in the future (selection bias, omitted variable bias).2
Two of the standard approaches to addressing these issues are infeasible in this instance.
The traditional solution is to apply an instrumental variables approach. For the application
at hand, this would require an instrument that is correlated with the individual-level HIV
status and is orthogonal to shocks to labor market status (conditional on observed covariates.) This is a tall order to fill. One class of correlates with HIV status – socioeconomic
variables such as income, education, sex, age and even household size – are likely correlated
with labor market status, while another class of correlates – health-related variables such
as sexual practices and knowledge about HIV – are themselves likely to be correlated with
the socioeconomic covariates and, by association, with labor market status.3 (A closely
related approach uses a control function with an exclusion restriction, and the same concerns that preclude good instruments similarly preclude a convincing exclusion restriction.
See Heckman and Navarro-Lozano (2004).)
The other approach to addressing sample selection which has gained currency in development economics is to conduct interventions such that the bias vanishes by design.4 In a
study of HIV status and labor market participation, this would involve randomly assigning
HIV status to individuals and comparing labor market status across the two groups. This
is one context for which the experimental approach is impossible.
We turn to methods based on the propensity score to address the issues of selection and
reverse causality. We investigate the impact of HIV status on labor market participation

3

using two methods– propensity score reweighting and control functions.5 While both have
been used to address the endogeneity issue in the literature, there have been few direct
comparisons of multiple estimators for the same problem. We use both methods as a
marginal methodological contribution and, more importantly, as a robustness check.
Propensity score reweighting and the control function approach both rely on the assumption that sample selection into being HIV+ is random, conditional on attributes that are
observable to the econometrician (selection on observables). Given the richness of the data
set we use, this assumption is weaker than it might be under other circumstances. The
survey questionnaire included over 175 questions, many with multiple sub-sections, yielding over four hundred individual covariates. The data set contains detailed information
on sexual practices and knowledge of HIV transmission in addition to household characteristics and other factors that might influence HIV status. We examine the validity of
the assumption of selection on observables in section 5 by testing whether a parsimonious
specification succeeds in balancing variables not used in the estimation (balancing tests)
and experimenting with multiple specifications to confirm that the inclusion of additional
controls does not change the results (robustness checks).
In the next section, we briefly discuss the related literature. Section 3 discusses the data
that are employed. In section 4, the two approaches to estimation are presented. Section
5 presents results, while section 6 provides both caveats and conclusions.

2

Related Literature

While understanding the relationship between HIV status and labor market participation
is important from multiple perspectives, there are few studies that present evidence on the
impact of HIV and fewer still that address issues of endogeneity.
4

A number of studies develop macroeconomic simulation models to examine the effect of
HIV/AIDS on economic growth, however these models may be extremely sensitive to
assumptions about life-expectancy for HIV+ individuals (see Cuddington and Hancock
(1994), Kambou, Devarajan and Over (1992), and Arndt and Lewis (2000)). Instead of
assuming an HIV/AIDS mortality rate, Bloom and Mahal (1997) estimate the impact
of AIDS on growth by exploiting cross-country variation in HIV prevalence rates. They
find that HIV has an insignificant effect on per capita GDP growth for the sample of 51
countries.
The HIV pandemic not only affects current economic growth, but can have lasting effects
on growth rates into the future. Kalemli-Ozcan (2006) and Bell, Devarajan and Gersbach
(2003) model the impact of current HIV prevalence rates on future economic growth.
Because HIV+ parents are likely to die before reaching old age, they may invest less
in their children’s human capital acquisition, lowering the stock of human capital and
contributing to lower growth rates in the future. On the other hand, if the AIDS epidemic
causes a reduction in fertility that dominates this human capital effect, higher future living
standards may result (Young (2005)).
Most papers that examine the impact of HIV on economic growth look exclusively at the
effect of AIDS mortality, overlooking the effects of the illness on employment and productivity. There are some exceptions. Murray, Sonnenberg, Nelson, Shearer, Bester, Begley
and Glynn (2005) find that the rate of minor work-related injuries was 30 percent higher
for HIV+ miners in South Africa than for HIV- miners. The correlation was observable
within one year of seroconversion which suggests that the acute initial infection or the
psychological shock has an effect long before AIDS symptoms appear. This is likely an
underestimate of the impact of HIV because miners who are most affected are more likely
to take on easier tasks at work or leave employment altogether.
5

Habyarimana, Mbakile and Pop-Eleches (2010) use ARV therapy inception date as an instrument for health status to examine the effect of health on productivity for mine workers
in Botswana. They document an inverse-V-shaped pattern of absenteeism for HIV+ workers in the two years around the inception of anti-retroviral (ARV) therapy. Workers who
subsequently enrolled in ARV therapy missed about five times as many days of work as
non-enrolled workers in the year prior to ARV therapy inception, but absenteeism rates
returned to pre-peak levels after a year of therapy. Non-enrolled workers appear to be a
valid control group because the two groups had similar levels of absenteeism from 5 years
to 1 year prior to therapy inception. These findings suggest that health can have large effects on employment outcomes, and that ARV therapy is effective in reducing the disparity
in productivity between HIV+ and HIV- workers.6 Fox, Rosen, MacLeod, Wasunna, Bii,
Foglia and Simon (2004) examine differences in on-the-job productivity between workers
who subsequently died of AIDS and other workers on tea plantations in Kenya. They find
that in the last year before death, AIDS victims are less productive (in this case, measured
by the quantity of tea leaves picked), are more likely to be reassigned to less strenuous but
less lucrative tasks and are more often absent from work.
One way to estimate the causal effect of HIV status on employment is to use a plausibly exogenous instrument for HIV status. Variation in circumcision has been used to
instrument for HIV status because circumcision has been found to be associated with a
reduced risk of HIV both in regression analyses (Weiss, Quigley and Hayes (2000)) and
in randomized controlled trials (Auvert, Taljaard, Lagarde, Sobngwi-Tambekou, Sitta and
Puren (2005)). Werker, Ahuja and Wendell (2006) find that HIV/AIDS did not have a
measurable effect on economic growth, savings, or fertility behavior in African countries
but that there was weak evidence that HIV/AIDS reduced youth literacy, and increased
malnutrition. McKelvey (2007) finds that across nine African countries and Haiti, HIV+

6

individuals are significantly less likely to have been employed or to have earned enough to
contribute more than half of household expenditures. However, specification checks using
two populations that would not be expected to benefit from circumcision (men under 20
years old and those who have never had sex) suggest that unobservable differences that
vary with circumcision may be driving the results.
Transitory economic shocks can have short-term effects on an individual’s propensity to
engage in risky behavior, but potentially long-term effects on health. This is one avenue
through which employment outcomes may impact HIV status, and one reason why reverse
causality is a salient issue. Women who are economically vulnerable may become active
with multiple sexual partners (Dinkelman, Lam and Leibbrandt (2007)), or turn to sexfor-gift exchanges to smooth consumption (Dunkle, Jewkes, Brown, Gray, McIntyre and
Harlow (2004); LeClerc-Madlala (2002)). Migration is another potential response to transitory shocks that can put both men and women at greater risk for HIV (Zuma, Lurie,
Williams, Mkaya-Mwamburi, Garnett and Sturm (2005)).

3

Data

Our data come from the nationally-representative South African National HIV Prevalence,
HIV Incidence, Behaviour and Communication Survey (SABSSM II) conducted in 2005
by the Human Sciences Research Council (HSRC), the Centre for AIDS Development, Research and Evaluation (CADRE) and the Medical Research Council.7 The survey asked
adult respondents questions about demographics, knowledge of HIV, sexual history, knowledge of voluntary counseling and testing (VCT) services, health, mental health, and drug
and alcohol use. It also included a household module that asked for basic demographic
data for all household members in addition to questions about household infrastructure
7

and participation in government programs. While there were no questions directly addressing income or expenditure, the individual survey did query labor market participation. Respondents were asked to classify their “present employment situation” as one of
the following thirteen categories: homemaker not looking for work, homemaker looking
for work, unemployed not looking for work, unemployed looking for work, informal sector
not looking for permanent work, old age pensioner, sick/disabled and unable to work, student/pupil/learner, self-employed full time (40 or more hours per week), self-employed part
time (less than 40 hours per week), employed part time (if none of the above), employed
full time or other.
The sample consisted of 23,275 individuals in 10,584 households.8 Not everyone in a
household was sampled. Using the roster of all household members (including those who
usually live in the household, whether or not they were present at the first interviewer visit,
and any guests that stayed in the household the previous night), field workers randomly
selected at most one person from each of three age groups (2-14 years, 15-24 years and 25
and up) to be interviewed. While this sampling strategy is an efficient way to obtain a
measure of HIV prevalence, it is problematic for any analysis of household dynamics. For
example, we are unable to directly measure the impact of having an HIV+ spouse on adult
labor supply, since only one household member above the age of 25 was surveyed.
The survey also included an opt-out HIV test for respondents age 2 and older. The response
rate for testing was 65.4 percent overall, and 73.3 percent in the adult sample (age 15 and
older) used for analysis (see Table 1). HIV incidence data was collected from all HIV+
specimens using an enzyme immunoassay that measures the ratio of HIV antibodies to
other antibodies to determine the elapsed time since HIV infection.
Table 2 presents HIV prevalence rates by race. Table 2 indicates that while HIV impacts

8

all races, Africans have, by far, the highest prevalence rates. In our sample, 17.34 percent
of Africans are HIV+ while the population group with the next highest prevalence rate,
Coloured, has a rate of 2.73 percent.9
For the remainder of this paper, we restrict our analysis to Africans. Africans comprise
about 80 percent of the population. The HIV prevalence rate, the employment rate, the
age profile of employment, and the education profile of employment are each markedly
different for Africans.10
Figure 1 presents the age profile of HIV prevalence– a profile broadly comparable to those of
other African countries. HIV prevalence peaks between age 25-30 for women and between
30-40 for men. The age profile for women is about 5 percentage points lower than UNAIDS
ante-natal clinic statistics, which may be due to differences in the sampling frame (UNAIDS
(2005)).
Table 3 reports employment status by HIV status separately for men and for women. For
our analysis, individuals were assigned to a labor market status using the broad definition
of unemployment, which includes discouraged workers. Respondents were classified as
unemployed if they report that they are unemployed (either looking for work or not) or
if they are a housewife or homemaker who is looking for work. They were classified as
not economically active if they reported being a student, an old age pensioner, too sick or
disabled to work, or a housewife or homemaker who is not looking for work. Otherwise,
they were classified as employed.11 Our main set of results excludes individuals who are
not economically active and we explore the sensitivity of our results to this restriction in
Appendix Table 2. A higher proportion of HIV+ individuals are unemployed relative to
the employed, and this is especially pronounced for women. Almost 57 percent of HIV+
women are unemployed. Students and other not economically active individuals (mostly

9

old age pensioners) have lower than average prevalence rates. A similar proportion of each
labor market group refused the HIV test.

4
4.1

Methodologies
Overview

Generating a plausible counterfactual is the core challenge to identifying a causal effect of
HIV. For the situation at hand, this approach entails creating a counterfactual in which
one could compare individuals who were virtually identical except for their HIV status and
then compare differences in labor market status. The following subsections present two
methods, each based on the propensity score, to generate unbiased estimates of the effect
of being HIV+ on labor market status.
Our “treatment” (as the public health and program evaluation literatures refer to it) is
HIV status, denoted by D, where D = 1 is HIV+ and D = 0 is HIV-. If HIV status
were independent of the untreated value of our outcome of interest, labor market status
(denoted Y0 ), then there is no sample selection problem and we can use a simple “naive”
estimator, a simple difference in means, to estimate the treatment effect. However, HIV
status is not randomly assigned and is in all likelihood related to our outcomes of interest.
We make the conditional independence assumption (CIA) that the untreated value of labor
market status is independent of HIV status conditional on a vector of covariates (denoted
X) :
Y0 ⊥
⊥ D|X.

10

(1)

4.2

The Propensity Score

In this context, the propensity score, denoted P (HIV +)|X ≡ p(X), is the probability
that an individual is HIV+ conditional on a vector of observable exogenous covariates (X).
These covariates must be exogenous to HIV status in that they cannot be affected by
HIV status (i.e. it would be inappropriate to use sexual behavior that may be changed if
HIV status is known).12 Rosenbaum and Rubin (1983) show that if the CIA is satisfied
by conditioning on the vector X, it is satisfied by conditioning on the propensity score
(i.e. the propensity score is a sufficient statistic for the X vector in the CIA). Hence, the
propensity score makes the problem of finding a comparable control group tractable by
reducing the dimensionality of the comparison, while still satisfying the CIA.

4.3

Propensity Score Reweighting

Propensity score reweighting uses the propensity score to create a counterfactual distribution of X in the HIV- (control) population so as to match the distribution of X in the
HIV+ population. Essentially, HIV- observations with X characteristics that are most like
HIV+ observations (i.e. that have a high p̂(X)) receive the most weight, whereas HIVobservations that are very different from the HIV+ population receive less weight.
More formally, Dehejia and Wahba (1997) and DiNardo, Fortin and Lemieux (1996) show
that
∆

AT ET

1 N T +N C
= T Σi=1
N


Di Yi − (1 − Di )Yi

p(Xi )
1 − p(Xi )


(2)

is a consistent estimator for the average treatment effect on the treated (ATET), provided
the CIA and the common support condition hold. In the calculation, HIV+ observations
receive a weight of 1 (the first term in parentheses) and HIV- observations are weighted

11

with ωi =

p̂(Xi )
1−p̂(Xi )

(the second term in parentheses). This estimator does not impose

a functional form on the relationship between HIV status and the outcome of interest
(Dehejia and Wahba (1999)).
This approach requires overlap in the support of the propensity scores for the HIV+ and
HIV- groups (the common support condition). In the Results section, we present density
plots to verify the validity of this assumption.13 Busso, DiNardo and McCrary (2010) show
that reweighting outperforms propensity score matching in settings likely to be encountered
in empirical work.

4.4

Control Functions

The control function approach is an alternative econometric strategy for addressing selection bias. The reason one obtains biased estimates from a simple regression of labor market
status on HIV status is that the disturbance term in such a regression is correlated with
HIV status (the independent variable). The essence of the control function approach is to
control for the portion of the disturbance term that is correlated with HIV status. Once
the portion of the disturbance term that is responsible for the correlation is expunged,
the new error term is uncorrelated with HIV status, and the regression yields unbiased
estimates of the impact of HIV on employment status. The control function approach was
developed in Heckman and Robb (1985) and has been used to estimate the impact of training on earnings (Heckman and Hotz (1989)), the returns to education (Card (1999)) and
the capitalization of pollution into housing values (Chay and Greenstone (2005)) among
other applications. As with propensity score reweighting, we maintain the assumption of
selection on observables.14

12

The data generating process is given by:


Y = Λ β0 + γD + f (X) + 

(3)

where f (X) is a function of observables X.
Under the assumption of selection on observables, conditioning on f (X) results in a disturbance term, , that is independent of D (HIV status) and hence, the estimate of the
parameter of interest, γ is unbiased. In practice, a polynomial in the estimated propensity
score as well as linear terms in X are used to flexibly model f (X). We estimate:

k


X
Y = Λ β0 + γD + X 0 φ +
βi p̂(X)i + 

(4)

i=1

separately for HIV- and HIV+ groups and obtain predicted values, Ŷ0 and Ŷ1 respectively,
from each regression. We calculate the ATET by averaging the difference in predicted
values across HIV+ observations.

5

Results

Estimating the impact of HIV status on labor market participation is a three-step process.
The first step is to estimate the propensity score. The second step is to empirically examine
the validity of the CIA and the common support condition to ensure that the appropriate
observable variables are included in the propensity score regression. If the underlying
assumptions hold, then one can proceed to the third step, estimating the impact of HIV
on labor market participation using propensity score reweighting and a control function
approach.

13

5.1

The Propensity Score

There are competing philosophies behind what constitutes a properly specified propensity
score regression. One approach is to adopt a relatively parsimonious specification, albeit
one still rich enough to plausibly satisfy the CIA, while another approach is to include most
all plausible regressors. We adopt the former, but experiment with the latter in sensitivity
analyses.
The plausibility of the selection on observables assumption clearly rests on having data
that can, in our context, account for selection into HIV status. The SABSSM II data set
has several hundred variables for most respondents. In addition to the usual demographic
information, the survey also collected extensive information on sexual practices and knowledge about HIV transmission, which is exactly the type of information needed to account
for selection into HIV status. Information on either sexual practices or knowledge about
HIV transmission can be misleading, so it is important to have information on both for
predicting HIV status. For example, a respondent who has multiple partners but was well
informed on how HIV is transmitted before their sexual debut and therefore practices safe
sex may have a low probability of being HIV+. Similarly, a respondent who knows very
little about how HIV is transmitted but is abstinent will have a low likelihood of being
HIV+. Conditional on comprehensive information about an individual’s sexual practices
and knowledge regarding HIV transmission, unobservables such as attitudes towards risk
or moral beliefs may have little explanatory power. Hence, the selection on observables
assumption seems especially appropriate given the specifics of our data. The selection on
observables assumption is testable, and we investigate the reasonableness (or not) of this
assumption by conducting balancing tests on covariates in the propensity score specification as well as plausible covariates that were not included in the specification (see Section

14

5.2).
We estimate the propensity score as the predicted value of a logit regression. Table 4
reports the estimated coefficients (not marginal effects) and standard errors from our base
case. The covariates include basic demographic characteristics, educational attainment, information about a respondent’s sexual debut, knowledge of HIV transmission, and whether
there is a pensioner living in the household.15 We do not discuss the estimated coefficients
because the main focus of this paper is on using the propensity score to correct for selection
bias rather than on the correlates of seropositivity. Furthermore, it is quite difficult to have
much intuition about the marginal impact of a single regressor conditional on the other
44.16

5.2

Examining the Validity of the Propensity Score Method

We next examine the validity of the CIA and common support assumption under our
preferred (base case) propensity score specification. The former is done with balancing
tests and the latter by examining empirical distributions.
The intuition behind balancing tests is appealingly clear. The idea of propensity score
reweighting is to reweight the distribution of the observables (X’s) of the HIV- population
so as to match the distribution of the X’s for the HIV+ population (see Equation 2).
Balancing tests simply examine whether the difference in means of X’s between HIV+
and HIV- populations is reduced when the observations are reweighted. If the reweighted
means are similar (i.e. not significantly different) for HIV+ and HIV- populations, then the
reweighting has achieved its goal, the data are balanced, and the CIA is appropriate.
Table 5 reports the results of balancing for those variables that enter the propensity score
regression (i.e. internal balancing). We also conducted balancing tests for each of the indi15

cator variables for missing data, but these are not reported in the table. All were balanced.
The results in Table 5 apply to the entire sample. Balancing tests were also conducted
for each of the four subsamples with comparable results. Row 1 of Table 5 presents the
results for age; HIV+ individuals were on average 2.5 years younger than the HIV- population. This difference had a t-statistic of -4.86 so the difference was highly significant.
After reweighting, the difference falls to 0.255 years and is not significantly different from
zero. None of the variables in the propensity score regression have a statistically significant
difference between the HIV+ and HIV- populations in the reweighted data.
The propensity score weight, by design, attempts to minimize differences between HIV+
and HIV- groups for the variables included in the propensity score estimation (the X vector). A more stringent balancing test criterion is whether the propensity score weight also
succeeds in balancing covariates that were not used in the estimation. External balancing
tests were conducted on 56 variables. These external variables included measures of sexual
activity and almost 50 variables that are plausibly related to economic well-being (e.g.
source of water, type of cooking fuel, type of toilet, and measures of privation.) In the
unweighted data, 20 of these variables had means that were significantly different (at the
95 percent significance level) between the HIV+ and HIV- populations. After reweighting,
only three of those differences were still significant.
Based on internal and external balancing tests, we conclude that the propensity score
specification is adequately reweighting the data to justify the CIA. While selection on
observables is a strong assumption, we find that the richness of our data provides support
for the assumption.
The balancing tests provide support for the CIA. The other assumption underlying the
propensity score reweighting approach is the common support condition.17 We examine

16

the appropriateness of the support condition by comparing the empirical distributions of
the propensity scores for the HIV+ and HIV- populations. These distributions are shown
in Figure 2. In that figure, it is clear that the densities have a common support.

5.3
5.3.1

The Impact of HIV
Estimates

Table 6 presents estimates of the causal impact of HIV on labor market participation.
The table is organized such that each column presents estimates resulting from a different
estimator and each row presents estimates using different samples of the data.
The first column presents naı̈ve estimates of the impact of HIV status on labor market
participation. Estimates in this column are simply the (unconditional) difference in the
mean employment status for the HIV+ and HIV- populations, without the inclusion of any
controls. Variables are defined such that the 0.079 figure in the first cell implies that, on
average, HIV+ individuals are 7.9 percentage points more likely to be unemployed.
The second column presents the coefficient on HIV status when the variables in the propensity score (listed in Table 4 ) are included as controls in a simple logit regression of employment status on HIV status. This is a simple regression to run and is the same as the control
function approach but it excludes the higher order terms of the propensity score. The logit
result implies that for the full sample being HIV+ lowers the probability of employment
by 6.5 percentage points.
The third and fourth columns present estimates of the causal impact of HIV on employment using propensity score reweighting and the control function approaches, respectively.
For internal consistency of our results, both the propensity score weights and the control

17

function are based on the propensity score which is calculated using the set of control
variables included in the logit in column 2. Each parameter estimate in columns 3 and 4 is
the marginal effect of HIV status from a logit regression. For column 3, it is a simple logit
regression of labor market status on HIV status using propensity score reweighting while in
column 4, the reported estimate is the coefficient on HIV status (γ) in the regression given
by Equation 4. Using the entire sample, propensity score reweighting indicates that being
HIV+ raises the probability of unemployment by 6.2 percentage points while the control
function approach indicates an increase of 7.0 percentage points. Each of these impacts is
precisely estimated.18 Our estimates of the causal impact of HIV on employment imply
that, all else equal, being HIV+ raises the probability of unemployment by between 6 and
7 percentage points.
The estimates in the first row of Table 6 apply to the entire sample and, as such, potentially
hide substantial underlying heterogeneity in the impact of HIV on labor market status.
We investigate this heterogeneity in the remainder of Table 6 by restricting the sample to
particular sub-populations. The second through seventh rows in Table 6 present results
obtained from an analysis of sub-samples of the data, using propensity score estimates
calculated within the sub-sample alone. For men, propensity score reweighting and the
control function approach give estimates of 0.061 and 0.080, respectively. The former is
not precisely estimated while the latter still is. For females, the point estimates from
propensity score reweighting and the control function approach are 0.055 and 0.060. These
are slightly lower than the estimates obtained with the entire sample.
The next two rows in Table 6 restrict the analysis to respondents aged 25 and older, and
divide the sample between individuals whose education level is a Matric or higher and
those whose education level is less than a Matric. Respondents under 25 may not have
completed their schooling. A Matric is about equivalent to a high school education. The
18

message here is clear: the impact of HIV on labor market status is severe for those with
lower levels of education and is negligible for those with higher levels. The causal impact
of HIV status on labor market status for those with less than a Matric is an increase in the
likelihood of unemployment of 10 percentage points (with propensity score reweighting)
and 10.9 percentage points (with the control function approach.) These are large and
precisely estimated impacts. We repeated the analysis for subgroups defined by race as
well as by groups defined by education and sex, age, and education and age. These results
are not reported here, but are available upon request from the authors. The results in
Table 6 capture the gist of these divisions. Women, and especially women with lower levels
of education, experience larger causal impacts of HIV on labor market status.
The last two rows highlight urban/rural differences in the impact of HIV on unemployment.
Although both HIV and unemployment are more prevalent in rural areas, the causal impact
of HIV on unemployment is larger in urban areas where being HIV+ lowers the probability
of employment by between 7 and 8 percentage points.

5.3.2

Discussion

A concern about the role of selection bias motivated our choice of methodologies. Comparing the naı̈ve estimates in column 1 of Table 6 to the causal estimates in columns 3 and
4 speaks to this issue. The naı̈ve estimates are generally two to three percentage points
higher than the causal estimates, and this highlights the importance of selection. Our
results are consistent with the hypothesis that individuals who are HIV+ are more likely
to be unemployed than the average South African, irrespective of their HIV status.
Because this study is probably the first to examine the causal impact of HIV on employment outcomes, it is difficult to place the magnitude of the estimated impact in context.

19

There are no other estimates available for comparison. There are at least two economic
arguments for why one might have expected no causal impact. First, if unemployment
were so pervasive that HIV+ individuals would be unemployed even in the absence of HIV,
one would expect no impact. Second, if ARVs were sufficiently widely used, one might
expect either no impact or a tiny impact. Our estimates indicate that these arguments,
while perhaps ex ante plausible, are on average simply incorrect. Being HIV+ lowers the
probability of employment.
A counter-argument to the notion that HIV confers a negligible penalty in the face of
extremely high unemployment is that in the presence of high unemployment, even a small
disadvantage (e.g. the stigma sometimes associated with HIV) much less a large disadvantage (adverse physical effects of HIV) mean the difference between keeping a job and losing
it. The results in Table 6 are consistent with this counter-argument.
One way to gauge the magnitude of our estimates (beyond noting that they are not zero)
is to compare the estimated marginal effect of HIV status (D) with the estimated marginal
effect of other respondent characteristics (X) in Equation (4). For men, the magnitude
of the labor market advantage of being HIV- is approximately equal to the impact of 3
years of age, a Matric qualification (compared to no education), or the absence of a female
pensioner in the household. For women it is equal to the impact of 1.5 years of age, some
secondary education (compared to no education), or the absence of a male pensioner in
the household. It is worth noting that our results are likely an underestimate of the true
magnitude of the effect of HIV status on labor market outcomes because they do not
account for intra-category changes in employment outcomes. As their disease progresses,
HIV+ workers may shift into less physically demanding occupations at reduced wages,
which has implications for inequality.

20

We have estimated the causal impact of HIV status on the probability of unemployment,
and in this sense HIV contributes to unemployment in South Africa. It would be wrong,
though, to think that HIV was substantially responsible for South Africa’s dire unemployment. The numbers simply don’t add up.
Our results are conditional on the availability of ARVs as of 2005. We do not have data
on which HIV+ respondents were on ARV therapy. Access to ARVs in South Africa is far
from universal. One estimate is that in 2005, the year of our sample, only about 18 percent
of those who needed ARVs were actually using them. (See Dorrington, Bradshaw, Johnson
and Daniel (2006).) As the availability of ARVs changes, the impact of HIV on labor
market status, as we estimate it, will change. Because ARVs are more widely available
today than they were in 2005, ceteris paribus, the impact of HIV on unemployment is
lower today than it was in 2005. In addition, ARV usage is non-random, and this may in
part contribute to the pattern of results in Table 6. For example, ARVs are much more
likely to be employer-provided in the formal sector than they are in the informal sector.
Our findings are consistent with the fact that women and the less-educated tend to be
more heavily represented in the informal sector and in domestic (housekeeper) work and
hence less likely to receive employer-provided ARVs.
We also found that being HIV+ had virtually no employment impact for better educated
workers (and recall this result already accounts for the fact that highly educated individuals
are less likely to be HIV+). ARVs may also be contributing to this finding. Employers
have greater incentive to invest in ARVs for workers who are more difficult to replace such
as highly educated workers.
In sum, HIV appears to reinforce the already existing inequalities in South Africa.

21

5.4

Sensitivity Analyses

We investigate the sensitivity of our results both to alternative definitions of unemployment
and to alternative specifications of the propensity score regression.
As described in section 3, individuals were divided into three groups in our base case
specification – unemployed, employed, and not economically active (NEA). The first two
groups are included in our analysis while the third is not. In the base case results using the
broad definition of unemployment, so-called discouraged workers – workers who were not
actively seeking a job but desired employment – were classified as unemployed. The narrow
definition of unemployment classifies discouraged workers as NEA. We repeat the analysis
using this narrow definition of unemployment. Results are reported in Appendix Table
A1. The results are very similar to those in Table 6. The estimated coefficients are about
one-half to two-thirds the size of those reported in Table 6. We also repeated the analysis
by combining the NEA with the employed to create a group that might (awkwardly) be
called not-unemployed. Results are reported in Appendix Table A2. Compared to Table 6,
coefficients tend to increase, usually by about one and one-quarter to one and a half times.
Results tend to be more precisely estimated, and this is driven in part by the increase in
the sample size when NEA individuals are included in the analysis. From Appendix Tables
1 and 2, we conclude that our findings are robust to alternative definitions of labor market
status.
We also experimented with alternative specifications of the propensity score regression.
The results obtained from regressions using additional variables in the calculation of the
propensity score are virtually identical to results obtained from the preferred specification.
These results are not reported here. When including ten variables with information on the
household, no point estimate changed by more than two percentage points, and only three

22

of the 15 point estimates changed by more than one percentage point. The additional
household variables chosen to indicate socioeconomic level were: type of toilet facility,
source of energy for cooking, access to electricity, presence of a land line, and a dummy
for whether the household information was missing for the observation. Adding additional
behavioral variables did not change any of the point estimates by as much as one percentage
point. The additional behavioral variables were condom use at last sex, number of current
sexual partners, number of partners in the last year, whether the respondent had been
tested for HIV before, whether they had received their test result, and whether they had
heard of ARVs.

6
6.1

Conclusions and Caveats
Conclusions

Identifying the causal impact of HIV on labor market status requires addressing the issue of
selection into being HIV+. In the absence of plausible instruments, we exploit the richness
of the data and assume that selection is on observables. External balancing tests support
the validity of this assumption. Employing two estimation strategies, we find that being
HIV+ causes, on average, an increase in the likelihood of unemployment of six to seven
percentage points. This penalty exists despite very high unemployment rates. The average
impact hides important heterogeneity. HIV’s causal impact on unemployment is larger
(10 to 11 percentage points) for less educated South Africans. The results are robust to
multiple alternative econometric specifications.

23

6.2

Caveats

These results are the first nationally representative estimates of the causal impact of HIV
on employment in South Africa. While informative, they are not dispositive. Rather, the
results should be interpreted with caution for at least five reasons.
First, our analysis does not account for any general equilibrium effects. In particular, it
would be misleading to think that if ARVs were made universally available or a cure for
HIV/AIDS were found, that HIV+ individuals would see their likelihood of employment
rise on average by about seven percentage points. Rather, the labor market would adjust
and these adjustments would depend on supply and demand elasticities. Complicating this
analysis, the ability of the labor market to immediately absorb additional healthy workers
is questionable.
Second, data limitations preclude an analysis of the indirect labor market impact of having
multiple HIV+ adult household members. Recall that the structure of the SABSSM II
survey is such that only one adult age 25 or older is sampled from each household. It is
unclear in which direction our results may be biased. An HIV- worker could be unemployed
because they are caring for an HIV+ spouse, resulting in downward bias (i.e. the true
impact is larger than our estimates suggest), or an HIV+ worker might be more motivated
to obtain employment to financially support another HIV+ household member, resulting
in upward bias.
Third, our results are conditional on the time profile of HIV and prevalence rates as of
2005. Given an approximately nine-year period (on average) of latent HIV infection before
AIDS conversion, and HIV prevalence rates that increased from 5 percent in 1996 to 12
percent in 2001,19 we would expect the “stock” of individuals with AIDS to increase quite
sharply between 2003 and 2008. This implies that, ceteris paribus, the impact of HIV on
24

unemployment would rise in coming years as the number of HIV+ individuals who are too
ill to work increases. However, it is unclear how this effect would interact with any increase
in the availability of ARVs.
Fourth, our results are not structural. As such, we are unable to convincingly address
the particular avenues through which HIV impacts labor market status. Relatedly, we
are unable to conduct detailed policy analysis. For example, increased access to ARVs and
successful programs to de-stigmatize HIV might each increase the likelihood of employment,
but our approach cannot conduct the counterfactual experiments to estimate the likely
impacts of these potential policies.
Lastly, our results are generally not applicable to other countries. South Africa has a
stunningly high rate of unemployment, high HIV prevalence rates and a troubled history
with the distribution of ARVs – three factors that suggest that it may be misguided to
generalize the results of this study to other countries.

Notes
1

There are other data sets available for which the techniques employed in this paper are potentially

applicable. These include some of the Demographic Health Surveys (DHS) and the Botswana AIDS Impact
Survey (see Levinsohn and McCrary (2008))
2

These challenges are discussed in detail in Strauss and Thomas (1998).

3

With country-level data, the fraction of the male population that has been circumcised has been used as

an instrument (see Werker et al. (2006)). At the individual-level, this instrument is problematic. The protective effect may not transfer to women (Wawer, Kigozi, Serwadda, Makumbi, Nalugoda, Watya, Buwembo,
Ssempijja, Moulton and Gray (2008)) and there is often virtually no variation within large categories of the
male population like religion, race and ethnic/tribal affiliation (see McKelvey (2007)).

25

4

For example, Thomas and et al. (2006) use experimental methods to obtain a causal estimate of the

effect of improved health (in this case, from increased iron intake) on labor market outcomes.
5

These methods are drawn mostly from the program evaluation literature, but they have also been used

in other fields of economics. For example, a similar control function approach is used in Olley and Pakes
(1996) for solving the endogeneity problem in the context of production functions. Levinsohn and McCrary
(2008) use the propensity score re-weighting technique to address a missing data problem in the context of
HIV prevalence.
6

Thirumurthy, Zivin and Goldstein (2005) also found that in western Kenya, labor supply increased

within six months of initiating ARV therapy.
7

A detailed description of the survey methodology is found in Shisana and et al. (2005), available online

at: http://www.hsrcpress.ac.za/product.php?productid=2134&cat=0&page=1
8

When matching individuals to households based on household identification numbers, approximately

14 percent of the individual observations (3413) could not be matched to household data. Household
variables were imputed to zero for these unmatched observations. A specification check suggests that the
data were consistent with a pattern of “missing at random”; a dummy variable for being unmatched was
not significant in any specification. As with all variables that are imputed, an indicator variable was created
that took a value of 1 if the value was imputed and 0 otherwise. These indicator variables are included in
the empirical specifications. Individual survey records were matched to HIV incidence and viral load data
using the barcode number that identified each specimen.
9

The prevalence rates in Table 2 do not correct for sample selection due to non-random opt-out of the

HIV test. We have replicated our analysis on the impact of HIV on labor market participation with weights
that do correct for non-random opt-out (as computed by HSRC) and the results are virtually identical.
This suggests that selection into testing is independent of the effect of HIV on employment. These rates
apply to our sample which only includes individuals aged 15 and over. Hence they differ from the national
prevalence rates reported in Shisana and et al. (2005).
10

A version of this paper that includes all races in all the results is available on Levinsohn’s website.

11

Those who responded being in the “other” category are grouped with the employed to generate con-

servative estimates.

26

12

It is important to note that these are not the same variables we would use as instruments in an

instrumental variables (IV) regression. In that case we would want Zs correlated with HIV status but not
with labor market status; in our case these Zs should not be included in the propensity score regression.
Because actual HIV status is known by the econometrician and can therefore be controlled for in the
regression, the covariates in X do not need to be good predictors of HIV status. In fact, selecting the
attributes for X depending on predictive power can actually increase bias. See Heckman and NavarroLozano (2004).
13

Frölich (2004) demonstrates that an estimated propensity score close to 1 can cause problems for

estimating the ATET. Our values of the estimated propensity scores are not large enough for this to be a
concern.
14

A similar control function method can be used if there is selection on unobservables (see Heckman and

Navarro-Lozano (2004)). However, allowing for selection on unobservables requires an exclusion restriction–
a variable that is correlated with HIV status but uncorrelated with labor market status.
15

Elements of the X vector of covariates were imputed to zero for item non-response, and a dummy

variable for imputation was included in the specifications. We include indicator variables for each province
in South Africa. These coefficients are not reported in the table.
16

We also examine particular subsamples of the data (e.g. by sex, by education, by area of residence). For

each of these sub-samples, we re-estimate the propensity score. These results are available on request.
17

The support condition is not required for the control function approach, however confirming that it holds

ensures that we are not relying on solely on functional form assumptions for any values of the propensity
score.
18

Both the reweighting and the control function approach use the estimated propensity score. Hirano,

Imbens and Ridder (2003) show that using the estimated propensity score rather than the true propensity
score produces efficient estimates. They suggest bootstrapping to obtain standard errors. We do so.
19

ASSA demographic model predictions cited in Natrass (2004) (p. 42). The model on which these

estimates are based predicted a 14 percent prevalence rate for 2004 – about the same as that of our 2005
data.

27

References
Arndt, Channing and Jeffrey D. Lewis, “The Macro Implications of HIV/AIDS in
South Africa: A Preliminary Assessment,” South African Journal of Economics, December 2000, 68 (5), 856–87.
Auvert, Bertran, Dirk Taljaard, Emmanuel Lagarde, Joelle SobngwiTambekou, Remi Sitta, and Adrian Puren, “Randomized, Controlled Intervention Trial of Male Circumcision for Reduction of HIV Infection Risk: The ANRS
1265 Trial,” PLoSMed, 2005, 2 (11), e298.
Bell, Clive, Shantayanan Devarajan, and Hans Gersbach, “The Long-Run Economic Costs of AIDS: Theory and an Application to South Africa,” World Bank
Policy Research Working Paper, October 2003, (3152).
Bloom, David E. and Ajay S. Mahal, “Does the AIDS epidemic threaten economic
growth?,” Journal of Econometrics, 1997, 77 (1), 105–124.
Busso, Matias, John DiNardo, and Justin McCrary, “New Evidence on the Finite
Sample Properties of Propensity Score Matching and Reweighting Estimators,” 2010.
Working Paper.
Card, David, “The Causal Effect of Education on Earnings,” Handbook of Labor Economics, 1999, 3, 1801–1863. Editor: O. Ashenfelter and D. Card; Publisher:Elsevier
Science B.V.
Chay, Kenneth Y. and Michael Greenstone, “Does Air Quality Matter? Evidence
from the Housing Market,” Journal of Political Economy, April 2005, 113 (2), 376–
424.
Cuddington, J. and J. Hancock, “Assessing the impact of AIDS on the growth path
of the Malawian economy,” Journal of Development Economics, 1994, 4, 363–8.
Dehejia, Rajeev H. and Sadek Wahba, “Causal Effects in Non-Experimental Studies:
Re-Evaluating the Evaluation of Training Programs,” in Rajeev Dehejia, ed., Econometric Methods for Program Evaluation, Ph.D. Dissertation, Harvard University, 1997,
chapter 1.
and
, “Causal Effects in Nonexperimental Studies: Reevaluating the Evaluation
of Training Programs,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 1999, 94
(448), 1053–1062.
DiNardo, John, Nicole M. Fortin, and Thomas Lemieux, “Labor Market Institutions and the Distribution of Wages, 1973-1992: A Semiparametric Approach,”
Econometrica, 1996, 64 (5), 1001–1044.

28

Dinkelman, T., D. Lam, and M. Leibbrandt, “Household and community income,
economic shocks and risky sexual behavior of young adults: evidence from the Cape
Area Panel Study 2002 and 2005,” AIDS, 2007, 21 (Suppl 7), S49–S56.
Dorrington, R., D. Bradshaw, L. Johnson, and T. Daniel, “The demographic
impact of HIV/AIDS in South Africa: National and Provincial Indicators for 2006,”
Technical Report, Cape Town 2006. Joint publication of the Centre for Actuarial
Research, the Burden of Disease Research Unit, and the Actuarial Society of South
Africa (ASSA).
Dunkle, K., Rachel K. Jewkes, Heather C. Brown, Glenda E. Gray, James A.
McIntyre, and Sioban Harlow, “Transactional sex among women in Soweto, South
Africa: Prevalence, risk factors and association with HIV infection.,” Social Science
and Medicine, 2004, 59, 1581–92.
Fox, Matthew P., Sydney Rosen, William B. MacLeod, Monique Wasunna,
Margaret Bii, Ginamarie Foglia, and Jonathon L. Simon, “The impact of
HIV/AIDS on labour productivity in Kenya,” Tropical Medicine and International
Health, March 2004, 9 (3), 318–24.
Frölich, Markus, “Finite-Sample Properties of Propensity-Score Matching and Weighting
Estimators,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2004, 86 (1), 77–90.
Habyarimana, James, Bekezela Mbakile, and Cristian Pop-Eleches, “The Impact
of HIV/AIDS and ARV Treatment on Worker Absenteeism: Implications for African
Firms,” Journal of Human Resources, 2010, 45 (4), 809–839.
Heckman, James and Salvador Navarro-Lozano, “Using Matching, Instrumental
Variables, and Control Functions to Estimate Economic Choice Models,” The Review
of Economics and Statistics, February 2004, 86 (1), 30–57.
Heckman, James J. and Richard Robb, “Alternative Methods for Estimating the
Impact of Interventions,” Longitudinal Analysis of Labor Market Data, 1985. Ed:
James J. Heckman and Burton Singer; Pub: Cambridge University Press.
and V. Joseph Hotz, “Choosing Among Alternative Nonexperimental Methods for
Estimating the Impact of Social Programs: The Case of Manpower Training,” Journal
of the American Statistical Association, 1989, 84 (408), 862–874.
Hirano, Keisuke, Guido W. Imbens, and Geert Ridder, “Efficient Estimation of
Average Treatment Effects Using the Estimated Propensity Score,” Econometrica,
July 2003, 71 (4), 1161–1189.
Kalemli-Ozcan, Sebnem, “AIDS, Reversal of the Demographic Transition and Economic
Development: Evidence from Africa,” NBER Working Paper, April 2006, (12181).

29

Kambou, G., S. Devarajan, and M. Over, “The economic impact of AIDS in
an African country: simulations with a computable general equilibrium model of
Cameroon,” Journal of African Economies, 1992, 1, 109–130.
LeClerc-Madlala, S., “Youth, HIV/AIDS and the importance of sexual culture and
context,” Social Dynamics - A Journal of the Centre for African Studies, University
of Capetown, 2002, 28, 20–41.
Levinsohn, James and Justin McCrary, “Estimating Correct HIV Prevalence Rates:
The Case of Botswana,” 2008. Working Paper.
McKelvey, Christopher, “Circumcision and the Labor Market Consequences of HIV in
Developing Countries,” October 2007. Unpublished.
Murray, Jill, Pam Sonnenberg, Gill Nelson, Stuart Shearer, Andre Bester,
Arthur Begley, and Judith R. Glynn, “Effect of HIV on work-related injury
rates in South African gold miners,” AIDS, 2005, 19, 2019–2024.
Natrass, Nicoli, The Moral Economy of AIDS in South Africa, Cambridge University
Press, 2004.
Olley, S. and A. Pakes, “The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommunications
Equipment Industry,” Econometrica, 1996, 64 (6), 1263–1298.
Rosenbaum, Paul R. and Donald B. Rubin, “The Central Role of the Propensity
Score in Observational Studies for Causal Effects,” Biometrika, 1983, 70 (1), 41–55.
Shisana, Olive and et al., South African National HIV Prevalence, HIV Incidence, Behaviour and Communication Survey, 2005, Human Sciences Research Council, 2005.
Published in Cape Town.
Strauss, John and Duncan Thomas, “Health, Nutrition, and Economic Development,”
Journal of Economic Literature, 1998, 36 (2), 766–817.
Thirumurthy, Harsha, Joshua Graff Zivin, and Markus Goldstein, “The Economic
Impact of AIDS Treatment: Labor Supply in Western Kenya,” NBER Working Paper,
2005, (11871). Forthcoming in JHR (XXX).
Thomas, Duncan and et al., “Causal Effect of Health on Labor Market Outcomes:
Experimental Evidence,” California Center for Population Research On-Line Working
Paper Series, September 2006, (070).
UNAIDS, “UNAIDS/WHO AIDS Epidemic Update,” Technical Report, UNAIDS/WHO
December 2005.
Wawer, Maria, G Kigozi, D Serwadda, F Makumbi, Nalugoda, S Watya,
D Buwembo, V Ssempijja, L Moulton, and R Gray, “Trial of Male Circumci-

30

sion in HIV+ Men, Rakai, Uganda: Effects in HIV+ Men and in Women Partners,”
February 2008. Paper presented at Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic
Infections.
Weiss, Helen A., Maria A. Quigley, and Richard J. Hayes, “Male circumcision and
risk of HIV infection in sub-Saharan Africa: a systematic review and meta-analysis,”
AIDS, 2000, 14, 2361–70.
Werker, Eric, Amrita Ahuja, and Brian Wendell, “Male Circumcision and AIDS:
The Macroeconomic Impact of a Health Crisis,” Harvard Business School Working
Paper, October 2006, (07-025).
Young, Alwyn, “The Gift of the Dying: The Tragedy of AIDS and the Welfare of Future
African Generations,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2005, 120 (2).
Zuma, K., M.N. Lurie, B.G. Williams, D. Mkaya-Mwamburi, G.P. Garnett, and
A. W. Sturm, “Risk factors of sexually transmitted infections among migrant and
non-migrant sexual partnerships from rural South Africa,” Epidemiol.Infect., 2005,
133, 421–428.

31

Table 1: Sample sizes
Full sample
Total sample
23,275
Aged 15 and up
16,398
Agreed to HIV test
12,032
Tested HIV+
1,351
Infected for more than 6 months
1,172

African only
13,935
9,664
7,443
1,239
1,068

Table 2: Naı̈ve HIV prevalence rates by race
Race
African
Coloured
Indian
White
Total

HIV prevalence rate (%)
17.34
2.73
1.27
0.53
14.14

N
7,443
1,041
2,468
1,058
12,010

1

Sample includes all individuals aged 15 and over.

2

Rates are calculated using sample weights only.

Table 3: Employment status by HIV testing status (for African men and
women)
Employment status
Men
Employed (and other)
Unemployed (broad definition)
Student (NEA)
Other NEA
Missing data
Total
Women
Employed (and other)
Unemployed (broad definition)
Student (NEA)
Other NEA
Missing data
Total
1

HIV+

HIV-

Not tested

Total

N

44.53
38.19
5.02
5.15
7.12
100

34.82
27.92
25.25
9.60
2.41
100

37.64
27.93
26.54
7.18
0.71
100

36.54
28.99
23.47
8.53
2.47
100

1,329
986
921
301
65
3,602

21.19
56.61
8.50
13.20
0.50
100

20.00
35.67
16.26
26.97
1.10
100

21.82
38.93
17.14
21.34
0.77
100

20.57
39.66
15.22
23.62
0.93
100

1,309
2,260
1,059
1,374
60
6,062

Sample includes all individuals aged 15 and over. NEA: not economically active.

32

Table 4: Propensity score regression for HIV+ status (base case)
Variable
Age
Female
Urban resident
Never married
Completed primary education
Completed secondary education
Holds a matric qualification
Has some post-matric education
Has had sex
Age at first sex
Age at first sex squared
Used a condom at first sex
Knows HIV transmitted through vaginal sex
Believes HIV not transmitted through witchcraft
Knows condoms prevent HIV transmission
Knows reducing number of partners reduces risk
Male of pension age in household
Female of pension age in household
Pseudo-R2
Observations

33

Coefficient
0.138***
(0.051)
0.470***
(0.112)
0.305**
(0.127)
0.371***
(0.126)
0.347
(0.216)
0.338*
(0.201)
0.096
(0.232)
-0.514*
(0.277)
2.454**
(1.066)
-0.165*
(0.096)
0.004*
(0.002)
-0.285*
(0.169)
-0.169
(0.209)
-0.139
(0.169)
-0.121
(0.175)
0.199*
(0.119)
-0.002
(0.479)
-0.233
(0.193)
0.07
4,620

Table 5: Balancing tests for variables used in estimation of propensity score.
Variable
Age
Female
Eastern Cape
Northern Cape
Free State
Kwa-Zulu Natal
Northwest Province
Gauteng
Mpumalanga
Limpopo
Urban dweller
Never married
Has had sex
Age at first sex
Age at first sex-squared
Completed primary education
Completed secondary education
Holds a matric qualification
Completed some post-matric educ
Used a condom at first sex
Knows HIV transmitted through vaginal sex
Believes HIV not transmitted through witchcraft
Knows condoms prevent HIV transmission
Knows reducing number of partners reduces risk
Male of pension age in household
Female of pension age in household
1

Unweighted
Diff. Std. E
-2.587
0.533
0.106
0.026
-0.019
0.015
-0.003
0.002
0.003
0.019
0.069
0.022
-0.011
0.018
0.019
0.023
0.034
0.014
-0.064
0.013
0.071
0.026
0.088
0.026
0.016
0.013
-0.150
0.420
-8.242
9.125
0.006
0.023
0.057
0.026
0.007
0.021
-0.041
0.011
-0.021
0.018
-0.006
0.013
-0.010
0.019
-0.004
0.016
0.027
0.025
-0.015
0.018
-0.025
0.013

t-Stat
-4.86
4.02
-1.23
-1.82
0.17
3.10
-0.65
0.81
2.50
-4.77
2.67
3.34
1.30
-0.36
-0.90
0.27
2.18
0.36
-3.80
-1.15
-0.49
-0.54
-0.25
1.10
-0.83
-1.86

Reweighted
Diff. Std. E
-0.255
0.496
0.000
0.027
-0.002
0.015
0.000
0.002
-0.001
0.018
0.003
0.024
0.001
0.017
0.004
0.024
-0.003
0.015
-0.002
0.012
0.002
0.027
0.014
0.027
0.002
0.012
0.021
0.432
-0.366
9.420
-0.007
0.024
0.008
0.027
0.001
0.022
0.002
0.010
0.003
0.018
-0.002
0.014
0.002
0.020
0.003
0.016
0.001
0.025
-0.003
0.017
-0.001
0.014

Difference between HIV+ and HIV- subsamples. Includes all individuals aged 15 and older.

34

t-Stat
-0.51
-0.01
-0.16
-0.08
-0.03
0.11
0.07
0.18
-0.19
-0.19
0.09
0.50
0.14
0.05
-0.04
-0.29
0.30
0.03
0.20
0.17
-0.18
0.10
0.16
0.04
-0.16
-0.10

Marginal effect of being HIV+ from naı̈ve (unconditional) difference in means,
logit with controls, propensity score reweighting (RW) and control function (CF).
Table 6: Marginal effect of being HIV+ on likelihood of being unemployed.
Sample
Full sample
Male
Female
Matric and up
Less than Matric
Rural
Urban
1

2

3

Naı̈ve
0.079
(0.026)
-0.003
(0.044)
0.095
(0.028)
0.044
(0.059)
0.103
(0.035)
0.082
(0.041)
0.091
(0.033)

***

***

***
**
***

Logit
0.065
(0.029)
0.064
(0.051)
0.059
(0.031)
-0.027
(0.073)
0.109
(0.035)
0.051
(0.041)
0.080
(0.039)

**

***

**

RW
0.062
(0.024)
0.061
(0.046)
0.055
(0.028)
-0.006
(0.072)
0.100
(0.031)
0.046
(0.035)
0.076
(0.033)

***

***

**

CF
0.070
(0.022)
0.080
(0.041)
0.060
(0.026)
0.014
(0.059)
0.109
(0.031)
0.067
(0.032)
0.070
(0.029)

***

N
4620
1761

**

2859
839

***

2581

**

1973

**

2647

Full sample and results by sex include individuals aged 15 and older. Results by education level are
restricted to individuals aged 25 and older.
Naı̈ve is OLS without controls. Controls used in logit are same as those used in propensity score
estimation.
Bootstrapped standard errors reported for RW and CF. *** significant at 99 percent level, ** significant at 95 percent level.

35

Appendix Table A1
Sensitivity check using narrow definition of unemployment.
Marginal effect of being HIV+ from naı̈ve (unconditional) difference in means,
logit with controls, propensity score reweighting (RW) and control function (CF).
Sample
Naı̈ve
Logit
RW
CF
N
Full sample
0.068 *** 0.025
0.034
0.038 *** 4620
(0.026)
(0.029)
(0.026)
(0.024)
Male
-0.012
0.021
0.031
0.049
1761
(0.042)
(0.047)
(0.045)
(0.043)
Female
0.086 *** 0.031
0.027
0.040 **
2859
(0.031)
(0.034)
(0.032)
(0.029)
Matric and up
0.017
-0.049
-0.007
0.015
839
(0.058)
(0.067)
(0.064)
(0.058)
Less than Matric 0.091 *** 0.044
0.051
0.063 *** 2581
(0.035)
(0.037)
(0.033)
(0.032)
Rural
0.063
0.002
0.009
0.039 **
1973
(0.043)
(0.047)
(0.042)
(0.034)
Urban
0.082 **
0.038
0.049
0.040 **
2647
(0.033)
(0.036)
(0.033)
(0.030)
1

2

3

Full sample and results by sex include individuals aged 15 and older. Results by education
level are restricted to individuals aged 25 and older.
Naı̈ve is OLS without controls. Controls used in logit are same as those used in propensity
score estimation.
Bootstrapped standard errors reported for RW and CF. *** significant at 99 percent level,
** significant at 95 percent level.

36

Appendix Table A2
Sensitivity check including not economically active (NEA) individuals in the sample.
Marginal effect of being HIV+ from naı̈ve (unconditional) difference in means,
logit with controls, propensity score reweighting (RW) and control function (CF).
Sample
Naı̈ve
Logit
RW
CF
N
Full sample
0.180 *** 0.086 *** 0.093 *** 0.104 *** 7443
(0.022)
(0.023)
(0.022)
(0.021)
Male
0.103 *** 0.048
0.063
0.101 *** 2672
(0.039)
(0.040)
(0.044)
(0.039)
Female
0.209 *** 0.096 *** 0.100 *** 0.087 *** 4771
(0.026)
(0.028)
(0.027)
(0.025)
Matric and up
0.056
-0.007
0.013
0.023
932
(0.056)
(0.064)
(0.067)
(0.056)
Less than Matric 0.178 *** 0.090 *** 0.096 *** 0.096 *** 3804
(0.029)
(0.030)
(0.029)
(0.029)
Rural
0.177 *** 0.073 **
0.084 **
0.099 *** 3538
(0.034)
(0.035)
(0.035)
(0.031)
Urban
0.185 *** 0.100 *** 0.106 *** 0.110 *** 3905
(0.029)
(0.030)
(0.030)
(0.028)
1

2

3

Full sample and results by sex include individuals aged 15 and older. Results by education level are
restricted to individuals aged 25 and older.
Naı̈ve is OLS without controls. Controls used in logit are same as those used in propensity score
estimation.
Bootstrapped standard errors reported for RW and CF. *** significant at 99 percent level, ** significant at 95 percent level.

37

.4
.35
.3
HIV prevalence
.15 .2 .25
.1
.05
0
15

20

25

30

35

40

45 50 55
Age group
Male

60

65

70

75

80

Female

Figure 1: Age profile of naı̈ve HIV prevalence– Africans only

38

85

4
3
2
1
0
0

.2

.4

.6

x0
HIVnegative

HIVpositive

Figure 2: Empirical distributions of the propensity scores for the full African sample
(N=4620.)

39

