NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE PROMISE OF BEIJING:
EVALUATING THE IMPACT OF THE 2008 OLYMPIC GAMES ON AIR QUALITY
Yuyu Chen
Ginger Zhe Jin
Naresh Kumar
Guang Shi
Working Paper 16907
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16907

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2011

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Yuyu Chen, Ginger Zhe Jin, Naresh Kumar, and Guang Shi. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Promise of Beijing: Evaluating the Impact of the 2008 Olympic Games on Air Quality
Yuyu Chen, Ginger Zhe Jin, Naresh Kumar, and Guang Shi
NBER Working Paper No. 16907
March 2011
JEL No. D0,Q53,Q58
ABSTRACT
To prepare for the 2008 Olympic Games, China adopted a number of radical measures to improve
air quality. Using officially reported air pollution index (API) from 2000 to 2009, we show that these
measures improved the API of Beijing during and after the Games, but 60% of the effect faded away
by the end of October 2009. Since the credibility of API data has been questioned, an objective and
indirect measure of air quality at a high spatial resolution – aerosol optimal depth (AOD), derived
using the data from the NASA satellites – was analyzed and compared with the API trend. The analysis
confirms that the improvement was real but temporary and most improvement was attributable to plant
closure and traffic control. Our results suggest that it is possible to achieve real environmental improvement
in an authoritarian regime but the magnitude of the effect and how long it lasts depend on the political
motivation behind the policy interventions.
Yuyu Chen
Applied Economics Department
Guanghua School of Management
Peking University
Beijing, 100871
Chenyuyu@gsm.pku.edu.cn

Naresh Kumar
Department of Geography
The University of Iowa
316 Jessup Hall
Iowa City, Iowa 52242
naresh-kumar@uiowa.edu

Ginger Zhe Jin
University of Maryland
Department of Economics
3105 Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742-7211
and NBER
jin@econ.umd.edu

Guang Shi
Applied Economics Department
Guanghua School of Management
Peking University
Beijing, 100871
shiguangpku@gmail.com

1. Introduction
Air pollution is a great challenge for human health. What policy interventions are
effective in improving air quality? How long will their effects last? The radical air-cleaning
actions that China took before the 2008 Olympic Games provide a unique opportunity to answer
these questions.
Before the Games, China was often cited for elevated air pollution levels. This risked
China‟s stake to host the 2008 Beijing Olympic Games and put China‟s air pollution under the
world‟s spotlight. Since the primary motive of hosting the Games was to establish a positive
image of China, improving air quality became one of the most visible tasks for the Chinese
government. Under an authoritarian regime1, China was able to take a series of radical actions
quickly at a large scale. These actions, including plant closure/relocation, furnace replacement,
introduction of new emission standard, and stringent traffic control, cost over US$10 billion.2
Plus the $42.9 billion3 spent on city infrastructure and Olympic stadiums,4 Beijing Olympics
were arguably the largest natural experiment in air cleaning and the most expensive Games in the
Olympic history.
Although poor air quality in Beijing drew public attention worldwide before and during
the Olympics, China did not allow individual researchers to access in situ measurements of air
pollution. Given the data constraints, we rely on the official daily air pollution index (API)
published by the Ministry of Environmental Protection of China (MEP), as well as the aerosol
optical depth (AOD) derived using the data from the Moderate Resolution Imaging
Spectraradiomenter (MODIS) aboard NASA's Terra and Aqua satellites (which cross China daily
at 10:30am and 1:30pm local time, respectively). API is a composite index of Sulphur Dioxide
(SO2), Nitrogen Dioxide (NO2), and total suspended particles (TSP); and AOD represents the
1

China is classified as an authoritarian regime according to the Economist Intelligence Unit‟s Democracy Index
(2008), accessed at www.economist.com/node/12499352?story_id=o12499352.
2
Both UNEP (2009) and Zhang (2008) report that the planned environmental investment is $5.6 billion between 1998
and 2002, and $6.6 billion between 2003 and 2007. According to Zhang (2008), the actual environmental investment made
between 1998 and 2007 is $15.7 billion.
3
According to the city government of Beijing, the total city infrastructure investment made between 2001 and 2008 is roughly
280 billion RMB (or US$41 billion) and the total investment in Olympic stadiums is 13 billion RMB (or US$1.9 billion), see
more details at http://finance.people.com.cn/GB/7609928.html.
4

An official audit from the State Council of China concludes that the Olympics made a modest profit of US$145
million with total expenditure of US$2.8093 billion and total income of $2.975 billion. However, this report does
not include many expenditures spent by the local government in the name of the Olympic Games
(http://www.runblogrun.com/2009/06/beijing_olympics_made_103_mill.html). Media has estimated the total
expenditure to be $43 billion (http://www.sourcejuice.com/1183548/2009/06/19/China-announced-results-auditconfirmed-clean-Olympics/).
2

concentration of airborne solid and liquid particulates that can absorb, reflect and scatter the
electromagnetic radiation. The credibility of API has been questioned (Andrews 2008), but AOD
is an objective measure retrieved from satellite data and immune from any gaming incentives
facing Chinese officials.
Our main methodology is comparing Beijing with 28 non-Olympic cities before, during
and after the Games while controlling for a long list of differential factors. We also separately
control for five cities that co-hosted the Games in other parts of China (referred to as co-host
cities) and three cities surrounding Beijing that adopted measures to improve air quality in and
around Beijing (referred to as neighbor cities). Time-wise, we take the one and half years before
the setup of the Beijing Organizing Committee for the Games of the XXIX Olympiad (BOCOG)
as the benchmark period (6/5/2000-12/12/2001) and detect treatment effects in three windows:
the seven-year preparation period (12/13/2001-8/7/2008), the one month during the Olympic and
Paralympic Games (8/8/2008-9/17/2008), and 13 months after the Games (9/18/200810/31/2009).
After controlling for various factors, we find that the average API of Beijing dropped
from 109.01 in 2000 and 2001 to 76.69 during the Games. Most of the improvement did not
occur until the Games started. After the Games ended, we estimate that the API of Beijing
reverts to 82.52 in one month and to 96.29 ten-to-thirteen months after the Games. In
comparison, the AOD of Beijing (which shows a positive relationship with air pollution) started
to decline before the Games, continued to decline during the Games, and reached the lowest
level 2-6 months after the Games. In contrast to surface measures of API, aerosol can be
circulated in the air for a longer life span, so the delay in AOD improvement is not surprising.
Consistent with the API findings, the improvement in AOD started to revert since Spring 2009.
This suggests that air quality improvement in Beijing was real but temporary. Further analysis of
API and visibility (another official statistics related to air pollution but with less media attention)
finds little evidence of gaming in API.
The unique setting of Beijing Olympics allows us to compare different air cleaning
actions. Accounting for the different timing of actions, we find that the API improvement,
especially the improvement in TSP, is most attributable to plant closure and traffic control. More
importantly, the fine resolution of AOD enables us to link the center of each AOD observation to
road density and plant closure within a five-kilometer radius. As expected, we find more AOD
3

improvements in the areas with greater road density and more plant closures but all of the
differential effects decline gradually over time. These findings are consistent with the fact that
most plant closures and traffic controls were only effective in the periods immediately before or
during the Games.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Sections 2-4 summarize the background, the
related literature and the data respectively. Section 5 presents the main results on API and AOD.
Section 6 addresses the concern of data gaming from Chinese officials. Section 7 examines the
mechanisms that can potentially contribute to the air quality improvement of Beijing. Section 8
summarizes the main findings of this paper.
2. Background
China has been known for poor air quality. The 1996 national standard on Sulphur
Dioxide (SO2), Nitrogen Dioxide (NO2), total suspended particles (TSP), and particulate matter
with an aerodynamic diameter of 10 microns or smaller (PM10) were 2-7 times higher than the
standards established by the World Health Organization (UNEP 2009). An amendment in 2000
further weakened the Chinese standard for NO2 and Ozone. Even so, the relatively generous
standard is hard to enforce in China. Sixteen Chinese cities appeared on the list of the world‟s
top twenty most polluted places in 2007.5 Some athletes were so concerned about the air quality
that they planned to either wear masks in competition or skip the Beijing Olympic Games (Los
Angeles Times March 12, 2008; New York Times March 12, 2008).
China adopted a number of air cleaning policies for the Olympic Games. After the
International Olympic Committee awarded Beijing the 2008 Games on July 13, 2001, China
established the Beijing Organizing Committee for the Games of the XXIX Olympiad (BOCOG)
on December 13, 2001. The main responsibility of BOCOG was preparing for the 2008 Games,
this included infrastructure development, environment improvement, public relation, and
logistics. The three main concepts promoted by BOCOG were “Green Olympics, High-tech
Olympics and People's Olympics”, highlighting the importance of environmental protection and
public interests.
We assume that December 13, 2001 was the earliest date when the Chinese government
5

http://www.cbsnews.com/stories/2007/06/06/eveningnews/main2895653.shtml.

4

started to implement air quality improvement policies for the Olympic Games. To the extent that
the Olympic-related air cleaning efforts started before the setup of the BOCOG, our results
represent a conservative estimate of the overall effect. The main treatment period ranged from
the start of the 2008 Olympic Games (8/8/2008) to the end of the Paralympic Games
(9/17/2008). The seven year window from the setup of BOCOG to the start of the Games is
referred to as “Games Preparation” and the 13 months after the Games (9/18/2008 to
10/31/2009) is referred to “Post Games.” All these are compared to the “benchmark” period from
the start of our data (6/5/2000 for API and 2/26/2000 for AOD) to the setup of BOCOG
(12/12/2001).
To prepare for the Games, China took most air cleaning actions in Beijing. December 31
of 2002 marked the end of Beijing‟s Phase 8 environmental cleaning efforts (phase 1 started
from 1998), which included conversion of 1500 coal furnaces into clean fuel, retirement of
23,000 old automobiles, reduction in emission from the major industrial plants by 30 thousand
tons, and an increase of 100 km2 area under green coverage.
In 2003 and 2004, Beijing reduced the industrial use of coal by 10 million tons,
desulfurated the air pollutants from the YanShan Petrochemical Company, shut down coal-fired
generators in the Capital Steel Company and Beijing Coking Plant, and closed Beijing Dyeing
Plant. Between 2005 and 2006, China constructed desulfuration, dust removal and denitrification
facilities in Beijing Thermal Power Plant and Power Plant of the Capital Steel. By the end of
October 2006, Beijing renovated 100% of the furnaces for clean fuel in five districts, and 50% in
the three other districts. The largest plant relocation – for the Capital Steel Company – started
from 2005 and the biggest action took place toward the end of 2007, the same time as the closure
of the Second Beijing Chemical Plant and Beijing Eastern Petrochemical Co. Ltd. Based on these
institutions, we define October 31, 2006 as the benchmark point for furnace renovation and
December 31, 2007 as the benchmark for plant closure.
Beijing also attempted to control for vehicle emission by adopting new emission
standards on March 1, 2008 (applicable to new vehicles only) and restricting on-road vehicles to
half based on even or odd vehicle registration number during 8/17/2007-8/20/2007 and
7/20/2008-9/20/2008. A weaker form of traffic control continued after the Games as each
registered vehicle was required to be off the road one weekday per week.
According to Streets (2007) neighboring provinces and municipalities such as Hebei,
5

Shandong and Tianjin made a significant contribution to air pollution in Beijing. Therefore, cohost and neighbor cities adopted the similar measures to improve air quality, but the magnitudes
were smaller than those for Beijing. For example, Tianjin implemented the same odd-even traffic
control but only during the Olympic Games, Shandong requested closure of 132 heavy polluting
plants during the Games, Shenyang invested 163 million RMB to replace old buses, and
Shanghai installed desulfuration facilities for large electricity generating plants. Given the
limited access to time and location specific policies, we report the general API/AOD change for
Beijing, co-host and neighbor cities, but restrict the detailed mechanism analysis to Beijing.
While the 2008 Olympic Games triggered many new efforts for cleaning air, some
environmental protection policies existed even before 2000. For example, the central government
started to build the green great wall in northern China since 1978. A nationwide policy was
adopted in 1999 to encourage farmers to convert less productive farm into green land. These
policies targeted desertification instead of air pollution, but the two are clearly linked. A more
direct nationwide campaign for “blue sky” started in 1997. Defining “blue sky” if API below
100, the central government included the frequency of blue sky days as a performance measure
reported by local officials. The 2002 amendment specified that a “model city” must have at least
80% of days with “blue sky” in a calendar year. This standard was raised to 85% in 2008.6 To
the extent that performance evaluation has a significant impact on local government policies, air
quality improvements may have occurred nationwide long before the 2008 Games. In our
analysis, we control for all the national air-cleaning policies by date fixed effects.
Some earlier air-cleaning efforts were Beijing specific. Before the setup of the BOCOG,
the city government of Beijing already carried out seven phases of air cleaning. Probably due to
the increasing occurrence of sand storms, Beijing realized that its early efforts were fruitless and
it was necessary to adopt more stringent measures to improve air quality. This led to the start of
phase 1 cleaning on December 16, 1998.7 As time went by, the 50th National Day (10/1/1999)
helped to further justify air cleaning, but the efforts of Beijing continued after the celebration.
During the seven phases of air cleaning before the setup of BOCOG, Beijing adopted many
measures, including extended use of clean fuel, introducing desulfuration of equipment, covering
6

For more details, see MEP documents #1997-349 (stipulated in May 1997), #2002-132 (stipulated on November
19, 2002) and #2008-71 (stipulated on September 21, 2008, effective January 1, 2010).
7
See Beijing municipal documents 1998 #24 (phase 1), 1999 #249 (phase 2), and 1999 #29 (phase 3) for more
details.
6

bare land with grass and trees, enforcing the retirement of heavy-duty vehicles, dust control on
construction sites, and a ban on outdoor barbeques. To the extent that Beijing had specific
reasons to adopt these policies, it was important to control for the city fixed effects and cityspecific trend.
3. Literature Review
Although researchers have attempted to investigate air quality change in response to the
Olympic related interventions (Wang et al. 2009a; Tang et al. 2009; Yao et al. 2009; Simorich
2009), the lack of access to in situ measurements of air pollution data has constrained
researchers‟ ability to fully evaluate the effects of these interventions.
Two studies have used their own measurements of air quality instead of the published
API. Wang et al. (2009a) collected PM10 and PM2.5 data in Peking University between July 28
and October 7, 2008. They found a significant correlation between the self-measured and
published PM10, but the absolute level of their self-measure is 30% higher. This finding triggered
some concerns that the official API must have been subject to manipulation, but this discrepancy
can be attributed to sampling (through systematic bias in the locations of samplers and types of
samplers used) and methodological differences (Tang et al, 2009, Yao et al. 2009, Simorich
2009). Wang et al. (2009a) also find that meteorological conditions such as wind, precipitation
and humidity account for 40% of the total variation in PM10. This finding motivates us to control
for meteorological conditions that can greatly influence concentration and transportation of air
pollutants (Kumar et al. 2011).
Wang et al. (2009b) compare the self-measured ambient concentrations of Black Carbon
(BC) in Beijing in the summers of 2007 and 2008. Although their data covered a longer time
span than that of Wang et al. (2009a), they do not control for the nationwide trend of air quality
between 2007 and 2008. The main finding of Wang et al. (2009b) is that the BC concentration
was significantly better during the traffic controls than without the traffic controls. We could not
find a precise definition of BC particles in Wang et al. (2009b), but we also suspect BC particles
are much correlated to diesel exhaust (either from heavy duty vehicles or industries).
Unlike academic researchers, United Nations published a summary report (UNEP 2009)
based on in situ measures of CO, PM10, SO2 and NO2 from the Beijing Environmental Protection
Bureau (EPB). Their data ranged from 2000 to 2008 including a couple of months immediately
7

after the Olympic Games. The report examines Beijing‟s in situ measurements before, during
and immediately after the Games while controlling for meteorological factors. As shown in
Figure 4, the officially reported API data shows a nationwide trend toward better air. This
implies that a simple before-after comparison within Beijing is likely to confound the nationwide
trend with the actual air quality improvement due to the policy interventions adopted for the
Games. We overcome this shortcoming by comparing Beijing with other big Chinese cities in the
same time horizon. We also employ API data until 13 months after the Games so as to better
evaluate the fade-away effect after the Games. Like this paper, UNEP (2009) has used several
satellite images from NASA‟s Terra and Aqua satellites for August 2008, but our resolution of
AOD (10 km x 10 km) is much smaller than theirs (100km x 100km) and our frequency is daily
instead of monthly. These rich details allow us to link AOD to the exact date and geographic
location of plant closure and traffic control, a process essential to attribute air quality
improvement to specific policy interventions.
Andrews (2008) suspected that Beijing may have manipulated the official API data for
several reasons: Beijing relocated monitoring stations over time; the 2000 MEP standard for air
quality weakened the limits of Nitrogen Oxides and Ozone; the number of days with API
between 96 and 100 was significantly higher than the number of days with API between 101 and
105. Guinot (2008) suggests that it is not uncommon to add monitoring stations with economic
and urban development and the uncertainty in the API metrics may range from 15% to 25% due
to measurement errors. In addition to using high resolution AOD data as an objective measure of
air quality, another novel aspect of our research is to investigate the gaming of API using API
and visibility, another official statistics related to air pollution but with less media attention.
A growing body of literature has attempted to evaluate the effect policy interventions on
air quality in other developing countries. Davis (2008) examines the traffic restrictions in
Mexico City (forcing vehicles off the road one day per week) and finds no effect on air quality.
He attributes the finding to more vehicles in circulation and a composition change toward highemission vehicles. In a similar study, Kathuria (2002) finds that the emission controls that Delhi
adopted in 1999 to 2001 had little impact on air quality improvement for two potential reasons.
First, more vehicles were added on the road after policy went into effect. Second, no
supplemental policies were in place to check the traffic volume despite the fact that new vehicles
had better emission standards. Kumar et al. (2009) examined air pollution
8

distribution/redistribution in Delhi in response to a series of air quality regulations. Two
alarming findings emerged from this study. First, the air quality of the City improved after the
regulations, but the effects of the regulations faded away several years after the regulations.
Second, while the regulations improved air quality in the city, the air quality of neighboring
areas, without the regulations in place, deteriorated. Another study by Foster and Kumar (2011)
suggests that the improvement in air quality of the City improved respiratory health of Delhi
residents and the deteriorated air quality in the neighboring areas is likely to have adverse health
effects. Foster, Gutierrez and Kumar (2009) examine Mexican plants‟ voluntary participation in
a major pollution reduction program. They find evidence that measures of voluntary participation
are related to lower AOD and less infant mortality due to respiratory causes.
Our research is also related to a broader literature on environmental policies. Several
studies in the US have documented the health effects of air pollution (Chay and Greenstone
2002, Almond et al. 2009, Currie and Neidell 2005), the effect of environmental policies on
polluting industries (Henderson 1996, Becker and Henderson 2000, List et al. 2003), and the
social costs of environmental policies (Hazilla and Kopp 1990). Most of these studies suggest
that air quality improvement is a long time process and largely depends on the dynamic interplay
of government policies and private compliance. In contrast, the actions that China undertook for
the Beijing Olympics were largely government-driven, much more intensive, and implemented
in a relatively short period. Not only do these features help separate the effects of the Chinese
efforts from other confounding factors in the long run, they also help understand how much air
quality improvement can be achieved if an authoritarian government is willing and able to
implement intensive measures in a short time.
More specifically, this study is likely to augment our understanding of the political
economy of environmental protection in a socialist country. It has been argued that authoritarian
regimes are more reluctant to protect the environment as they enjoy a greater-than-median
income share and have a shorter-than-average time horizon than a democratic regime. Congleton
(1992) and Murdoch and Sandler (1997) show that the democratic countries are more likely to
support and enforce chlorofluorocarbon emissions control under the Montreal Protocol.
However, one factor less noticed in the literature is the greater administrative power of
authoritarians. If political opportunities motivate authoritarians to protect the environment, an
authoritarian regime like China, may overcome industrial resistance and implement
9

environmental protection policies quicker and at a large scale. These politically motivated
interventions set the stage for a social experiment to understand how policy interventions in an
authoritarian regime can improve air quality and protect the environment in a relatively short
time frame.
4. Data
The data for this research were acquired from several sources: the official API data
published by the MEP, visibility and other meteorological data from the China Meteorological
Administration (CMA) and the National Climatic Data Center (NCDC 2007), and the AOD data
from NASA. Data from China, reported by city and day, were available from June 5, 2000 to
October 31, 2009; AOD was extracted at 10km spatial resolution for every day within 100km
distance to the city center for each city from February 26, 2000 to December 31, 2009.
API Data: For each focal city, the MEP aggregates the measured intensities of NO2, SO2
and TSP into a daily air pollution index (API) ranging from 0 to 500.8 Specifically, suppose a
city has M stations and each station monitors NO2, SO2 and TSP for N times each day,9 MEP
first computes the daily average of all the MxN measures for each pollutant and then translate the
daily mean intensity into pollutant-specific API according to linear spines with the cutoff points
defined in Table 1.10 The overall API is the maximum of all the pollutant-specific APIs. If that
maximum is above 500, the overall API is capped at 500. An API below 50 is defined as
“excellent” air quality, 50-100 as “good”, 100-200 as “slightly polluted”, 200-300 as
“moderately polluted” and above 300 as “heavily pollution.” A crude categorization refers to a
day with API at or below 100 as “blue sky.”
MEP reports API data by city and day, and the category of the dominant pollutant(s) if
API is above 50. By this definition, we can infer the absolute level of TSP for 72.9% of data
points across all cities. For the other 19.9% of the data where API was less than 50, we knew
TSP was upward bounded by the TSP level corresponding to the reported API. In comparison,
8

MEP monitors the intensity of CO, but does not include it in the current API calculation because the calculation
formula was set ten years ago and at that time the vehicle volume in China was very low. MEP is considering adding
CO and other pollutants for future API. Source: http://news.163.com/09/0312/11/5470SBA9000120GU.html
9
The MEP stipulates the number of monitoring stations according to city population and the size of the established
area. For a large city like Beijing, one monitoring station is required for every 25-30 km2 and the total number of
stations must be at least 8.
10
For example, if the daily mean of TSP is 370 μg/m3, the corresponding API of TSP is (370-300)/(500-300)*(200100)+100 = 135.
10

inference on NO2 and SO2 was much more difficult because only 0.35% of city-days reported
NO2 and 6.85% reported SO2 as the dominant pollutant.
Meteorological data from CMA are reported at 2pm each day at a fixed point in each
city. It allows us to control for local temperature, precipitation, barometric pressure, sunshine,
humidity and wind. The data also include visibility, the greatest distance at which an observer
with normal eyesight can discern a dark object from the horizontal sky. Researchers have shown
that API and visibility are negatively correlated (Che et al. 2006, Fan and Li 2008) and visibility
is considered to be an important predictor of fine particulates (Ozkaynak et al. 1985, Huang et al.
2009). 11 Like API, visibility is reported by Chinese officials but attracts less media attention than
API. For this reason, Section 6 will use visibility to check the reliability and gaming of API.
Should there be gaming of API , it should show greater improvement before, during and after the
Games than the improvement in visibility.
Conditional on having non-break API and visibility data, our analysis consists of 37
cities.12 We grouped these cities into four categories: Beijing was a category by itself because
most of the Games were held in Beijing; Qingdao, Shenyang, Tianjin, Shanghai, and
Qinghuangdao were categorized as the “co-host” cities because they hosted some of the Games
in the treatment period.13 BOCOG defined six cities close to Beijing as “Olympic Environment
Protection Cities.” Our sample included the three largest neighboring cities: Taiyuan,
Shijiazhuang, Huhehaote.14 The other 28 cities were grouped in the category of control cities. As
shown in Figure 1, the sample covered almost every provincial capital in China and most
treatment cities (Beijing, co-host and neighboring cities) are located in the developed parts of
east China.
AOD Data: The daily 10km AOD data (Level 2, collection 5.0) were acquired from
NASA (NASA 2010). AOD is retrieved using the data from Moderate Resolution Imaging
Spectroradiometer (MODIS) aboard Terra and Aqua satellites. The AOD extraction procedure is
11

Fine particulates (PM2.5), are defined as particulates with less than 2.5µm in aerodynamic diameter.
Although the MEP reports API for 86 cities and the CMA visibility data cover 69 cities, only 42 cities has API
data in 2000 and the visibility data are incomplete for some cities between 1993 and 2009. For an unknown reason,
the API data are missing on June 4, 2008 for all cities. So the “non-break” criterion ignores the missing data on June
4, 2008.
13
Qinhuangdao is the only city that violates our sampling rule because its API data is not available until 2001. We
include it in the sample in order to cover all co-host cities. Results are robust if we exclude Qinhuangdao from the
sample.
14
The other three “Olympic Environment Protection Cities” are Datong, Yangquan and Chifeng. None of them is
provincial capital.
12

11

available elsewhere (Chu, Kaufman et al. 2003; Levy, Remer et al. 2007; Levy, Remer et al.
2007). In recent years, many researchers have shown that AOD, corrected for meteorological
conditions, can predict air quality (Gupta, Christopher et al. 2006; Kumar, Chu et al. 2011).
Focusing on Delhi and Kanpur in India and Cleveland in US, Kumar et al. (2009; 2011)
demonstrate how AOD can be converted to PM10 estimates. They develop an empirical
relationship between in situ measurements of PM10 and AOD. They conclude that the AOD
captured 70% of the variations in the PM10 (monitored on the surface) after controlling for
meteorological conditions and seasonality. Since the in situ PM10 data were not available in
China, this paper utilizes AOD corrected for meteorological conditions and spatiotemporal
structure.
In addition to being immune to potential data manipulation from Chinese officials, AOD
can be extracted at a high spatial resolution (~10km x 10km). This enabled us to evaluate change
in AOD with respect to the location specific interventions of plant closure and traffic control.
Despite these advantages, there are several concerns about the AOD data. First, without the in
situ measurements of air pollution it is difficult to develop and validate robust air quality
estimates. This implies that the air quality improvement detected from AOD is relative instead of
absolute. Second, by definition, AOD captures the amount of radiation absorbed, reflected and
scattered due to the presence of solid and liquid particulates suspended in the atmosphere
(Kaufman, Gobron et al. 2002; Kaufman, Tanre et al. 2002). Since the sources of aerosol can be
natural (such as dust storm, sea salt forest fire) and anthropogenic (combustion), air quality
(PM10 concentration) predicted using AOD can vary regionally. We cannot extrapolate the PM10
predictive model of Delhi or Cleveland to China. Third, AOD is sensitive to the point and time
specific weather conditions, and it is not possible to retrieve AOD under cloudy conditions;
therefore there are systematic gaps (across time and geographic space) in AOD dataset (Kumar
2010).
In total, we retrieved 102,820 valid 10km AOD observations over Beijing from February
25, 2000 to December 31, 2009. Of all the 3,596 calendar days in the time span of this study,
only 2,297 days (64%) had valid AOD observations due to gaps in the data. On average, we had
45 data points of AOD per day over Beijing. Similarly, the AOD data were retrieved for the
other 36 cities, which brought the total sample of AOD to 2,614,734 data points.
To control for time-specific meteorological conditions at the observation time of AOD,
12

we acquired hourly global surface meteorological data from the monitoring stations in and
around the selected cities. The details on these data are available elsewhere (NCDC 2007). These
data were collocated with the AOD data within one hour time interval of AOD time on a given
day. This means we assigned the same value of meteorological conditions (from the closest
station) to all AOD values in a given city on a same day. Since there were subtle gaps in the
meteorological and AOD data, it resulted in missing values in 6% of the sample. Therefore,
meteorological conditions were imputed for missing days when AOD was available. The
procedure impute was employed to estimate missing values with the aid of continuous time and
other city specific meteorological conditions in STATA (StataCorp 2010).
Information about location-specific actions was collected for Beijing only. We
overlay a 2.5km x 2.5km grid over Beijing, and define three variables for each cell of the
grid. The first is a dummy variable that indicates whether the cell has any permanent plant
closure at present or before the study date d (close_pergd). This was defined using the exact
addresses and closure dates of four large plants. The second variable is also a dummy
variable and includes information on whether the cell has any temporary plant closure
during the study date (close_temgd). This included 20 temporary closures reported in the
local newspapers; the plant closure dates were defined as from 7/20/2008 to 9/20/2008. The
exact locations of permanently or temporarily closed plants are shown in Figure 2. The third
variable is the length of major and secondary roads in cell g during 2005 (road_deng). This
variable is time-invariant and will be interacted with the period dummies to capture policy
interventions due to the Games. Figure 3 shows the cell-by-cell distribution of major and
secondary roads in Beijing.
To merge these location-specific interventions with AOD, we take the center of each
AOD observation (by latitude and longitude) and draw a 5km radius around it. We then sum
and average the values of all three variables (close_pergd, close_temgd and road_deng) in all
2.5km cells that overlap with the search radius.
Supplemental Data: In addition to the API, meteorological and satellite data, we
acquired data on economic development indicators, including GDP growth rate, GDP per
capita, total industrial production, and population density by city and year from the
statistical yearly book published by the National Statistical Bureau. These data were
available up to 2008. In the main analysis, dummy variables were created to indicate
13

missing socioeconomic variables in 2009.
To the extent that Beijing‟s unobservable economic growth may follow a different
linear trend over time, it is controlled for in the city-specific trend. To further address the
concern that Beijing may experience different economic growth in 2009, we use 2007 and
2008 economic development data to extrapolate the 2009 data for each city separately. In
2008, many economic activities of Beijing were Olympic specific, so this imputation tends
to overestimate the 2009 economic growth in Beijing and therefore an analysis controlling
for the imputed data should underestimate the fade-away effect in 2009. Our results are
robust to the addition of the imputed data.
Other data include the 1999 total energy consumption at the provincial level from the
China Energy Data Book, and the 1999 total number of motor vehicles by city from the
China Transportation Yearbook of 2000. Our analysis allows these two variables to affect a
quadratic time trend of air pollution. We do not use the after-2000 data on energy
consumption and motor vehicles because a couple of Olympic-motivated policies target
them directly. A dummy of heating season is defined as one if a city has a regular heating
supply during the winter and if the date under study is between November 15 and March
15.15
5.

Main Results

5.1

Descriptive Analysis
Table 2 reports the average daily API by treatment periods and city groups. Before the

establishment of BOCOG, the average APIs of Beijing and its neighboring cities were 20-50
points higher than that of control and co-host cities. While the API of every city group improved
before the end of the Games, neighboring cities did not show improvement in the preparation
period. In comparison, the improvement in Beijing was not obvious until the start of the Games.
During the Games, the API of Beijing and its neighbor cities was better than the rest of the
sample. After the Games, every city group reverted, but not fully to where it was before the setup
of the BOCOG. Similar patterns appear in the absolute levels of TSP, which was inferred using

15

Roughly speaking, cities to the north of the Huai River have regular heating supply. More detailed city by city
variation is borrowed from Almond et al. (2009). November 15 to March 15 is the heating supply dates for Beijing.
We do not know the exact heating supply dates for other cities with regular heating supply.
14

the reported API.16.
Figure 4 shows the detailed API by date and city groups. To facilitate visual comparison,
every data point plotted in Figure 4 represents a 40-day moving average of API surrounding a
specific date. Over time, API is trended down for every group. There are strong seasonal
variations: high value in winter and low in summer. This suggests that the better API during the
summer Games (as shown in Table 2) could be driven by season instead of real improvement and
a simple before-after comparison of Beijing (as in UNCP 2009) tends to overestimate the air
quality improvement due to the Olympic Games. Across groups, control and co-host cities show
similar fluctuations in API. In comparison, Beijing and neighboring cities are more similar to
each other in terms of variation in API than the control and co-host cities.
Both Table 2 and Figure 4 indicate significant variations across time, cities, and seasons.
A pretreatment trend test, after controlling for city fixed effects and day fixed effects, still shows
significantly different trends across the four city groups, suggesting that more specific controls
such as city-specific trends might be needed to derive any meaningful inferences on the causal
impact of the Olympic Games.
Table 3 summarizes the average visibility by city groups and treatment periods. In the
benchmark period, Beijing‟s visibility was slightly better than that of the co-host cities but worse
than that of control and neighboring cities. After the setup of BOCOG, Beijing‟s visibility
improved over time, while all other city groups reported the best visibility during the Games
(Figure 5). Like API, visibility shows strong seasonal variation: low visibility in winter and high
in summer.
Consistent with the literature, we find a significantly negative correlation between
visibility and API (-0.276, p-value<0.01). Regressing visibility on API and all the other
meteorological variables by city-day, resulted in an R-square of 0.404; the coefficient of API
was -0.059 with t-statistics equal to -5.04. The strong correlation between visibility and API
also indicates toward the fact that 80.12% of city-days in our sample reported TSP as the
dominant pollutant.
Table 4 summarizes the average AOD by city groups and treatment periods. Since
the small fraction of aerosols cycles and recycles longer (Textor, Schulz et al. 2006), policy
interventions may have a lagged effect on AOD. Therefore, we decompose the post period
16

Inference is available if the API is above 50 and the dominant pollutant is TSP.
15

into 5 spans, namely 1 month, 2-3 months, 4-6 months, 7-10 months and 11-16 months after
the Games. As shown in Table 4, the AOD of Beijing increased during the Games and the
most significant drop of AOD appeared in 2-5 months after the Games. By spring 2009, the
AOD of Beijing bounced back to that of the benchmark period but improved somewhat in
the rest of 2009. Similar improvement and reversion patterns appear in Figure 7 when we
plot the satellite based AOD over Beijing for the periods before, during, immediately after
and one year after the Games. The plotted AOD were corrected for meteorological
conditions and spatiotemporal trends in and around Beijing. Figure 6 shows strong
seasonality as well as similarity across the four city groups for AOD. As we expect, AOD is
positively correlated with API (correlation ~ 0.22) and negatively correlated with visibility
(~ -0.47).
5.2

Regression Results of API
Defining the unit of observation as city (c) by date (d), we use the following specification

to detect the effect of the Olympic Games on API:
(1)

∑

where  c denotes city fixed effects,  d denotes date fixed effects, t denotes the day count
between 6/5/2000 to d so that  c  t captures city-specific time trend. The key variables are the
interaction of the Beijing dummy and each treatment period. In the most basic form, {

}

distinguishes preparation from during and post the Games. A more detailed version decomposes
preparation into 2001-2004 and 2005-2008, and post period into 1, 2-3, 4-6, 7-10 and 11-13
months post the Games.
We use several sets of control cities: all the other 36 cities as control; excluding the eight
co-host and neighbor cities; all the 36 non-Beijing cities but with the co-host and neighbor cities.
This amounts to:

16

(2)

∑
∑

∑

In both specifications (1) and (2), Wcd denotes CMA reported weather conditions,
including rainfall, temperature, barometric pressure, sunshine, humidity (if rainfall is zero), wind
velocity, and four dummies for wind direction (east, south, west and north) by city and date, X cy
denotes socioeconomic factors including GDP growth rate, GDP per capita, industrial
production, and population density by city and year, Ec ,1999 denotes energy use of city c in year
1999, Vc ,1999 denotes the number of registered motor vehicles of city c in year 1999, and H cd is
the dummy of heating season. We use 1999 instead of yearly data on energy use and vehicle
stock because many Olympic preparation efforts might have a direct impact on them. To account
for their potential growth independent of the Olympic Games, we include the interactions of t2
with the 1999 energy use and the 1999 vehicle numbers.17 The error term,  cd , is clustered by
each individual city, except that all the co-host cities are pooled as one cluster and all neighbor
cities are pooled as another cluster.
Table 5 presents the estimates of  BJ , x ,  cohost , x and neighbor,x in six columns. Columns 1-4
contrast Beijing with all the other 36 cities. More specifically, Column 1 controls for daily
weather city fixed effects and date fixed effects, Column 2 adds city-specific linear trends,
Column 3 adds vehicle and energy controls which include the heating dummy and the interaction
of t2 with energy and vehicle numbers as of 1999. Column 4 adds socioeconomic factors.
Column 5 uses the same specification as Column 4 but excludes the co-host and neighbor cities
from the sample. Following specification (2), Column 6 keeps co-host and neighbor cities in the
sample, but treats them as two separate groups with different coefficients in different periods.
One consistent finding is that most API improvement in Beijing was recorded during and
immediately after the Games. Specifically, Column 1 shows that Beijing‟s API was slightly
better (-0.334, statistically insignificant) in the preparation period than the API before the birth of
BOCOG (109.31). The effect, measured by decline in API, was the highest during the Games (a
decline of 29.42 in API) but significantly smaller (13.21) after the Games. Both numbers were
17

The interactions of t*1999 energy use and t*1999 vehicle numbers are absorbed in city specific linear trends.
17

significant with 99% confidence. A similar pattern persisted when we added city-specific linear
trend, energy and socioeconomic factors or used different sets of control cities. The only
exception was that, with sufficient controls, the API improvement became statistically significant
before the Games but its magnitude was still much smaller than during or after the Games.
Our main assumption is that Beijing was comparable with the control cities without the
Game related interventions once controlled for the city-by-city differences using the city fixed
effects, the nationwide fluctuation by date fixed effects, the city-specific linear trend, weather
and other observable factors. To test this assumption, we perform a pre-treatment test using data
before the setup of BOCOG. Specifically, we divided the pre-treatment period into two:
6/5/2000-12/31/2000 and 1/1/2001-12/12/2001. Using the first segment as benchmark, we
regressed the pre-treatment API on the interaction of Beijing and the dummy of the second
period, in addition to the same controls as in Columns 1-6. The F-statistics for this interaction
coefficient, reported at the end of each column, is highly significant in Columns 1-3, but
insignificant in Columns 4-6. This suggests that it is important to control for the city-specific
trend, energy and socioeconomic factors before we interpret the estimated  BJ , x as a causal effect
of the Olympic Games on Beijing.
In contrast, if we perform the same pretreatment test on co-host and neighbor cites, the F
statistics are significant, suggesting that co-host and neighbor cities are not readily comparable to
the 28 control cities and the coefficients reported in Column 6 (  cohost , x and neighbor,x ) cannot be
interpreted as the causal effect of the Olympic Games. For this reason, we believe Column 5,
which excludes co-host and neighbor cities from the sample, yields the most robust results.18
To further examine how the effect of the Olympic Games has changed over time, we use
the same specification as in Table 5 Columns 4-5 but decompose the preparation period into two
sub-periods (prepare1 for 12/13/2001-12/31/2004, prepare2 for 1/1/2005--8/7/2008), and the
post-Games into five sub-periods (1, 2-3, 4-6, 7-10 and 11-13 months after 9/18/2008).19 Results
reported in Table 6 suggest that the API of Beijing‟s API declined slightly in the two preparation
18

In an unreported table, we replaced the dependent variable with ln (API) and found similar results in all five
columns.
19
As a robustness check, we have examined the time-varying effects differently by singling out 2007, 2006, 2005,
2004, and 2003 from the rest of the preparation period progressively. The API results on Beijing and neighbor cities
are similar to what is reported in the draft. The API results on co-host cities are less stable (some coefficients
become positive and significant), but they lead to the same conclusion that the Olympic Games do not cause any
significant API reduction in co-host cities.
18

periods (-5.076 and -2.154), but that improvement was much lower than the reduction of API
during the Games (32.319). Interestingly, the API improvement declined to 26.494 one month
immediately after the Games and 12.723 eleven to thirteen months after the Games. The F-tests
conducted at the end of Table 6 suggest that most of the reversions are statistically significant. In
short, the biggest effect of the Olympic Games on Beijing API took place during the Games and
roughly 60% of the effect faded away one year after the Games.
5.3 Results on AOD
To address the concern that API may have been subject to manipulated (Andrew 2008),
we resort to AOD as a more objective measure of air quality. Table 7 reports the regression
results as we rerun specification (1) on AOD. Since the AOD locations are irregular (because of
varying satellite path every day), we control for city fixed effects as well as dummies describing
whether the distance from the center of AOD to the center of the city is less than 12.5km,
between 12.5km and 25km, and greater than 25km. Since the point-time-specific weather
conditions (dew point, temperature, wind speed, and relative humidity) were highly autocorrelated, factor analysis was employed to collapse these variables into three uncorrelated
factors.
Table 7 focuses on the three crude time spans: before, during and after the Games. The
improvement of AOD (meaning declines) was not statistically significant until after the Games.
To better understand the timing of AOD improvements, Table 8 decomposed the preparation
period into prepare1-2 and the post period into after1-5. Like before, we added controls
progressively from Column 1 to Column 4, excluded co-host and neighboring cities in Column 5,
and estimated the treatment effects for co-host and neighboring cities separately in Column 6.
Table 8 only reports the coefficients of Beijing.
All six columns present a consistent finding: the improvement of AOD started before the
Games, sped up during the Games, and reached the best level in 2-6 months after the Games.
However, by spring 2009, the AOD improvement of Beijing reverted significantly as compared
to the best level. These estimates are greater than that reported in Table 7 because the estimation
is somewhat sensitive to how we decompose the preparation period. Different decompositions
imply different identification on the coefficient of city-specific time trend. We tried a number of
divisions on the preparation periods. While the point estimates vary, we always reach the same
19

conclusion that AOD improvement was the best 2-6 months after the Games and gradually
declined afterwards.
The sharper reversion of API after the Games suggest that the policy interventions
adopted may have immediate effects on the surface measurement of air quality. However, the
best improvement in AOD that represents the optical thickness in the atmosphere and influenced
by meteorological conditions was achieved several weeks after the Games. This suggests that
cycling and recycling of pollutants, especially fine mode aerosols in the atmosphere may take
several weeks before the full effects of interventions are realized in the atmosphere and on the
surface. In the exploratory analysis, we controlled for daily weather conditions up to 10 days
before the study time. This is the best we can do given the potential colinearity between current
and lagged weather. Like in Table 8, significant decline of AOD did not occur in Beijing except
for 2-6 months after the Games.
An alternate explanation for the reversion of air quality improvement is economic
development in 2009. Unfortunately, the National Bureau of Statistics of China has not
published the city-specific report for 2009. Therefore we cannot control for it directly. In the
exploratory analysis, we make a linear projection of 2009 socioeconomic factors based on cityspecific data of 2007 and 2008. If anything, this tends to overestimate the economic development
of Beijing in 2009 because a lot of development in 2008 was driven by one-time investment for
the Olympic Games. With the imputed 2009 socioeconomic variable, we rerun Tables 5-10 and
find that the results are very much similar to what is reported here. This robustness suggests that
the reversion of air quality improvement in Beijing is unlikely driven by the unobserved
economic development in 2009.20
6. Gaming of API
This section examines API more intensively and compares it with visibility, another
official statistics reported by China but received with much less media attention. If the
improvement in API was driven by gaming, visibility should not show much improvement.
Gaming of blue sky days: One reason that led Andrews (2008) to suspect the API data
for Beijing was higher frequency in the range right below the cutoff for blue sky days (96-100)
than in the range right above it (101-105). This pattern could be driven by gaming if Beijing
20

Results are available upon request.
20

officials systematically underreported a slightly-above-100 API than slightly below the 100
mark. One may argue that such gaming is more likely than blatant cheating either because it is
easier to manipulate air immediately surrounding the samplers, or because large scale
underreporting is more likely to raise questions from the central government. However, gaming
is not the only possibility. Besides measurement error, as argued in Guinot (2008), the density of
the real API could have decreased between 96 and 105, even without gaming.
We plot the kernel density of API for each city group (Beijing, co-host, neighbor and
control) in Figures 8(a) to 8(d). Each figure presents four densities, corresponding to before the
setup of BOCOG, the preparation period, during the Games, and post the Games. If officials
underreported API right above the 100 mark as compared to right below the 100 mark, the
density curve should show a bump right below the 100 mark, and a dip right above the 100 mark.
In contrast, if API was not subject to gaming, the density plot of API should be as smooth around
100 as in other neighborhoods.
An abnormal bump right below 100 does show up in some periods for the co-host,
neighbor and control cities, but the pattern is less apparent in Beijing because most times the
mode is close to 100 in Beijing. More importantly, when the mode of Beijing API shifts to the
left during and after the Games, we do not observe any bump in the area right below the 100
mark. This is understandable because the goal of Beijing is not limited to the number of “blue
sky days” and Beijing officials may be reluctant to game the system given the intensive media
attention on Beijing preceding and succeeding the Games. In comparison, the bump right below
100 appears in the control cities, despite the lack of connection to the Games. This suggests that,
if the above-mentioned gaming exists in control cities, they are more likely responsive to the
nationwide performance evaluation of local officials, rather than to the Games per se. The below100 bump for the co-host and neighbor cities could reflect response to both incentives.
Gaming in the second half of month: To facilitate performance evaluation, local
governments are required to file monthly report on the number of blue sky days achieved in a
calendar month. This could generate extra gaming toward the end of month. To evaluate this
possibility, Figures 9(a) to 9(d) plot the kernel density of API for each city group, for the firstand second-half of the month separately. These densities exclude the days during the Olympic
Games because Olympic-related cities should have incentive to maintain good API throughout
the duration of the Games, not just in the days towards the end of the month.
21

In Beijing, the API density for the second-half of month does not have a more apparent
bump right below 100 and the second half of month tends to have even higher API than the first
half. Both patterns are inconsistent with the extra gaming incentives in the second half of month.
However, it is more difficult to rule out extra gaming in the second half of month for the other
three cities groups. The bump below 100 is similar in the first- and second-half of month for the
control cities, and the bump seems more likely to stand out in the second-half of the month for
the co-host and neighbor cities.
To detect whether the Olympic Games generate more gaming in the second half of a
month than in the first half, we report two sets of results. The first set focuses on an indicator of
whether the study date falls into the second half of a month. Since this indicator alone will be
absorbed with date fixed effects, we interact it with the dummies for the three treatment city
groups. As reported in Column 1 of Table 9, the coefficients of these interactions are all positive,
which is against the gaming prediction. In Column 2 of Table 9, we add to Specification (2) a
full set of interactions between the key variables {

,

, and

} and an indicator of whether the study day falls into the second half of a
month. The coefficients of these new variables capture the additional effect of the Games on the
second-half of a month, relative to the first half. If Olympic Games introduced extra incentives
to gaming around the threshold of 100 in the second half of a month, these new coefficients
should be significantly negative. As shown in Table 9, one out of the nine coefficients is
significantly positive, the rest are all indifferent from zero (by 95% confidence). We take this as
evidence that the Olympic Games do not generate more gaming of the API data in the second
half of the month than in the first half of month. That being said, it does not rule out the
possibility that the same amount of gaming may exist in both halves of the month, and some
gaming around the threshold of blue sky days may have existed nationwide independent of the
Olympic Games.
Evidence from visibility: The CMA reported visibility data are not readily available to
the public (we purchased them from CMA). Since visibility attracts little media attention, there
should be little incentive to fabricate the visibility data. If the significant API improvement in
Beijing was due to underreporting of air pollution during the Games (than before and after the
Games) we should have observed a lower correlation between API and visibility during the
Games. Throughout our sample, the correlation between API and visibility (by city-day) was
22

-0.2370 before the setup of the BOCOG, -0.2918 in the preparation period, -0.3903 during the
Games, and -0.2737 after the Games. The higher correlation during the Games is at odds with the
gaming prediction.
More importantly, we repeat specification (1) with visibility as the dependent variable.
Since the co-host and neighboring cities have violated the pretreatment test, Table 10 only
reports the regression results for Beijing, either pooling the co-host and neighboring cities with
the control cities (Columns 1-4) or excluding co-host and neighboring cities from the sample
(Columns 5).The key assumption here is that, before the treatment, the visibility of Beijing
follows the same fluctuation pattern as that of the control cities, once we control for the daily
weather, date fixed effects, city fixed effects, city-specific linear trend, energy, and
socioeconomic factors. To test this assumption, we report the pretreatment test statistics at the
end of each column. Like API, these statistics suggest that the comparability of Beijing, and
other cities is not justified until we control for city-specific linear trend, energy, and
socioeconomic factors. For this reason, we focus on Columns 4 and 5.
The regression results suggest that visibility made some improvement in the preparation
period and such improvement was highest during the Games. It is tempting to interpret the
insignificant coefficient of  BJ , x after the Games as an abatement of visibility improvement, but
this is not conclusive given the large standard errors. These findings are inconsistent with the
gaming explanation of API improvements.
One explanation for the less reversion of visibility is that gaseous pollutants captured in
API (for example coarse particles) may not have a strong impact on visibility.21 To examine this
explanation, we regress API on visibility, take the residual as the non-visibility component of
API, and use the residuals as the dependent variable for the same specification as Table 10
Column 6 (i.e. using the most extensive controls but excluding the co-host and neighbor cities
from the sample). Results suggest that the late-occurring and short-lived effects of the Games on
Beijing‟s API are likely driven by the non-visibility component of API.
Overall, all three datasets – API, visibility and AOD – suggest that Beijing witnessed real
improvement in air quality due to the Olympic Games. However, both API and AOD data
suggest that this improvement was short-lived and faded away significantly within one year of
21

Huang et al. (2009) compare visibility with the in situ measure of each pollutant, conditional on data from
Shanghai only. They show that visibility is more correlated with fine particles (PM 2.5) than with other pollutants.
23

the Games.
7. Mechanisms of air quality improvement in Beijing
The above analysis suggests real air quality improvement in Beijing during and after the
Games. Before policy makers use this finding to guide future policy interventions in China and
elsewhere, it is important to understand which actions were most effective in improving air
quality in Beijing. The preparation period witnessed four types of actions: plant closure, furnace
renovation, new automobile emission standard, and traffic control. It is difficult to distinguish
these four actions because they overlap in time and their effects may be cumulative and gradual.
Given we have developed fine resolution data for Beijing, we present the results of two
investigations for Beijing. First, we examine whether the API of Beijing changed significantly
before and after the cutoff dates corresponding to each action, and assess whether we can
attribute these changes to a particular action depending on how large the changes were, how
immediate the effects of the action were, and to what extent the action overlapped with other
actions. Second, we investigate location specific AOD with respect to location and time of
interventions. We achieve this by linking the latitudes and longitudes of AOD data with the
timing and location of plant closures and traffic control for major and secondary roads.22 This
approach was subject to the caveat that the effect of surface interventions on AOD may be
delayed due to the prolonged life cycle of aerosols.
Evidence from API: Specification (3) mimics Specification (1) but replaces the
interaction of Beijing and the treatment periods with a set of interactions between Beijing and a
dummy of whether the study date t is after the above-mentioned cutoff date for action a. For
example, the dummy of plant closure is defined as one if t is after December 31, 2007 and the
dummy of traffic control is turned on if t falls into 8/17-8/20/2007 or 7/20/2008-9/20/2008.
(3)

.
To better understand the overlap of the four actions, we first run Specification (3) with
only one action included and then pool all four actions in the same regression. The results are
22

We cannot find any geographic data on furnaces in Beijing.
24

reported in Table 11. When we look at each action separately, all actions were associated with a
significant decline in API after the corresponding cutoff date than before the cutoff. However,
with all four actions combined, only plant closure and traffic control showed significantly
negative coefficients. The coefficient of furnace renovation was no longer significant, and the
coefficient of new emission standard was even positive. The counter-intuitive sign for the new
emission standard is probably because the new standard only applies to new vehicles, which
could have a perverse effect of encouraging more use of old vehicles. Similarly, no-effect was
shown in Delhi, India (Kathuria 2002).
Panels B and C examine how plant closure, traffic control, furnace renovation and new
emission standard of Beijing correlate with the inferred TSP density and whether the reported
dominant pollutant is SO2. We dropped NO2 because very few percent of days (0.35%) report
NO2 as the dominant pollutant. Like Panel A, we first focus on each single action and then pool
the four actions in the same regression.
Panel B suggests that plant closure and traffic control accounted for the most reduction in
the absolute density of TSP. Its similarity with the API results is not surprising because 72.9% of
the total sample and 84.4% of the Beijing observations reported TSP as the dominant pollutant.
Since we cannot infer the exact level of TSP when API is below 50 and API is more likely below
50 during and after the Games, we tend to underestimate the effects of Olympic-related actions
on TSP. According to the last column of Panel C, only furnace renovation was associated with a
lower likelihood of SO2 being the dominant pollutant. In theory, plant closure should have had a
similar effect on SO2 but due to its strong effect on TSP it might have reduced the chance of SO2
being the dominant pollutant. Like in Panel A, the introduction of new emission standard has a
counter intuitive sign on TSP and SO2.
Evidence from AOD and point-specific policies As described in Section 4, we
construct variables for permanent plant closure (close_pergd ), temporary plant closure
(close_temgd ) and road density (road_deng ) for each 2.5km cell, and aggregated them to match
the spatial resolution of AOD (~ 10km x 10km). To capture the policy interventions due to the
Games, the time-invariant road_deng with seven period dummies of preparation for the Games,
during the Games, and 1, 2-3, 4-6, 7-10 and 11-15 months after the Games. We expected that the
effects of the Games be greater in an area with more major and secondary roads. To capture the
potentially time-varying effect of close_pergd and close_temgd, we interact close_pergd with 1,
25

2-3, 4-6, and 7+ months after the closure date and close_temgd with during, 1 month after, 2-3
months after and 4-6 months after the temporary closure.
We apply the AOD data of Beijing (at center point p date d) to the following
specification:
(4)

∑
∑

where

∑

represent area fixed effects for each 10km x 10km square in Beijing.
Under this specification, Table 12 reports four sets of results with progressive control of

date fixed effects, area fixed effects, and weather variables. Across all columns, it is clear that
traffic control is more effective in improving AOD in the areas with more roads. While this
improvement started to appear right after the Games, it was the greatest 2-3 months after the
Games and then tampered off completely within 6 months after the Games. This suggests that the
strictest traffic control (50% of vehicles off road) was very effective in reducing AOD
temporarily but the weaker form of traffic control that continued after the Games (vehicles off
road one of five weekdays) was ineffective. The latter is consistent with evidence shown in
Mexico City (Davis 2008).
Similarly, temporary closure had the largest reduction effect on AOD one month after the
closure and this effect declined afterwards. The effect of permanent closure was not significant
until 4-6 months after the closure date and dropped quickly afterwards. The lack of permanent
effects was not surprising, as temporary closure was only effective immediately before and
during the Games and even if permanent closure had a permanent effect in ground emission,
nearby aerosols may travel to mitigate the effects.
The estimates reported in Table 12 allow us to compare the effectiveness of permanent
plant closure, temporary plant closure and traffic control. The largest coefficient of permanent
plant closure on AOD improvement suggests that closing one plant permanently will at the best
improve the AOD within 5km radius by 0.42 units. This is an enormous effect considering the
fact that the average AOD of Beijing was 0.53 before the setup of the BOCOG. In comparison,
to achieve the same effect by other measures, one needs to temporarily close 1.6 plants or
restricting on-road vehicles to half in an AOD area that has a total length of 118.25km in major
and secondary roads. Given the fact that the road length in a typical 5km radius surrounding a
26

center point of AOD is no more than 12km, plant closure is much more effective than traffic
control for a specific AOD area. However, traffic control can be applied to many AOD areas at
the same time but plant closure is tied to a specific address. In this sense, the total effect of traffic
control can be comparable or even greater than closing a single plant depending on how wide the
traffic control is applicable. How to compare the effectiveness of these measures in light of their
economic and social cost is a potential topic for future research.
Overall, the detailed analysis of AOD within Beijing confirms the previous finding that
traffic control and plant closure were most likely to be responsible for the air quality
improvement in Beijing and their effects were temporary.
8. Conclusion
Viewing the 2008 Olympic Games as a political opportunity, China adopted a series of
radical measures to improve air quality in Beijing. Based on the publicly reported air pollution
index (API), we find that these actions, especially plant closure and traffic control, effectively
reduced the API (i.e. improvement in air quality) in Beijing by 29.65% during the Games as
compared to one year before any Olympic-motivated action.23 However, roughly 60% of this
improvement in air quality dissipated one year after the Games.24 The satellite based AOD data,
acquired from NASA, confirms that air quality improvement in Beijing was real but temporary.
Our results imply that, in contrast to the common wisdom regarding the impact of
political regime on environmental protection (Oates and Portney 2003), an authoritarian regime
could use its administrative power to improve air (or environmental) quality but its effectiveness
may largely depend on the underlying political motivation. Even if the regime has such
motivation, it remains an open question as to whether the actions adopted by an authoritarian
regime are in line with the public health and/or environmental interest in the long run. Is it
possible that China has sacrificed other welfare-enhancing policies in order to boost its political
image during the Games? Could it be more beneficial to the society if the same resources were
distributed more evenly across geographic space and time? These questions, as well as the
impact of the air quality improvement on human health and environment, call for future research.
23

The estimated improvement is 32.23, which is a 29.65% reduction from the absolute level of API in Beijing
before the setup of BOCOG (109.01).
24
The estimated improvement of API in Beijing is 32.23 during the Games, 12.723 in 11-13 months after. (32.2312.723)/32.23=60.5%.
27

9. References
Almond D., Yuyu Chen, Michael Greenstone and Hongbin Li (2009) “Winter Heating or Clean
Air? Unintended Impacts of China's Huai River Policy” American Economic Review
Papers & Proceedings, 99(2): 184–90, May, 2009.
Andrews, Steven (2008) “Beijing Plays Air Quality Games” Far Eastern Economic Review
(uploaded on July 4, 2008). Accessed at
http://www.feer.com/essays/2008/august/playing-air-quality-games on January 10, 2010.
Becker, Randy and Vernon Henderson (2000) “Effects of Air Quality Regulations on Polluting
Industries” The Journal of Political Economy, 108 (2): 379-421.
Chay, Kenneth and Michael Greenstone (2003) “The Impact of Air Pollution on Infant Mortality:
Evidence from Geographic Variation in Pollution Shocks Induced by a Recession”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(3).
Che, Huizheng; Xiaoye Zhang; Yang Li; Zijiang Zhou; and Zhenline Chen (2006) “Relationship
Between Horizontal Extinction Coefficient and PM10 Concentration in Xi‟An, China
During 1980-2002” China Particuology 4(6): 327-329.
Congleton, R. (1992) “Political Institutions and Pollution Control” Review of Economics and
Statistics 74: 412–21.
Chu, D. A.; Y. J. Kaufman; G. Zibordi; J. D. Chern; J. Mao; C. Li; and B. N. Holben (2003)
“Global Monitoring of Air Pollution over Land from EOS-Terra MODIS.” Journal of
Geophysical Research, 2003. 108(D21): p. 4661.
Currie, Janet, and Matthew Neidell (2005) “Air Pollution and Infant Health: What Can We Learn
from California‟s Recent Experience?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 120(3): 1003–
30.
Davis, Lucas W. (2008) “The Effect of Driving Restrictions on Air Quality in Mexico City”
Journal of Political Economy 116(1): 37-80.
Fan, Yin-Qi and Chun Li (2008) “Visibility Trends in Beijing, Tianjin and Hebei Province
During 1980-2003” Plateau Meteorology 27(6): 1392-1400.
Foster, A., Gutierrez, E. and N. Kumar, Voluntary Compliance, Pollution Levels, and Infant
Mortality in Mexico. American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, 2009, 99(2):
1–11.
Guinot, Benjamin (2008) “Olympic Games: Beijing Air Quality” accessed at
http://www.ambafrance-cn.org/奥林匹克运动会：北京大气质量,4570.html on January
10, 2010.
Gupta, P., S. A. Christopher, et al. (2006). "Satellite remote sensing of particulate matter and air
quality assessment over global cities." Atmospheric Environment 40(30): 5880-5892.
Hazilla, Michael and Raymond J. Kopp (1990): “Social Cost of Environmental Quality
Regulations: A General Equilibrium” The Journal of Political Economy, 98 (4): 853-873.
Henderson, J. Vernon (1996) “Effects of Air Quality Regulation” The American Economic
Review, 86 (4): 789-813.
Huang, Wei; Jianguo Tan; Haidong Kan; Ni Zhao; Weimin Song; Guixiang Song; Guohai Chen;
Lili Jiang; Cheng Jiang; Renjie Chen; and Bingheng Chen (2009) “Visibility, air quality
and daily mortality in Shanghai, China” Science of the Total Environment, 407 (2009):
3295–3300.
Kathuria, Vinish (2002) “Vehicular Pollution Control in Delhi: Need for Integrated Approach”
Economic and Political Weekly, Vol. 37, No. 12 (Mar. 23-29, 2002), pp. 1147-1155.
28

Kaufman, Y. J., N. Gobron, et al. (2002). "Relationship between surface reflectance in the visible
and mid-IR used in MODIS aerosol algorithm - theory." Geophysical Research Letters
(0094-8276) 29(23): 31-31 to 31-34.
Kaufman, Y. J., D. Tanre, et al. (2002). "Aerosol radiative impact on spectral solar flux at the
surface, derived from principal-plane sky measurements." Journal of the Atmospheric
Sciences 59(3): 635-646.
Kumar, N., A. Chu, and A. Foster, “Remote sensing of ambient particles in Delhi and its
environs: estimation and validation.” International Journal of Remote Sensing, 2008.
29(12): p. 3383-3405.
Kumar, N., A. Chu, and A. Foster, “An Empirical Relationship between PM2.5 and Aerosol
Optical Depth in Delhi Metropolitan.” Atmospheric Environment, 2007, 41(21): p. 44924503.
Kumar, N. (2010). "A Hybrid Approach for Predicting PM2.5 Exposure." Environmental Health
Perspective 118(10).
Kumar, N., A. Foster, S.N. Tripathi, A. Dasguptai, and A. D. Chu “Predicting Air Quality using
MODIS data” (2009), under review.
Kumar, N., A. D. Chu, et al. (2011). "Satellite Remote Sensing for Developing Time and Space
Resolved Estimates of Ambient Particulate in Cleveland, OH." Aerosol Science and
Technology (forthcoming).
Levy, R. C., L. A. Remer, et al. (2007). "Global aerosol optical properties and application to
Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer aerosol retrieval over land." Journal of
Geophysical Research-Atmospheres 112(D13): -.
Levy, R. C., L. A. Remer, et al. (2007). "Second-generation operational algorithm: Retrieval of
aerosol properties over land from inversion of Moderate Resolution Imaging
Spectroradiometer spectral reflectance." Journal of Geophysical Research-Atmospheres
112(D13).
List, John A.; Daniel L. Millimet; Per G. Fredriksson and W. Warren McHone (2003): “Effects
of Environmental Regulations on Manufacturing Plant Births: Evidence from a
Propensity Score Matching Estimator” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 85(4):
944-952.
Millimet, Daniel L.; John A. List and Thanasis Stengos (2003): “The Environmental Kuznets
Curve: Real Progress or Misspecified Models?” The Review of Economics and Statistics,
85 (4): 1038-1047.
Murdoch, J. and T. Sandler (1997) “The Voluntary Provision of a Pure Public Good: The Case of
Reduced CFC Emissions and the Montreal Protocol” Journal of Public Economics 63:
331-50.
NASA. (2010). "the Level 1 and Atmosphere Archive and Distribution System." Retrieved July
3, 2010, from http://ladsweb.nascom.nasa.gov/.
NCDC. (2007). "National Climatic Data Center." from http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/oa/ncdc.html.
Oats, Wallace and Paul Portney (2003) “The Political Economy of Environmental Policy” in
K.G. Maler and J. Vincent edited Handbook of Environmental Economics (Amsterdam:
Elsevier) pp. 325-354.
Ozkaynak H, et al. (1985) “Relationship between aerosol extinction coefficients derived from
airport visual range observations and alternative measures of airborne particle mass"
JAPCA. 35 (1985):1176–85.
Simonich, Stacil L. Massey (2009) “Response to Comments on „Atmospheric Particulate Matter
29

Pollution during the 2008 Beijing Olympics‟” Environmental Science & Technology (43):
7590-7591.
StataCorp (2010). STATA/SE Version 10.1. College Station, Texas 77845, StataCorp LP.
Streets, David G.; Joshua S. Fu; Carey J. Jang; Jiming Hao; Kebin He; Xiaoyan Tang; Yuanhang
Zhang; Zifa Wang; Zuopan Li; Qiang Zhang; Litao Wang; Binyu Wang; and Carolyne
Yu (2007) “Air Quality during the 2008 Beijing Olympic Games” Atmospheric
Environment (41): 480-492.
Tang, Xiaoyan; Min Shao; Min Hu; Zifa Wang; and Junfeng (Jim) Zhang (2009) “Comment on
„Atmospheric Particulate Matter Pollution during the 2008 Beijing Olympics‟”
Environmental Science & Technology (43): 7588.
United Nations Environment Programme (2009) “Independent Environmental Assessment
Beijing 2008 Olympic Games.” Accessed at http://www.unep.org/publications/UNEPeBooks/BeijingReport_ebook.pdf.
Wang, Wentao; Toby Primbs; Shu Tao; and Stacil L. Massey Simonich (2009a) “Atmospheric
Particulate Matter Pollution during the 2008 Beijing Olympics” Environmental Science &
Technology (43): 5314-5320.
Textor, C., M. Schulz, et al. (2006). "Analysis and quantification of the diversities of aerosol life
cycles within AeroCom." Atmospheric Chemistry And Physics 6: 1777-1813.
Yao, Xiaohong; Xiaohong Xu; Kelly Sabaliauskas and Ming Fang (2009) “Comment on
„Atmospheric Particulate Matter Pollution during the 2008 Beijing Olympics‟”
Environmental Science & Technology (43): 7589.
Wang, Xing; Dane Westerdahl; Lung Chi Chen; Ye Wu; Jiming Hao; Xiaochuan Pan; Xinbiao
Guo and K. Max Zhang (2009b) “Evaluating the air quality impacts of the 2008 Beijing
Olympic Games: On-road emission factors and black carbon profiles” Atmospheric
Environment 43: 4535-4544.
Zhang, Qiupei (2008) “Beijing Olympics Environmental Evaluation Report” published by
Greenpeace.org at
http://www.greenpeace.org/raw/content/china/zh/press/reports/2008.pdf.

30

Figure 1: The map of the 37 study cities

Figure 2: Distribution of Permanent and Temporary Plant Closures in Beijing

Data source: http://www.gov.cn/zwgk/2008-04/14/content_944313.htm

31

Figure 3: The distribution of major and secondary roads in Beijing, as of 2005

32

Figure 4: Time series of API by city group and treatment periods25

Figure 5: Time series of visibility by city group and treatment periods26

25

Moving average: The API at date t is

26

Moving average: The visibility at date t is

∑
∑

33

Figure 6: Time series of satellite-based AOD by city group and treatment periods27

27

Moving average: The AOD at date t is

∑

34

Figure 7: Satellite based AOD, corrected for meteorological conditions and spatiotemporal trends in and around Beijing.

35

Figure 8: Kernel density of API by city group and period

36

Figure 9: Kernel density of API by city group and half month

37

Table 1: MEP cutoff points for different levels of API
API
500
400
300

200
100
50

Notes of health effects
Pollutant intensity (μg/m3） Air Air Quality
quality condition
TSP
SO2
NO2
level
1000
2620
940
V
Heavy
Exercise endurance of the healthy people
pollution
drops down, some will have strong
875
2100
750
symptoms. Some diseases will appear.
625
1600
565
IV
Moderate The symptoms of the patients with cardiac
pollution
and lung diseases will be aggravated
remarkably. Healthy people will
experience a drop in endurance and
increased symptoms.
500
250
150
III
Slightly The symptom of the susceptible is slightly
polluted aggravated, while the healthy people will
have stimulated symptoms.
300
150
100
II
Good
Daily activity will not be affected.
120

50

50

I

Excellent

Daily activity will not be affected.

Source: The first four columns are taken from the MEP website. The last three columns are copied from
Table 2.2 of UNEP (2009).

38

Table 2: Summary of daily average API by treatment periods and city groups
API
Benchmark period (06/05/00-12/12/01)
Preparation (12/13/01-08/07/08)
Preparation 1 (12/13/01-12/31/04)
Preparation 2 (01/01/05-08/07/08)
Olympic Games (08/08/08-09/17/08)
After Games (09/18/08-12/31/09)
After Games 1 (09/18/08-10/17/08)
After Games 2 (10/18/08-12/17/08)
After Games 3 (12/18/08-03/17/09)
After Games 4 (03/18/09-07/17/09)
After Games 5 (07/18/09-10/31/09)
Total
TSP (μg/m3) inferred from API
(conditional on API>=50 & dominant
pollutant=TSP)
Benchmark period (06/05/00-12/12/01)
Preparation (12/13/01-08/07/08)
Preparation 1 (12/13/01-12/31/04)
Preparation 2 (01/01/05-08/07/08)
Olympic Games (08/08/08-09/17/08)
After Games (09/18/08-12/31/09)
After Games 1 (09/18/08-10/17/08)
After Games 2 (10/18/08-12/17/08)
After Games 3 (12/18/08-03/17/09)
After Games 4 (03/18/09-07/17/09)
After Games 5 (07/18/09-10/31/09)
Total

Control
cities
76.08
72.36
74.91
70.18
56.16
65.55
63.58
73.12
74.13
61.82
58.82
71.96

Beijing
109.01
102.93
104.02
102.01
54.88
81.83
66.63
89.36
85.07
81.35
79.62
100.84

Co-host
cities
88.16
78.79
82.82
75.36
57.34
70.78
65.93
76.08
79.60
67.18
65.84
78.9

Neighbor
cities
126.79
93.11
102.90
84.81
52.47
73.11
62.16
86.09
86.99
70.26
60.35
95.7

Control
cities

Beijing

Co-host
cities

Neighbor
cities

235.57
226.70
234.70
219.68
179.44
211.04
201.99
227.41
234.69
202.04
192.61
225.82

311.47
301.21
305.09
298.08
178.78
249.81
226.84
269.48
266.64
240.30
243.11
295.72

256.63
232.71
243.98
222.34
182.48
211.99
202.36
230.84
238.87
200.11
202.45
233.66

345.97
274.34
294.28
256.20
161.08
217.60
209.93
253.31
244.62
215.95
187.71
279.87

39

Table 3: Summary of visibility by treatment periods and city groups
Visibility (km)
Benchmark period (06/05/00-12/12/01)
Preparation (12/13/01-08/07/08)
Preparation 1 (12/13/01-12/31/04)
Preparation 2 (01/01/05-08/07/08)
Olympic Games (08/08/08-9/17/08)
After Games (09/18/08-12/31/09)
After Games 1 (09/18/08-10/17/08)
After Games 2 (10/18/08-12/17/08)
After Games 3 (12/18/08-03/17/09)
After Games 4 (03/18/09-07/17/09)
After Games 5 (07/18/09-10/31/09)
Total

Control
cities
17.85
16.58
16.83
16.37
19.03
17.33
17.24
16.69
14.74
18.50
18.55
16.91

Beijing
15.77
18.06
17.44
18.59
20.71
21.24
19.80
19.33
21.38
23.70
19.77
18.10

Co-host
cities
15.15
14.28
14.42
14.16
16.17
15.78
17.43
16.07
14.58
15.41
16.57
14.61

Neighbor
cities
16.35
15.37
15.74
15.05
15.99
16.78
14.47
17.48
14.37
18.91
16.62
15.70

Co-host
cities
0.52
0.62
0.57
0.65
0.55
0.46
0.50
0.31
0.39
0.65
0.47
0.59

Neighbor
cities
0.48
0.53
0.50
0.55
0.45
0.35
0.42
0.21
0.30
0.51
0.33
0.50

Table 4: Summary of AOD by treatment periods and city groups
AOD
Benchmark period (02/25/00-12/12/01)
Preparation (12/13/01-08/07/08)
Preparation 1 (12/13/01-12/31/04)
Preparation 2 (01/01/05-08/07/08)
Olympic Games (08/08/08-9/17/08)
After Games (09/18/08-12/31/09)
After Games 1 (09/18/08-10/17/08)
After Games 2 (10/18/08-12/17/08)
After Games 3 (12/18/08-03/17/09)
After Games 4 (03/18/09-07/17/09)
After Games 5 (07/18/09-12/31/09)
Total

Control
cities
0.55
0.62
0.59
0.64
0.57
0.53
0.59
0.42
0.50
0.72
0.49
0.60

40

Beijing
0.53
0.61
0.59
0.63
0.56
0.44
0.54
0.26
0.27
0.63
0.45
0.58

Table 5: Main results on API
VARIABLES
BJ×Preparation
BJ×During
BJ×After
Co-host×
Preparation
Co-host×
During
Co-host×After
Games
Neighbor×
Preparation
Neighbor×
During
Neighbor× After
Games
Weather
City FE
Date FE
City-specific
linear trends
Energy&Vehicle
*date^2
Heating
Socioeconomic
factors
Co-host and
neighbor cities
Observations
R-squared
Pretreatment test
for Beijing F-stat
(p-value)
Pretreatment test
for co-host and
neighbor cities
(p-value)

(1)

API

(2)

API

(5)

API

(6)

API

(7)

API

(8)

API

-0.334
(2.193)
-29.423***
(3.611)
-13.208***
(2.632)

-2.928
(1.842)
-34.820***
(2.346)
-19.173***
(1.857)

-4.922*
(2.640)
-34.335***
(2.260)
-19.643***
(1.780)

-5.085**
(2.467)
-34.905***
(2.428)
-22.035***
(3.399)

-6.353**
(2.578)
-37.642***
(2.813)
-23.580***
(3.995)

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

-5.455**
(2.535)
-36.888***
(2.397)
-22.593***
(3.589)
-1.087
(1.514)
-1.973
(2.054)
3.842*
(1.930)
-15.701***
(2.340)
-20.677***
(2.904)
-7.838**
(3.042)
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

included

included

included

included

excluded

included

126688
0.416
22.46
(0.0000)

126688
0.433
35.13
(0.0000)

126688
0.439
24.17
(0.0000)

126688
0.439
0.37
(0.5484)

99584
0.430
0.29
(0.5927)

126688
0.440
0.73
(0.3988)
12.54
(0.0001)

Note: Clustered standard errors in parentheses. ***p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1. Socioeconomic factors include
GDP growth rate, average GDP, industrial production and population density by city and year. Weather
includes rainfall, temperature, barometric pressure, sunshine, humidity if rainfall is zero, wind velocity, four
dummies for wind direction (east, south, west and north) by city and date.

41

Table 6: Time varying effects of the Olympic Games on API
 after1 is the first month after Olympics
 after2 is 2-3 months after the Olympics
 after3 is 4-6 months after the Olympics
 after4 is 7-10 months after the Olympics
 after5 is the rest.

VARIABLES
BJ×Prepare
BJ×Prepare1

(1)

API

-5.085**
(2.467)

BJ×Prepare2
BJ×During Games
BJ×After
BJ×After1

-34.905***
(2.428)
-22.035***
(3.399)

BJ×After2
BJ×After3
BJ×After4
BJ×After5
Weather
City FE
Date FE
City-specific linear trends
Energy&Vehicle*date^2

Heating

Socioeconomic factors
Co-host and neighbor
cities
Observations
R-squared

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
included
126688
0.439

(2)

API
-3.572
(2.316)
0.073
(2.573)
-28.462***
(2.872)
-22.965***
(2.983)
-15.382***
(3.058)
-22.997***
(6.676)
-10.423**
(5.071)
-10.252*
(5.502)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
included
126688
0.439

(3)

API

-6.353**
(2.578)

-37.642***
(2.813)
-23.580***
(3.995)

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Excluded
99584
0.430

(4)

API
-5.076**
(2.446)
-2.154
(2.972)
-32.319***
(2.720)
-26.494***
(2.737)
-18.497***
(4.475)
-26.444**
(9.846)
-12.329**
(5.600)
-12.723**
(5.953)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Excluded
99584
0.430

Note: Clustered standard errors in parentheses. ***p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1. Socioeconomic factors include GDP
growth rate, average GDP, industrial production and population density by city and year. Weather includes rainfall,
temperature, barometric pressure, sunshine, humidity if rainfall is zero, wind velocity, four dummies for wind
direction (east, south, west and north) by city and date.

42

Table 6-continued: F test for the decreasing effect



Cells marked yellow imply that the effect in the latter period (column) is significantly smaller than the effect in
the former (row) period.
Cells marked green imply that the effect in the latter period (column) is significantly larger than the effect in the
former (row) period.

F test for column 2 of table 6: test whether the effect is decreasing
F-stat (pBJ×After1
BJ×After2
BJ×After3
value)
BJ×During
18.09***
26.06***
0.72
(0.0002)
(0.0000)
(0.4029)
BJ×After1
8.39***
0.00
(0.0070)
(0.9961)
BJ×After2
2.88
(0.1002)
BJ×After3
BJ×After4
F test for column 4 of table 6: test whether the effect is decreasing
F-stat (pBJ×After1
BJ×After2
BJ×After3
value)
BJ×During
13.62***
10.59***
0.34
(0.0010)
(0.0030)
(0.5641)
BJ×After1
3.81*
0.00
(0.0609)
(0.9960)
BJ×After2
1.55
(0.2231)
BJ×After3
BJ×After4

BJ×After4

BJ×After5

15.85***
(0.0004)
7.37**
(0.0109)
2.04
(0.1640)
10.34***
(0.0031)

13.17***
(0.0010)
6.64**
(0.0151)
1.95
(0.1726)
16.45***
(0.0003)
0.01
(0.9214)

BJ×After4

BJ×After5

17.00***
(0.0003)
8.38***
(0.0073)
2.65
(0.1150)
4.08*
(0.0530)

11.72***
(0.0019)
6.09**
(0.0199)
2.62
(0.1168)
5.78**
(0.0230)
0.04
(0.8490)

43

Table 7: Main results on AOD
VARIABLES
Beijing_prepare
Beijing_during
Beijing_after
Co-host_prepare

(1)
AOD*1000
15.309
(10.395)
41.065**
(19.713)
-22.236
(16.763)

(2)
AOD*1000
-27.909**
(11.204)
-37.943
(27.908)
-99.916***
(30.641)

(3)
AOD*1000
-27.405
(20.910)
-39.418
(28.474)
-96.803***
(30.420)

(4)
AOD*1000
-35.567
(22.319)
-45.037
(28.946)
-125.392***
(31.304)

(5)
AOD*1000
-31.456
(27.206)
-38.270
(37.173)
-130.247***
(37.851)

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

included
2614734
0.422
3.00
(0.0916)

included
2614734
0.424
3.95
(0.0544)

included
2614734
0.425
4.17
(0.0485)

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
included
2614734
0.425
1.79
(0.1896)

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
excluded
1892832
0.444
2.72
(0.1100)

Co-host_during
Co-host_after
Neighbor_prepare
Neighbor_during
Neighbor_after
Weather
City FE
Date FE
City_specific linear trend
Energy&Vehicle*date^2
Heating
Socioeconomic factors
Co-host and neighbor cities
Observations
R-squared
Pretreatment test for Beijing
F-stat (p-value)
Pretreatment test for Cohost and Neighbor cities Fstat (p-value)

(6)
AOD*1000
-44.025*
(24.308)
-55.132
(33.974)
-163.467***
(35.335)
-13.867
(16.706)
-49.676
(47.491)
-70.148
(55.799)
-37.613**
(17.045)
-11.749
(27.824)
-82.243*
(43.240)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
included
2614734
0.425
2.33
(0.1359)
8.23
(0.0011)

Note: Clustered standard errors in parentheses. ***p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1. Dummies for three distance categories
are controlled for in all columns. Weather of point p in city c at date d and time t includes three factors: tr_fac1,
tr_fac2 and tr_fac3. Energy includes 1999 energy*date quadratic, 1999 vehicle*date quadratic, heating*dummy of
Nov 15-Mar 15. Socioeconomic factors include GDP growth rate, average GDP, industrial production and population
density by city and year.

44

Table 8: Time-varying results on AOD

VARIABLES
Beijing_prepare1
Beijing_prepare2
Beijing_during
Beijing_after1
Beijing_after2
Beijing_after3
Beijing_after4
Beijing_after5
Weather
City FE
Date FE
City_specific linear trend
Energy
Socioeconomic factors
Co-host and neighbor cities
Observations
R-squared

(1)
AOD*1000
4.989
(8.671)
22.776
(13.711)
41.173**
(19.764)
-51.921**
(23.875)
-57.941**
(24.272)
-68.475***
(21.986)
17.415
(18.555)
28.634
(17.871)
Y
Y
Y

(2)
AOD*1000
-38.608***
(10.887)
-72.386***
(17.069)
-89.594***
(28.283)
-176.215***
(36.645)
-186.188***
(38.736)
-196.045***
(32.596)
-119.584***
(29.430)
-115.711***
(32.906)
Y
Y
Y
Y

(3)
AOD*1000
-40.850*
(20.638)
-74.200**
(27.482)
-92.019***
(30.901)
-180.495***
(38.431)
-178.617***
(40.113)
-179.386***
(34.771)
-121.364***
(29.226)
-113.751***
(32.904)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

included
2614734
0.422

included
2614734
0.424

included
2614734
0.425

(4)
AOD*1000
-51.349**
(23.879)
-90.637***
(32.890)
-109.326***
(35.304)
-198.082***
(42.056)
-196.663***
(42.905)
-225.735***
(45.843)
-181.546***
(54.645)
-174.321***
(50.565)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
included
2614734
0.425

(5)
AOD*1000
-53.292*
(29.644)
-108.690**
(40.704)
-128.030***
(41.445)
-226.313***
(55.393)
-255.381***
(47.763)
-240.056***
(57.076)
-183.402***
(62.567)
-175.329***
(61.413)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
excluded
1892832
0.444

(6)
AOD*1000
-60.503**
(25.954)
-102.836***
(36.593)
-124.411***
(40.267)
-243.896***
(46.113)
-241.003***
(42.163)
-263.987***
(50.921)
-238.637***
(60.759)
-204.781***
(57.103)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
included
2614734
0.425

Note: Clustered standard errors in parentheses. ***p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1. Dummies for three distance categories
are controlled for in all columns. Weather of point p in city c at date d and time t includes three factors: tr_fac1,
tr_fac2 and tr_fac3. Energy includes 1999 energy*date quadratic, 1999 vehicle*date quadratic, heating*dummy of
Nov 15-Mar 15. Socioeconomic factors include GDP growth rate, average GDP, industrial production and population
density by city and year.

45

Table 8-continued: F test for after-Olympic periods



Cells marked yellow imply that the effect in the latter (column) period is significantly smaller than the
effect in the former (row) period.
Cells marked green imply that the effect in the latter (column) period is significantly larger than the effect
in the former (row) period.

F test for column 4 of table 10: test whether the effect is decreasing
F-stat (pBJ×After1
BJ×After2
BJ×After3
value)
BJ×During
15.00***
14.42***
27.48***
(0.0004)
(0.0005)
(0.0000)
BJ×After1
0.00
1.07
(0.9569)
(0.3078)
BJ×After2
1.19
(0.2819)
BJ×After3
BJ×After4
F test for column 4 of table 6: test whether the effect is decreasing
F-stat (pBJ×After1
BJ×After2
BJ×After3
value)
BJ×During
6.55***
20.84***
15.76***
(0.0162)
(0.0001)
(0.0005)
BJ×After1
0.57
0.17
(0.4569)
(0.6862)
BJ×After2
0.26
(0.6152)
BJ×After3
BJ×After4

BJ×After4

BJ×After5

3.76*
(0.0602)
0.16
(0.6930)
0.11
(0.7477)
2.20
(0.1468)

5.27**
(0.0276)
0.55
(0.4635)
0.40
(0.5299)
9.62***
(0.0037)
0.16
(0.6923)

BJ×After4

BJ×After5

1.89
(0.1807)
1.03
(0.3178)
4.75**
(0.0380)
4.54**
(0.0420)

1.63
(0.2128)
1.91
(0.1774)
4.92**
(0.0348)
8.33***
(0.0074)
0.18
(0.6729)

46

Table 9: API results by first and second half of a month
Dependent variable = API, Observation = 126688
(1)
1.767***
(0.233)

(2)
BJ x second half month
-0.859
(1.091)
BJ×preparation
-7.237**
(2.837)
BJ×preparation x second half month
3.751***
(1.265)
BJ×during Games
-36.960***
(2.442)
BJ×after Games
-22.281***
(3.553)
BJ×after Games x second half month
-0.594
(1.613)
Co-host x second half month
0.541**
1.698*
(0.237)
(0.953)
Co-host×preparation
-0.520
(1.832)
Co-host×preparation x second half month
-1.230
(1.095)
Co-host×during Games
-1.844
(2.093)
Co-host×after Games
4.974**
(2.262)
Co-host×after Games x second half month
-2.397
(1.477)
Neighbor x second half month
0.541**
-0.946
(0.241)
(1.065)
Neighbor ×preparation
-16.595***
(2.322)
Neighbor ×preparation x second half month
1.894
(1.187)
Neighbor ×during Games
-20.749***
(2.911)
Neighbor ×after Games
-8.293***
(2.889)
Neighbor ×after Games x second half month
0.974
(1.515)
Observations
126688
126688
R2
0.44
0.44
Note: Clustered standard errors in parentheses. ***p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1. All the coefficients are obtained
in one regression with city fixed effects, day fixed effects, city-specific linear trend, energy, socioeconomic
factors, and weather. Energy includes 1999 energy* date quadratic, 1999 vehicle*date quadratic,
heating*dummy of Nov 15-Mar 15. Socioeconomic factors include GDP growth rate, average GDP, industrial
production and population density by city and year. Weather includes rainfall, temperature, barometric
pressure, sunshine, humidity, wind velocity, four dummies for wind direction (east, south, west and north) by
city and date.

47

Table 10: Regression results on visibility
VARIABLES
BJ×Preparation
BJ×During
BJ×After
Weather
City FE
Date FE
City-specific
linear trends
Energy&Vehicle
*date^2

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

3.195***
(0.217)
4.477***
(0.429)
4.522***
(0.390)

1.359***
(0.207)
1.120***
(0.337)
0.869**
(0.348)

0.867**
(0.406)
1.058***
(0.367)
0.806**
(0.344)

0.721
(0.431)
0.933**
(0.374)
0.721
(0.656)

0.934*
(0.495)
0.994**
(0.466)
0.933
(0.773)

-5.234**
(2.544)
-36.451***
(2.857)
-22.463***
(3.795)

Visibility

Y
Y
Y

Visibility

Y
Y
Y
Y

Heating

Socioeconomic
factors
Co-host
and
neighbor cities
Observations
R-squared
Pretreatment test
for Beijing F-stat
(p-value)

Visibility

Visibility

Visibility

API residual

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

included

included

included

included

excluded

excluded

126688
0.569
9.46
(0.0044)

126688
0.573
63.12
(0.0000)

126688
0.574
45.06
(0.0000)

126688
0.575
2.54
(0.1218)

99584
0.587
2.56
(0.1206)

99584
0.418
0.01
(0.9246 )

Note: Clustered standard errors in parentheses. ***p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1. Socioeconomic factors include
GDP growth rate, average GDP, industrial production and population density by city and year. Weather
includes rainfall, temperature, barometric pressure, sunshine, humidity if rainfall is zero, wind velocity, four
dummies for wind direction (east, south, west and north) by city and date.

48

Table 11: Mechanism detection using API data
(1)
Panel A: Dependent Variable = API
BJ×Plant Closure
-13.886***
(3.878)
BJ×Furnace Rennovation

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-32.940***
(3.772)
-6.918**
-1.645
(3.331)
(2.462)
BJ×New Emission
-7.521*
24.170***
(3.782)
(3.910)
BJ×Traffic Control
-17.341***
-14.527***
(3.196)
(3.885)
Observations
99584
99584
99584
99584
99584
R2
0.43
0.43
0.43
0.43
0.43
Panel B: Dependent Variable = Inferred TSP in μg/m3 (conditional on API>=50 & dominant
pollutant=TSP)
BJ×Plant Closure
-27.740***
-77.646***
(9.621)
(7.533)
BJ×Furnace Rennovation
-13.623
-4.381
(8.562)
(6.757)
BJ×New Emission
-14.429
60.397***
(9.711)
(9.338)
BJ×Traffic Control
-32.899***
-27.624***
(7.721)
(8.739)
Observations
71173
71173
71173
71173
71173
R2
0.42
0.42
0.42
0.42
0.42
Panel C: Dependent Variable = Dummy of SO2 being the dominant pollutant
BJ×Plant Closure
0.066**
-0.033
(0.024)
(0.042)
BJ×Furnace Rennovation
-0.019
-0.044*
(0.025)
(0.023)
BJ×New Emission
0.089***
0.129**
(0.027)
(0.050)
BJ×Traffic Control
0.046**
0.007
(0.020)
(0.019)
Observations
99584
99584
99584
99584
99584
R2
0.21
0.21
0.21
0.21
0.21
City FE
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Date FE
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
City-specific linear trends
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Weather
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Energy & Vehicle*t^2
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Socioeconomic factors
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Co-host and neighbor cities
excluded
excluded
excluded
excluded
excluded
Note: Clustered standard errors in parentheses. ***p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1. Weather includes rainfall,
temperature, barometric pressure, sunshine, humidity, wind velocity, four dummies for wind direction (east,
south, west and north) by city and date.

49

Table 12: Mechanism detection using AOD data and location-specific policies
VARIABLES
Road length*
Preparation for Games
During the Games
1 month after Games
2-3 months after Games
4-6 months after Games
7-10 months after Games
11-15 months after Games
Permanent closure*
1 month after closure
2-3 months after closure
4-6 months after closure
7+ months after closure
Temporary closure *
During closure
1 month after closure
2-3 months after closure
4-6 months after closure
Date FE
10kmx10m area FE
Weather
Observations
R-squared

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.123*
(0.066)
-0.484***
(0.111)
-0.835***
(0.114)
-0.967***
(0.090)
-1.179***
(0.133)
-0.302***
(0.105)
-0.524***
(0.125)

-0.097***
(0.027)
-0.340***
(0.075)
-0.589***
(0.054)
-0.834***
(0.049)
-1.109***
(0.085)
-0.076
(0.048)
-0.407***
(0.051)

0.090***
(0.022)
-0.020
(0.046)
-0.248***
(0.042)
-0.347***
(0.048)
-0.335***
(0.074)
0.085**
(0.041)
-0.147***
(0.043)

0.085***
(0.022)
-0.037
(0.046)
-0.265***
(0.043)
-0.354***
(0.048)
-0.299***
(0.070)
0.082**
(0.041)
-0.146***
(0.043)

370832.547
(318199.715)
78030.001
(78360.028)
-183015.200***
(51085.653)
84565.870***
(29437.937)

298758.406**
(132060.006)
147721.110***
(44625.879)
-12341.830
(28451.278)
63411.523***
(14766.186)

138565.670
(125869.322)
21077.080
(44526.709)
-41435.026*
(21553.660)
-18219.266*
(9746.093)

137525.013
(124835.985)
19783.409
(44943.191)
-41859.605**
(21242.877)
-16803.589*
(9737.749)

-81231.537**
(34284.373)
-75328.125**
(33585.856)
-77613.787***
(13316.433)
-64615.638***
(18004.374)

9499.631
(16587.897)
-27882.007**
(13764.728)
-34092.672***
(7155.813)
-26413.263**
(10749.104)
Y

17981.410
(14662.832)
-25173.525**
(11877.424)
-13638.940*
(7825.291)
-21949.223**
(8570.402)
Y
Y

102820
0.100

102820
0.839

102820
0.885

18566.090
(14744.359)
-25978.657**
(12190.489)
-13266.406*
(7801.435)
-20069.643**
(8461.783)
Y
Y
Y
102820
0.886

AOD*10^6

AOD*10^6

AOD*10^6

AOD*10^6

Note: Clustered standard errors (by 10kmx10km area) in parentheses. ***p<0.01, **p<0.05,
*p<0.1. Linear date count is controlled for in the first column. Weather of point p at date d
includes three independent factors derived from the raw data on temperature, humidity, etc.

50

