NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IDENTIFICATION PROBLEMS IN PERSONALITY PSYCHOLOGY
Lex Borghans
Bart H.H. Golsteyn
James J. Heckman
John Eric Humphries
Working Paper 16917
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16917

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2011

This research was supported by grants from NIH R01-HD054702 and R01-HD065072; The Institute
for New Economic Thinking (INET); A New Science of Virtues: A Project of the University of Chicago;
the American Bar Foundation; a conference series from the Spencer Foundation; the JB & MK Pritzker
Family Foundation; the Buffett Early Childhood Fund; and the Geary Institute, University College
Dublin, Ireland. The opinions expressed in this report are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of any of the funders, or of the National Bureau of Economic Research. We thank
Tim Kautz for helpful comments. Additional information is presented in a Web Appendix, available
at http://jenni.uchicago.edu/identification-problems/.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Lex Borghans, Bart H.H. Golsteyn, James J. Heckman, and John Eric Humphries. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Identification Problems in Personality Psychology
Lex Borghans, Bart H.H. Golsteyn, James J. Heckman, and John Eric Humphries
NBER Working Paper No. 16917
March 2011
JEL No. D01,D03,D89
ABSTRACT
This paper discusses and illustrates identification problems in personality psychology. The measures
used by psychologists to infer traits are based on behaviors, broadly defined. These behaviors are
produced from multiple traits interacting with incentives in situations. In general, measures are determined
by these multiple traits and do not identify any particular trait unless incentives and other traits are
controlled for. Using two data sets, we show, as an example, that substantial portions of the variance
in achievement test scores and grades, which are often used as measures of cognition, are explained
by personality variables.

Lex Borghans
Department of Economics and ROA
Maastricht University
P.O. Box 616
NL-6200 MD Maastricht
The Netherlands
lex.borghans@maastrichtuniversity.nl
Bart H.H. Golsteyn
Department of Economics
Maastricht University
P.O. Box 616
NL-6200 MD Maastricht
The Netherlands
and SOFI, Stockholm University
b.golsteyn@maastrichtuniversity.nl

James J. Heckman
Department of Economics
The University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and University College Dublin and IZA
and also NBER
jjh@uchicago.edu
John Eric Humphries
Department of Economics
The University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago IL 60637
johnerichumphries@gmail.com

1.

Introduction
There is a growing interest in personality psychology by economists to better

understand the diversity of responses of agents to similar circumstances. Many
economists now include personality measures and proxies for cognition in their empirical
analyses. How should one interpret these estimated relationships?
Personality psychology attempts to describe the whole person.2 It considers both
universal traits and individual differences. It examines the ways in which people are
unique. As a sign of its breadth, personality psychology considers both cognitive
functioning and personality traits as aspects of personality.
Characterizing what personality psychologists analyze, it is helpful to distinguish
personality traits, personality as a response function, and measured personality (Almlund,
Duckworth, Heckman et al., 2011). Personality is a response function that maps
personality traits to measured (manifest) personality. One leading personality
psychologist defines personality traits in the following way:
“Personality traits are the relatively enduring patterns of thoughts, feelings, and
behaviors that reflect the tendency to respond in certain ways under certain
circumstances.” (Roberts, 2009, p. 140)
This definition, or closely related versions, is used throughout personality psychology.3
Roberts’ definition of personality traits refers to the stability of certain patterns of
conduct, such as actions or responses to situations that people take, including patterns of
thoughts or feelings. Perceptions, expectations of future events and preferences also
2

Cervone and Pervin (2009).
However, some personality psychologists use this or a very similar definition to define personality and not
personality traits. Thus Cervone and Pervin (2009) define personality as
“psychological qualities that contribute to an individual’s enduring and distinctive
patterns of thinking, feeling and behaving” (p. 8).
3

3

shape behavior, feelings and thoughts. In this way, cognitive activities help to determine
measured personality. In light of these common-sense observations, how should one
interpret widely used measures of personality and cognition?
Many different models of personality have been formulated.4 A prototypical
model is developed by Roberts (2006). He presents the schematic displayed in Figure 1
to relate personality traits to measured behaviors, thoughts, and feelings. He
distinguishes mental abilities from personality traits, although both are aspects of
personality broadly defined. These traits and abilities, along with preferences (motives,
interests, and values) and narratives (the stories people tell themselves in organizing their
lives and making meanings of them), shape a person’s identity and reputation. This
includes the views of the person by others and the person’s perception of how others
perceive him. Identity and reputation shape the roles of individuals in the economy and
the society to which they belong. Personality is the system of relationships that map
traits and other determinants of behavior, thoughts, and feelings into measured actions.5
Measured personality results from interactions among the components of the system.
Personality traits are only one determinant of measured personality.
----------------------Figure 1 about here
-----------------------

Figure 1 illustrates the origins of the identification problem discussed in this
paper.6 Measurements of thoughts, feelings, and behaviors that arise from responses to
incentives and social interactions are used to infer personality traits and abilities.
4

See the models presented in John, Robins and Pervin (2008) and the survey in Cervone and Pervin (2009).
This system is formalized in Almlund, Duckworth, Heckman et al. (2011).
6
Almlund, Duckworth, Heckman et al. (2011) present a formal characterization of the identification
problem and solutions to it.
5

4

Personality traits and cognitive abilities, along with the other “units of analysis” in Figure
1, produce the measures that are used to infer the generating traits.
Behaviors include actions taken by agents whether in a task in the workplace, in
interactions with others observed by third parties, or as measured by scores on tests of
cognition or personality. To infer traits and abilities from measures requires “parsing
out” or standardizing for all of the other factors that also produce the observed behavior,
including incentives created by the situations in which people are placed. This is a
challenging task. The difficulty in isolating traits from behaviors, thoughts or feelings
gives rise to a fundamental identification problem. We illustrate this problem with two
examples: (a) interpreting what IQ tests measure and (b) interpreting what achievement
tests measure.
In Section 2, we report evidence that scores on IQ tests are determined by
incentives and personality. Section 3 shows that scores on achievement tests and
grades—often used as measures of cognition—are determined in substantial part by
personality. Section 4 concludes.

2.

IQ Test Scores Reflect Incentives and Capture Both Cognitive and
Personality Traits

Isolating a pure measure of intelligence is difficult. It is commonly regarded as distinct
from “noncognitive” or personality traits. By the definition of personality given in
Section 1, intelligence is one aspect of personality. It is a measure of how well a person
responds to (performs on) intelligence tests. (See Almlund et al., 2011.)

5

Performance on intelligence (and achievement) tests depends in part on the
personality traits of the test taker, apart from cognitive ability, as well as their motivation
to perform.7 A smart child unable to sit still during an exam or uninterested in exerting
much effort can produce low scores on an IQ test.
It is sometimes claimed that IQ tests measure maximal performance, i.e. that IQ
scores reflect the application of the maximal capacity of the person to the tests.8
Inspection of Figure 1 suggests that IQ scores should be standardized for effort. A series
of studies conducted over the past 40 years support this concern.
These studies show that among individuals with low baseline IQ scores,
performance on subsequent IQ tests can be increased up to a full standard deviation by
offering incentives such as money or candy for correct answers, particularly on groupadministered tests and particularly for individuals at the low-end of the IQ spectrum.9
Engaging in complex thinking is effortful, not automatic (Schmeichel, Vohs and
Baumeister, 2003), and therefore motivation to exert effort affects performance.
Borghans, Meijers and ter Weel (2008) and Almlund, Duckworth, Heckman et al. (2011)
summarize the literature on the effects of incentives on IQ tests. See Table 1 in the Web
Appendix, taken from Almlund, Duckworth, Heckman et al. (2011).10

7

It is likely that performance on personality tests can also depend on cognitive ability, but that is less well
documented. For example, it is likely that more intelligent people can ascertain the rewards to performance
on a personality inventory test. Motivation is sometimes, but not often, counted as a personality trait. (See
Borghans, Meijers and ter Weel, 2008.)
8
A leading psychometrician, Carroll (1993), discusses this claim but does not accept the notion that IQ
captures maximal effort.
9
The incentives for invoking effort vary across studies.
10
Zigler and Butterfield (1968) found that early intervention (nursery school, for example) for low-SES
children may have a beneficial effect on motivation, not on cognitive ability per se. In their study, the
benefits of intervention (in comparison to a no-treatment control group) on IQ were not apparent under
testing conditions where motivation to perform well was maximal. Raver and Zigler (1997) present further
evidence on this point. Heckman, Malofeeva, Pinto et al. (2011) show that the Perry Preschool program
improved productive personality traits but did not raise IQ. The intervention has a 7-10% annual rate of
return.

6

The response to incentives depends on personality traits. It is not enough to
standardize for incentives to measure intelligence with IQ tests. One should also
standardize for the personality traits that govern the response to incentives. Segal (2008)
shows that introducing performance-based cash incentives in a low-stakes administration
of the coding speed test of the Armed Services Vocational Battery (ASVAB) increases
performance substantially, but only for roughly one-third of participants. Men with lower
levels of the Big Five trait Conscientiousness are particularly motivated by incentives.
Borghans, Meijers and ter Weel (2008) show that adults spend substantially more
time answering IQ questions when rewards are higher, but subjects high in the Big Five
traits Emotional Stability and Conscientiousness are less affected by such incentives.
They already operate at a high level even without these incentives. Similarly, Pailing and
Segalowitz (2004) find that an event-related potential (ERP) indexing the emotional
response to making an error increases in amplitude when incentives are offered for
superior test performance. 11 Thus, IQ scores do not accurately reflect maximal
intellectual performance for individuals who are low in Conscientiousness and Emotional
Stability. Performance on IQ tests encodes, in part, how effective persons may be in the
application of their intelligence, that is, how people are likely to perform in some realworld settings.
Like low motivation, test anxiety can significantly impair performance (Hembree,
1988). That is, subjects do worse when they worry excessively about their performance,
which causes their autonomic nervous system to over-react by increasing perspiration,
heart rate, and so on. Individuals who are higher in Big Five Neuroticism are more likely

11

An ERP is an electrophysiological response of characteristic form and timing to a particular category of
stimuli.

7

to experience test anxiety. This is another mechanism, beyond incentives, through which
Emotional Stability can impact IQ scores (Moutafi, Furnham and Tsaousis, 2006).
Thus, IQ test performance captures not only pure intelligence, but also personality
traits (including anxiety), intrinsic motivation, and reactions to extrinsic incentives to
perform well, as suggested by Figure 1. The relative impurity of IQ tests likely varies
from test to test and individual to individual. Little effort to date has been made to
standardize the context and incentives of tests. To capture pure intelligence, it is
necessary to adjust for incentives, motivations, and context in which the measurements
are taken.

3.

Interpreting What Grades and Achievement Tests Measure
The same issues discussed in regard to IQ tests apply with even greater force to

achievement tests and grades. Achievement tests require factual knowledge acquired
through schooling and life experience, which are, in part, determined by the motivation,
curiosity, and persistence of the test taker. Cunha and Heckman (2008) and Cunha,
Heckman and Schennach (2010) show that personality traits facilitate the accumulation
of cognitive skills as measured by achievement tests. Thus, personality traits affect
achievement test scores indirectly through the greater knowledge acquired by individuals
with high levels of specific personality traits. Hansen, Heckman and Mullen (2004) and
Heckman, Stixrud and Urzua (2006) show that schooling and other acquired traits
substantially causally affect measured cognitive and personality test scores.
Achievement tests are typically designed to capture “general knowledge,” i.e., not
knowledge of specific facts or the contents of specific courses, but the knowledge

8

required to function effectively in modern society.12 Achievement tests attempt to
capture different aspects of cognition than are captured by IQ tests, but scores on the two
types of tests are highly correlated. As a result, the two types of measures are sometimes
used interchangeably in popular and academic discussions. For example, Herrnstein and
Murray (1994) use an achievement test as a measure of IQ. In later work, Nisbett (2009)
uses achievement test scores as a measure of intelligence. We show that this is a
dangerous practice. Achievement test scores depend on both personality and IQ.
Empirical demonstrations of the importance of intelligence, based on scores on
achievement tests or grades, are also demonstrations of the power of personality.
Table 1 displays the correlations among three widely used measures of cognition
recorded in the adolescent years—IQ, an achievement test (the Armed Forces Qualifying
Test or AFQT), and report card grades (in ninth grade).13,14 The correlations are large but
by no means do the measures perfectly correlate.
----------------------Table 1 about here
----------------------It is well established that measures of intelligence and academic achievement
predict a variety of social and economic outcomes although the R2 of such predictive
relationships rarely exceeds 10-15%.15 Borghans, Golsteyn, Heckman et al. (2011)
examine the predictive power of grades, IQ and achievement tests measured in the

12

See Lindquist, Van Dyke and Yale (1948). Lindquist, along with Ralph Tyler, pioneered the concept of
“general knowledge,” which motivated the achievement test movement.
13
The AFQT consists of four subtests: word knowledge, paragraph comprehension, arithmetic reasoning,
and mathematics knowledge (Roberts, Goff, Anjoul et al., 2000, p. 19).
14
Many interpret the AFQT as an IQ test. For discussion of the contrast between achievement and IQ tests
see the collection of papers in Green (1974). Many of the contributors to that book do not think any
distinction is meaningful.
15
For evidence on the predictive power of cognitive measures, see, for example, Herrnstein and Murray
(1994), Gottfredson (2008), Cawley, Heckman and Vytlacil (1999), Heckman, Stixrud and Urzua (2006),
Taubman and Wales (1973), Jencks, Smith, Acland et al. (1972), and Bowles, Gintis and Osborne (2001).

9

adolescent years for a variety of life outcomes past age 30.16 The R2 of most
relationships is below 0.10.
A general pattern emerges from their work. Achievement test scores are more
highly correlated with outcomes than are IQ tests. The correlation of grades with
outcomes is intermediate between IQ and achievement tests. Achievement tests and
grades capture traits valued in economic and social life other than measured intelligence.
Grades and achievement test scores predict adult outcomes better than IQ because
they also capture personality traits. This explains why achievement tests and grades have
more predictive power than IQ.17 Another interpretation of their evidence is that acquired
knowledge as captured by achievement tests and grades is more predictive than fluid
intelligence as measured by IQ. As previously noted, personality traits affect the
accumulation of knowledge.
Figure 2 presents evidence from two samples on the joint and individual
contributions of IQ and personality measures to explaining the variance in achievement
test scores and grades as measured by R 2 . The first sample (results displayed in Panel
A), extracted from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY79), is used to
produce the correlations reported in Table 1. The NLSY is a nationally representative
sample of American youth. Youth were 14-22 at the date of initial enrollment (1979) and
have been followed ever since. The second sample (results displayed in Panel B) shows
the predictive power of IQ and personality measures on achievement scores and grades

16

The outcomes include wages, income, hours worked, depression, smoking, physical activity, health,
voting, divorce and unemployment.
17
Duckworth, Quinn and Tsukayama (2010) present related evidence. See also Bowen, Chingos and
McPherson (2009), Willingham, Pollack and Lewis (2002), and Duckworth and Seligman (2005).

10

for a single Dutch high school (Stella Maris) sample in 2008. There is no long-term
follow-up of this sample.18

----------------------Figure 2 about here
----------------------The NLSY data have relatively weak measures of personality: the Rosenberg
measure of self-esteem and the Rotter locus of control. They are related to some of the
Big Five traits. (See the discussion in Almlund, Duckworth, Heckman et al., 2011.) The
Dutch data, while less representative and subject to the problem of restriction on range
(only the students from the upper and middle level tracks are sampled—students from the
lower track are not) have measurements of all of the Big Five inventory plus the Grit
measure of persistence developed by Duckworth, Peterson, Matthews et al. (2007). The
Differential Aptitude Test (DAT) measurement of achievement is very similar in content
to the AFQT achievement test in the NLSY79. The range of correlations between DAT
scores and AFQT scores in the NLSY data is from 0.76 to 0.80 (Borghans, Golsteyn,
Heckman et al., 2011).19
In the American data (Panel A), 48% of the variance in achievement scores and
21% of the variance in grades is accounted for by the combined influence of IQ and
personality tests. Personality alone explains 16% and 7% of achievement tests and
grades, respectively. The incremental contribution of personality to achievement and
grades above the influence of IQ is 5% and 3% respectively. Stated differently,
personality variables explain roughly a third of explained variance in achievement tests.
18

A more comprehensive description of the data is given in the Web Appendix.
Streicher and Friedman (1983) report correlations from .65 to .82 for 1,300 high school sophomores and
juniors. Kettner (1976) found that for a group of juniors and seniors, DAT scores had multiple correlation
coefficients ranging from .76 to .89 with the subtests of the AFQT.

19

11

These results are remarkable in light of the weak measures of personality in the NLSY
data.
The Dutch data (Panel B) show a similar pattern. Due to restriction on range, the
variance explained by IQ and personality measures is smaller. The relative contribution
of personality to explained variance is proportionately greater than in the American data.
The evidence on grades is especially striking. Personality traits explain virtually all of
the variance in grades.

4.

Summary
This paper discusses and illustrates a fundamental identification problem in

personality psychology. Traits are typically measured by behaviors, broadly defined to
include observer reports and performance on tests. Behaviors are influenced by
incentives and by traits other than the traits that the various measures seek to capture. In
order to isolate any individual trait, it is necessary to control for all other traits and
incentives.
We offer direct evidence on the relevance of these concerns. Using two sources
of data from the U.S. and the Netherlands, we establish that a substantial portion of the
variance in grades and achievement tests is predicted from measures of personality. The
incremental contribution of personality above and beyond IQ is substantial in both data
sets. Personality is particularly powerful in explaining the variation in grades.20

20

See the evidence in Duckworth and Seligman (2005) and Duckworth, Quinn and Tsukayama (2010).

12

This explains the greater predictive power of achievement tests and grades than
IQ for a variety of life outcomes. Personality plays a powerful role in predicting life
outcomes (see Almlund, Duckworth, Heckman et al., 2011).
The common practice of equating measurements with traits is not justified.21
Thus, when Herrnstein and Murray (1994) show the power of AFQT in predicting life
outcomes, they are not establishing the power of IQ or “g,” as they claim to have done.
Without standardizing for personality traits, their correlations show the combined effect
of cognition and personality on life outcomes.22

21

Almlund, Duckworth, Heckman et al. (2011) present a formal statement of this problem and some
econometric solutions.
22
Borghans, Golsteyn, Heckman et al. (2011) show that adjusting for personality reduces the predictive
power of achievement tests for some later life outcomes.

13

References

Almlund, M., Duckworth, A. L., Heckman, J. J., & Kautz, T. (2011). Personality psychology and
economics. In. E. A. Hanushek, S. Machin, & L. Wößmann (Eds.), Handbook of the

economics of education Amsterdam, Elsevier.
Borghans, L., Golsteyn, B. H. H., Heckman, J. J., & Humphries, J. E. (2011). Reinterpreting

estimated effects of cognition on social outcomes. Unpublished manuscript. Department
of Economics, University of Chicago.
Borghans, L., Meijers, H., & ter Weel, B. (2008). The role of noncognitive skills in explaining
cognitive test scores. Economic Inquiry, 46, 2-12.
Bowen, W. G., Chingos, M. M., & McPherson, M. S. (2009). Test scores and high school grades
as predictors. Crossing the finish line: Completing college at America's public

universities. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Bowles, S., Gintis, H., & Osborne, M. (2001). The determinants of earnings: A behavioral
approach. Journal of Economic Literature, 39, 1137-1176.
Carroll, J. B. (1993). Human cognitive abilities: A survey of factor-analytic studies. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Cawley, J., Heckman, J. J., & Vytlacil, E. J. (1999). On policies to reward the value added by
educators. Review of Economics and Statistics, 81, 720-727.
Cervone, D., & Pervin, L. A. (2009). Personality: Theory and research. Hoboken, NJ: John
Wiley and Sons.

Cunha, F., & Heckman, J. J. (2008). Formulating, identifying and estimating the technology of
cognitive and noncognitive skill formation. Journal of Human Resources, 43, 738-782.
Cunha, F., Heckman, J. J., & Schennach, S. M. (2010). Estimating the technology of cognitive
and noncognitive skill formation. Econometrica, 78, 883-931.
Duckworth, A. L., Peterson, C., Matthews, M. D., & Kelly, D. R. (2007). Grit: Perseverance and
passion for long-term goals. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 10871101.
Duckworth, A. L., Quinn, P. D., & Tsukayama, E. (2010). What No Child Left Behind leaves

behind: The roles of IQ and self-control in predicting standardized achievement test
scores and report card grades. Unpublished manuscript. University of Pennsylvania,
Department of Psychology.
Duckworth, A. L., & Seligman, M. E. P. (2005). Self-discipline outdoes IQ in predicting
academic performance of adolescents. Psychological Science, 16, 939-944.
Gottfredson, L. S. (2008). Of what value is intelligence? In A. Prifitera, D. Saklofske, & L. G.
Weiss (Eds.), WISC-IV applications for clinical assessment and intervention.
Amsterdam, Elsevier.
Green, D. R. (1974). The aptitude-achievement distinction. Monterey: McGraw-Hill.
Hansen, K. T., Heckman, J. J., & Mullen, K. J. (2004). The effect of schooling and ability on
achievement test scores. Journal of Econometrics, 121, 39-98.
Heckman, J. J., Malofeeva, L., Pinto, R., & Savelyev, P. A. (2011). Understanding the

mechanisms through which an influential early childhood program boosted adult
outcomes. Unpublished manuscript. Department of Economics, University of Chicago.

Heckman, J. J., Stixrud, J., & Urzua, S. (2006). The effects of cognitive and noncognitive
abilities on labor market outcomes and social behavior. Journal of Labor Economics, 24,
411-482.
Hembree, R. (1988). Correlates, causes, effects, and treatment of test anxiety. Review of

Educational Research, 58, 47-77.
Herrnstein, R. J., & Murray, C. A. (1994). The bell curve: Intelligence and class structure in

American life. New York: Free Press.
Jencks, C., Smith, M., Acland, H., Bane, M. J., Cohen, D. K., Gintis, H., Heyns, B., &
Michelson, S. (1972). Inequality: A reassessment of the effect of family and schooling in

America. New York: Basic Books.
John, O. P., Robins, R. W., & Pervin, L. A. (2008). Handbook of personality: Theory and

research. New York, NY: The Guilford Press.
Kettner, N. (1976). Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery (ASVAB Form 5): Comparison
with GATB and DAT tests. Los Angeles: Contemporary Research, Incorporated.
Lindquist, E. F., Van Dyke, L. A., & Yale, J. R. (1948). What good is high school? Chicago,
Science Research Associates.
Moutafi, J., Furnham, A., & Tsaousis, I. (2006). Is the relationship between intelligence and trait
neuroticism mediated by test anxiety? Personality and Individual Differences, 40, 587597.
Nisbett, R. E. (2009). Intelligence and how to get it: Why schools and cultures count. New York,
NY: WW Norton & Company.

Pailing, P. E., & Segalowitz, S. J. (2004). The error-related negativity as a state and trait
measure: Motivation, personality, and ERPs in response to errors. Psychophysiology, 41,
84-95.
Raver, C. C., & Zigler, E. F. (1997). Social competence: An untapped dimension in evaluating
Head Start's success. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 12, 363-385.
Roberts, B. W. (2006). Personality development and organizational behavior. In B. Staw (Ed.),

Research on Organizational Behavior (pp. 1-41). Oxford, UK, Elsevier Science/JAI
Press.
Roberts, B. W. (2009). Back to the future: Personality and assessment and personality
development. Journal of Research in Personality, 43, 137-145.
Roberts, R. D., Goff, G. N., Anjoul, F., Kyllonen, P. C., Pallier, G., & Stankov, L. (2000). The
Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery (ASVAB): Little more than acculturated
learning (Gc)!? Learning and Individual Differences, 12, 81-103.
Schmeichel, B. J., Vohs, K. D., & Baumeister, R. F. (2003). Intellectual performance and ego
depletion: Role of the self in logical reasoning and other information processing. Journal

of Personality and Social Psychology, 85, 33-46.
Segal, C. (2008). Motivation, test scores, and economic success. Department of Economics and
Business, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Working Paper No. 1124.
Streicher, A. H., & Friedman, D. (1983). Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery (ASVAB

Form 14): Comparison with CAT, DAT, and Fit/Fact Tests. Unpublished report.
Rockville, MD: Research Applications, Inc.
Taubman, P. J., & Wales, T. J. (1973). Higher education, mental ability and screening. Journal

of Political Economy, 81, 28-55.

Willingham, W. W., Pollack, J. M., & Lewis, C. (2002). Grades and test scores: Accounting for
observed differences. Journal of Educational Measurement, 39, 1-37.
Zigler, E. F., & Butterfield, E. C. (1968). Motivational aspects of changes in IQ test performance
of culturally deprived nursery school children. Child Development, 39, 1-14.

Table 1. Correlations Among NLSY79 Measures of Cognition

IQ
AFQT
GPA(9th)

Correlation between IQ, AFQT, and GPA
Achievement
Grade Point Average
IQ
(AFQT)
(GPA)
1
0.65
1
0.42
0.54
1

Source: National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY79). Pooled male and female random sample.
Notes: The Armed Forces Qualifying Test (AFQT) was administered in 1980 when subjects were 15-22. AFQT is adjusted for
schooling at the time of the test conditional on final schooling, following the procedure in Hansen, Heckman and Mullen (2004).
AFQT is constructed from Arithmetic Reasoning, Word Knowledge, Math Knowledge, and Paragraph Comprehension tests. IQ
and GPA are from high school transcripts. IQ is pooled across several IQ tests using IQ percentiles. GPA is the individual’s coresubject GPA measured in 9th grade when virtually all sample participants are enrolled. Differences between males and females
are slight. For the sake of brevity we report pooled results.

Figures
Figure 1. Roberts’s model of personality as the output of a system

Source: Roberts [2006].

Figure 2: Decomposing achievement tests and grades into IQ and personality
(A) NLSY79

(B) Stella Maris

Source: Borghans, Golsteyn, Heckman et al. [2011].
Notes: Rotter was administered 1979. The ASVAB and Rosenberg were administered in 1980. AFQT is constructed
from the Arithmetic Reasoning, Word Knowledge, Mathematical Knowledge, and Paragraph Comprehension
ASVAB subtests. IQ and GPA are from high school transcript data. AFQT, Rosenberg, and Rotter have been
adjusted for schooling at the time of the test conditional on final schooling, as laid out in Hansen, Heckman and
Mullen [2004]. IQ is pooled across several IQ tests using IQ percentiles. GPA is the individual's core subject GPA
from 9th grade. Sample excludes the military over-sample.

