                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




SCHOOL TRACKING AND ACCESS TO HIGHER EDUCATION AMONG DISADVANTAGED
                               GROUPS

                                            Ofer Malamud
                                         Cristian Pop-Eleches

                                         Working Paper 16914
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16914


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2011




 We would like to thank Thomas Lemieux, Steve Pischke, and Miguel Urquiola. All errors are our
 own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of
 the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
 reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
 NBER publications.

 © 2011 by Ofer Malamud and Cristian Pop-Eleches. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
 to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
 © notice, is given to the source.
School Tracking and Access to Higher Education Among Disadvantaged Groups
Ofer Malamud and Cristian Pop-Eleches
NBER Working Paper No. 16914
March 2011
JEL No. I21

                                               ABSTRACT

When students are tracked into vocational and academic secondary schools, access to higher education
is usually restricted to those who completed an academic track. Postponing such tracking may increase
university attendance among disadvantaged students if additional time in school enables them to catch
up with their more privileged counterparts. However, if ability and expectations are fairly well set
by an early age, postponing tracking during adolescence may not have much effect. This paper exploits
an educational reform in Romania to examine the impact of postponing tracking on the proportion
of disadvantaged students graduating from university using a regression discontinuity (RD) design.
We show that, although students from poor, rural areas and with less educated parents were significantly
more likely to finish an academic track and become eligible to apply for university after the reform,
this did not translate into an increase in university completion. Our findings indicate that simply postponing
tracking, without increasing the slots available in university, is not sufficient to improve access to
higher education for disadvantaged groups.


Ofer Malamud
Harris School of Public Policy Studies
University of Chicago
1155 East 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
malamud@uchicago.edu

Cristian Pop-Eleches
Columbia University
SIPA and Economics Department
1022 International Affairs Building, MC 3308
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
cp2124@columbia.edu
1         Introduction

The relationship between family background and access to higher education is a robust em-

pirical …nding across many countries.1 Yet there is debate about whether this relationship is

mostly predetermined at an early age or can be mediated through investments in schooling.

Carniero and Heckman (2002, 2004) argue that long-run factors shape ability and expec-

tations early on and therefore emphasize the importance of early childhood investments.

On the other hand, Krueger (2004) contends that the return to human capital investments

remains high even beyond adolescence, and especially for those from less advantaged family

backgrounds. But how important is age? Can the relationship between family background

and access to higher education be in‡uenced by the timing of educational transitions in

secondary school? This paper exploits a unique educational reform in Romania which post-

poned when students were tracked into academic and vocational schools in order to examine

whether such later tracking improves access to higher education among socio-economically

disadvantaged children.2

        The Romanian educational reform, which occurred in 1973, prevented students from

entering vocational schools after only 8 years of schooling and, instead, required them to

receive an additional two years of academic curricula. Due to this policy change, students

born after January 1, 1959 were more likely to complete an academic high school curriculum

as compared to their counterparts who were born immediately before this date. By increasing

    1
    Shavit and Blossfeld (1993) provide evidence from thirteen countries at various levels of development.
    2
    In earlier work, we focused on whether the increased exposure to general education in academic schools
a¤ected labor market outcomes later in life (Malamud and Pop-Eleches, 2010). We provided evidence
that the educational reform did not lead to an increase in average years of schooling or an increase in the
proportion of students completing university. In this paper, we focus on access to higher education among
socio-economically disadvantaged students.



                                                    1
the fraction of students who completed academic high school, the reform also increased the

proportion of students who became eligible to apply to university, while the number of

mandated university slots remained unchanged. Using data from the Romanian Census, we

employ a regression discontinuity (RD) design to show that students from poor and rural

regions and from less educated families, who were less likely to complete university, were

also those most a¤ected by the policy. However, although these disadvantaged students did

become signi…cantly more likely to be eligible for university after the reform, this did not

translate into a relative increase in university attendance and graduation.3 If more time

in academic schools had enabled disadvantaged students to catch up with their privileged

counterparts, delaying the timing of tracking should have increased university completion

among the disadvantaged. Instead, our …ndings indicate that simply postponing tracking,

without increasing the number of slots available in university, is not su¢ cient to improve

access to higher education for disadvantaged students.

      Many countries track pupils into academic and vocational schools at some point during

their secondary education. Some countries, such as Austria, Germany, and Hungary track

students as early as age 10, while others, such as the United States, have traditionally had

relatively little tracking across schools even at older ages. One of the main arguments for

tracking is that it is easier to teach a homogenous group of students.4 On the other hand,

the possibility of positive spillover e¤ects from more able to less able students is a common

argument against tracking. Early tracking may also be ine¢ cient when ability is measured

  3
     University drop-out rates during this period in Romania were so low that attendance and completion
were essentially identical (Braham, 1978).
   4
     Du‡o, Dupas, and Kremer (forthcoming) argue that this explains the positive bene…ts associated with
a (within-school) tracking intervention Kenya.




                                                   2
with noise because some students may end up assigned to the wrong track (Brunello, Gian-

nini, and Ariga, 2006). For Germany, Dustmann (2004) shows that parental background is

strongly related to the secondary track choice of the child, and to subsequent educational

achievements. Based on this evidence, Dustmann suggests that early tracking may explain

the low levels of intergenerational mobility in Germany. Nevertheless, in the absence of any

exogenous variation in the timing of tracking, it is di¢ cult to provide truly compelling ev-

idence. Manning and Pischke (2006) evaluate several studies in England and Wales which

estimate the e¤ect of moving from a system of extensive tracking to one with comprehen-

sive schools on academic achievement but conclude that selection bias is a serious threat to

validity and urge caution when interpreting results.5 In a cross-country setting, Hanushek

and Wössman (2006) …nd evidence that tracking raises educational inequality but Waldinger

(2006) argues that these results are not particularly robust to alternative speci…cations. Tak-

ing advantage of the unique educational reform in Romania, we use a regression discontinuity

design to address the possibility of omitted variable bias and selection bias. Importantly, al-

though Romania’s labor market under Communism was structured rather di¤erently from

those in other countries, the education system was actually quite similar to many systems

with explicit constraints on the number of university slots and competitive entry into high

school and university.

      We also contribute to a growing literature which examines the impact of educational

reforms in postwar Europe, and Scandinavia in particular. Meghir and Palme (2005) examine

a Swedish reform which increased compulsory schooling, abolished selection, and introduced

  5
    Maurin and McNally (2007) examine a more recent educational reform in 1989 that widened access to
the academic track in Northern Ireland.



                                                 3
a nationally uni…ed curriculum. Exploiting a period of experimentation across municipalities

during the 1950s, they …nd that the reform increased educational attainment and earnings

for students from low SES families. Aakvik, Salvanes, and Vaage (2010) examine a similar

reform in Norway which extended compulsory schooling, introduced comprehensive schools

and established a common curriculum in the 1960s. Although they focus on estimating

returns to schooling, they also …nd that the reform increased the probability of attending

university and weakened the e¤ect of family background on the likelihood of participating in

higher education. Pekkarinen, Uusitalo, and Pakkala (2009) show that an analogous reform

in Finland signi…cantly decreased the intergenerational income elasticity. Nevertheless, it is

di¢ cult to isolate the e¤ect of tracking in the earlier work because most of the educational

reforms a¤ected both the amount of education and the timing of selection. In the case of

Romania, average years of schooling attained by students remained the same before and

after the 1973 educational reform.6

   The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a background of the Romanian

educational system and the 1973 educational reform. Section 3 describes these data and the

empirical strategy. Section 4 presents the results, and Section 5 concludes.

   6
     The increase in years of schooling among who became eligible for university by completing high school
was o¤set by a reduction in years of schooling by students who left before completing high school (and no
longer acquired additional vocational education).




                                                    4
2         Background

2.1        Education in Romania

Apart from the changes induced by the 1973 reform, the structure of education in Romania

throughout the 1970s was relatively stable. Students began compulsory schooling by entering

schools of general education (scoal¼a de cultur¼a general¼a ) at the age of 6. More speci…cally,

students entered grade 1 in September of the year following the calendar year in which

they reached 6 years of age. Since the mid-1950’s, these schools o¤ered 8 years of general

education, nominally composed of primary education from grades 1 to 4 and gymnasium

education from grades 5 to 8.7 Prior to the educational reforms of 1973, students who

graduated from schools of general education entered vocational schools and apprenticeship

programs or continued onto academic secondary school lyceums, where entry was based on

competitive exams.

        The main types of academic secondary schools included the theoretical lyceums (licee

teoretice si real-umaniste) which were the most selective, as well as industrial lyceums (licee

industriale), teacher training lyceums (licee pedagogice), economic lyceums (licee economice),

agricultural lyceums (licee agricole). All lyceums operated at two distinct levels. The …rst

level corresponded to grades 9 and 10 of compulsory general education, while the second level

o¤ered general education in grades 11 and 12. Curriculum in the …rst level was essentially

homogenous across lyceums:
          “During the …rst 2-years of lyceum education, students are o¤ered a basically uniform
          curriculum both in academic and practical subjects whatever the character or orien-
          tation of a lyceum, its stated aims are to o¤er a well-balanced integrated curriculum

    7
    Some general schools also included grades 9 and 10 (ciclul superior de 2 ani ), usually as branches of
secondary school lyceums.

                                                    5
         composed of a number of subjects in the humanities, social studies, and the sciences,
         as well as subjects related to practical training in a particular …eld.” (Braham, 1978,
         p. 10)


Graduates from the …rst level of lyceum who did not take further courses in the second

level received a certi…cate of graduation from 10-year compulsory education (ceri…cat de ab-

solvire a înv¼at¼amîntului obligatoriu de 10 ani). Admission to the second level was based on

a composite score computed from academic achievement in the lower level and a competi-

tive entrance exam. Graduates from the second level who passed the baccalaureate exam

received the baccalaureate diploma (diploma de bacalaureat) while those who failed received

a certi…cate of graduation (certi…cat de absolvire). The vast majority of students enrolled in

the second level of lyceum did pass the baccalaureate exam.

       Vocational schools (şcoli profesionale) provided training in numerous trades ranging from

aircraft maintenance to winemaking. They also operated at two levels: a lower vocational

track for students who had completed 8 years of general education and an upper vocational

track for students who had received an additional two years of general education in the …rst

level of lyceum. The length of training varied by trade and depending on whether students

completed an additional two years of general education: “In 1967-68 vocational schools

o¤ered training in 232 trades, 175 of which required 3 years and 57, 2 years”(Braham, 1972,

p. 73).

       Entrance to higher education in universities, institutes, academies and conservatories

was open to graduates of the second level of lyceum schools and required a baccalaureate

diploma.8 Universities were under the central control and supervision of the Ministry of

   8
    In addition, technical schools for master craftsmen admitted graduates of vocational schools who had
spent between 3 and 5 years in production. A small number of postsecondary specialization schools admitted
graduates of lyceums and trained them in specialized …elds, but these were abolished in 1977.

                                                    6
Education, which also determined the number of openings at the di¤erent universities in

accordance with current and projected needs. During the 1960s, the number of university

slots expanded rapidly so that enrollment in 1968-69 was more than double that in 1960-

1961 (Braham, 1972). However, the number of slots remained roughly constant throughout

the 1970s. At that time, Romania had 42 institutions of higher education which o¤ered

degrees varying from a minimum of 3 years for teacher training to a maximum of 6 years

for medicine. Admission to university was open to all graduates of secondary education

holding a baccalaureate diploma and entry was based on a competitive oral and written

exams administered in July of each year. Successful applicants were selected solely based on

the scores achieved on these exams, subject to the predetermined quotas at each university

(Braham, 1972). In contrast to the baccalaureate exam, university entrance exams were

much harder to pass and it was not uncommon for a student to re-apply for a number of

years before being admitted. Once accepted, students very rarely dropped out of university

so attendance and graduation rates were very similar.

   Thus, in most respects, the educational system in Romania was quite comparable to those

which existed (and continue to exist) in many other countries. Schools followed a national

curriculum and entry into high schools and universities was constrained with admission based

on competitive exams. Although the Communist labor market of the 1970s was associated

with a highly compressed wage structure, attending a prestigious lyceum or university was

considered an extremely desirable outcome. Even under Communism, higher education

bestowed social status and allowed entry into the more highly valued professional jobs. As

a result, we believe that the …ndings of this study may be applicable to other settings where

the number of university slots is constrained.

                                                 7
2.2      The Educational Reform of 1973

The educational reforms of 1973, consisting of Decree No. 278 and the Resolution of the

Communist Party’s Central Committee of June 18 and 19, 1973, were intended to increase

the proportion of students with 10 years of general schooling. In particular, the Resolution

of June 1973 stated that “beginning with the school year 1974-75, the entire graduating

class of grade 8 will start in grade 9 of lyceums; vocational schools will no longer accept

students from this class [grade 8] directly.”9 Thus, these reforms prevented students from

entering vocational schools after 8 years of general education and required them to enter the

…rst level of lyceum schools instead. The structures of the educational system before and

after the change in 1973 are depicted in Figure 1. Depending on their aptitudes, skills, and

preferences, graduates of the …rst level of lyceum schools could (i) enter the workforce, (ii)

continue to vocational school for 1 year, or (iii) continue to grades 11 and 12 in the second

level of lyceum schools. The emphasis on additional general education after 1973 caused a

marked decrease in the prevalence of vocational training. As one secondary source explains,

the number of students in vocational schools “decreased during the 1970’s because of the

extension of compulsory education to include 2 years in the lyceum.”(Braham, 1978, p. 11)

      The Resolution of June 1973 also introduced measures to assure that su¢ cient quali…ed

teachers and school resources (such as science laboratories, classrooms, and dormitories) were

allocated to local authorities. In most cases, these measures did not require any physical

movement of resources; teachers and schools remained the same but their training and the

curriculum were changed. Speci…cally, the 1973 Resolution stated that:

  9
    These excerpts from the Resolution of the Communist Party’s Central Committee of June 18 and 19,
1973 are translated by the authors from the original Romanian text.


                                                 8
         “In order to provide for an e¤ective educational environment and to use the existing
         facilities e¢ ciently,...lyceums will, in general, function within the same premises as
         vocational schools and under the same leadership.”


Since most students who were prevented from entering vocational schools after grade 8 in

the fall of 1974 were placed in the …rst level of lyceum within existing vocational schools,

they remained with mostly similar peer groups in grades 9 and 10. With some expansion

of the second level of lyceums after the reform, the marginal student who entered this track

may have been exposed to slightly better peers, on average, during the …nal two years of

secondary school. However, as seen in Figure 2, the largest increase in lyceum enrollment

was in the somewhat less selective industrial high schools. Thus, while the marginal student

who graduated from a lyceum rather than a vocational school due to the policy change was

probably exposed to better peers, the increase in peer quality was likely limited because

of the already high level of sorting in di¤erent types of lyceums before and after the 1973

reform.10

       We can document some of these changes using aggregate data from the Annual Statistics

of the Socialist Republic of Romanian. Figure 3 shows the large decline in the number of

students enrolled in vocational schools and on-the-job apprenticeships between the school

years 1973-74 and 1975-76. During this period, enrollment in lyceums increased sharply, as

shown in Figure 4. At the same time, the number of teachers in vocational schools fell and

the number of teachers in lyceums rose in the initial years following the educational reform.

       Further evidence for these dramatic changes comes from the Romanian Census of 1992.

Since students began their compulsory schooling at age 6, they would have completed grade

  10
    The e¤ect of changing peer groups on avarage educational attainment and other outcomes would be
essentially zero in the presence of linear peer e¤ects. However, since we are interested in access to higher
education among disadvantaged groups, any potential change in peer groups could explain our …ndings.

                                                     9
8 by age 14 and grade 10 by age 16. As a result, students born in 1958 would have been

una¤ected by the policy while those students born in 1959 would have been required to

continue to grades 9 and 10 of lyceum schools. Figure 5 shows the highest educational

attainment by year of birth for individuals from the Romanian Census of 1992. There is

a sharp decline in the proportion of individuals with vocational training between cohorts

born in 1958 and 1959. At the same time, we observe a sharp increase in the proportion of

individuals who complete the …rst level (grades 9-10) and second level (grades 11-12) of a

general lyceum education. No such discontinuity is observed for the proportion completing

only lower/primary or those completing university. This is consistent with the historical

evidence that the supply of slots at Romanian universities did not change for the cohorts

a¤ected by the 1973 educational reform.




3      Empirical Strategy

3.1     Data

The primary dataset for the empirical analysis combines two independent random samples

from the 1992 Romanian Census.11 For each respondent, the census collected basic socioe-

conomic characteristics (such as gender, region of birth, rural/urban indicator of birth) and

detailed information about the highest level of educational attainment. Education levels

are classi…ed as follows: primary education, gymnasium education, …rst stage of lyceum

education (grade 9 and 10), second stage of lyceum education (grades 11 and 12), voca-

  11
    These include a 15% sample from the Population Activities Unit (PAU) of the United Nations Economic
Commission for Europe (UNECE) and a 10% sample from IPUMS International. We have veri…ed that these
two samples are two separate random draws from the universe of all responses.


                                                  10
tional training and apprenticeships, post-secondary education, and university education.12

Two features make this dataset especially useful for our analysis: First, with approximately

90,000 observations in each yearly birth cohort, we have su¢ cient power to employ a regres-

sion discontinuity design. Second, there is detailed information about the month and year

of birth so we can identify the discontinuity induced by the policy within a relatively narrow

window.

       A number of the individual and parental background indicators serve as important mark-

ers of social class. Among these, whether an individual was born in a rural or urban setting

is a particularly relevant indicator in Romania, whose economy prior to World War II was

primarily oriented towards agriculture, and where rural status continued to be an important

social issue in Romania during the transition period (Florian and Serbanescu, 1998). We

also de…ne a dummy variable indicating whether an individual was born in one of the 20

(out of 41) poorest regions of the country, as measured by regional GDP in the 1990’s. In

addition, we interact the two preceding variables to construct an indicator of being born

in a rural locality of a poor region. Finally, we consider indicators for whether each of the

parents has only a primary or no education. When examining parental characteristics, we

have to restrict our attention to those individuals who are still in the same household as their

parents. Although this sample is not completely representative of the overall population, we

have tested that the probability of living with a parent is not a¤ected by the educational

reform.13

  12
     Note that, since these categories are mutually exclusive, we cannot determine whether students with
vocational training and apprenticeships also completed the …rst stage of lyceum education.
  13
     Regression discontinuity estimates for the probability of residing with either the mother or father using
our main speci…cations are all statistically insigni…cant (not shown here).




                                                     11
   Table 1 presents summary statistics for the full sample used in the study (i.e. all individ-

uals in cohorts born between 1956 and 1961): approximately 27 percent complete vocational

training, 4 percent complete 9th and 10th grade in the …rst level of lyceum, and 27 per-

cent complete 11th and 12th grade in the second level of lyceum. Over 9 percent graduate

from university while only 1 percent of students complete some other form of post-secondary

training. Summing the last three categories, we determine that almost 38 percent of students

were eligible by law to apply for entrance into university (including, of course, those who

actually completed university). Roughly 72 percent of the sample is rural born, indicat-

ing that Romania was a predominantly rural country even through the late 1950s. Finally,

parental educational is very low, with 50 percent of fathers and 64 percent of mothers having

received only a primary education or no education at all. Note that all these background

characteristics, including gender, are very similar between the pre-reform and post-reform

cohorts (not shown here).



3.2    A Regression Discontinuity Design

We take advantage of the 1973 educational reform in order to estimate the e¤ect of postpon-

ing tracking. Since this reform went into e¤ect during the 1974-75 school year and students

entered grade 1 in September after the calendar year in which they reached 6 years of age,

those individuals born before January 1, 1959 were una¤ected by the policy while those born

after this date had their tracking postponed. With detailed information on date of birth, we

can estimate the impact of this policy using a regression discontinuity design.

   We …rst examine the e¤ect of the 1973 educational reform on educational attainment. Our



                                              12
primary educational outcomes include (a) eligibility to apply to university and (b) university

graduation. We consider the following regression equation:


                                                     0
                    _ =               X +    +  ( ) +                   (1)



where X includes …xed e¤ects for calendar month of birth to control for seasonal di¤erences

between individuals born in di¤erent months.    is equal to 1 if individual  was

born on or after January 1, 1959 and 0 if born on or before December 31, 1958. Finally,

 ( ) is a function of date of birth, which is the forcing variable in this context. As in many

recent studies employing this technique and as suggested by Imbens and Lemieux (2008),

we specify a ‡exible parametric model by including higher order polynomials of date of

birth.14 We consider speci…cations that use linear, quadratic and cubic trends in month of

birth, as well as linear, quadratic, and cubic splines (i.e. trends where the month of birth is

fully interacted with   ).15 All binary outcome variables are estimated using a linear

probability model but we have also veri…ed that non-linear regression methods, such as logit

and probit, yield similar results.

       Next, we examine how the 1973 educational reform changed the composition of students

from certain social classes who were (a) eligible to apply to university, or who (b) graduated

from university. To answer this question, we consider the following regression model:


                                              0
                         _ =          X +    +  ( ) +                           (2)

  14
     See Dinardo and Lee (2004) for use of parametric functions in regression discontinuity design. Lee and
McCrary (2005) and Card, Dobkin, and Maestas (2008) speci…cally use parametric functions of date of birth.
  15
     Estimating this equation using non-parametric methods, along the lines of Hahn, Todd, and van der
Klaauw (2001) also leads to similar results.


                                                     13
where all of the right-hand side variables are de…ned as in equation 1, and _ is

one of our …ve markers of social class based on personal and parental background charac-

teristics: (i) rural/urban place of birth, (ii) born in poor region, (iii) born in poor region in

rural locality, (iv) mother has only primary education or less and (v) father has only primary

education or less. We run this regression for the sample of students who are eligible for uni-

versity and for the sample who complete university. Consequently, in this speci…cation, the

coe¢ cient on    indicates the e¤ect of the reform on the proportion of disadvantaged

students eligible for university or graduating from university. We also report an alternative

set of speci…cations where we estimate equation 1 for eligibility to university and graduating

from university while restricting the sample to di¤erent disadvantaged groups.

   Our regression-discontinuity (RD) approach essentially compares the outcomes of indi-

viduals in cohorts a¤ected by the 1973 educational reform to their counterparts in cohorts

born too early to be a¤ected. We use a three year window on either side of the cuto¤, in-

cluding all individual born between January of 1956 and December 1961. The choice of the

window is somewhat arbitrary as we need to strike a balance between the advantages of hav-

ing more precise estimates with larger windows and mitigating the possibility of confounding

time e¤ects with more narrow windows. Therefore, we also present robustness checks where

use broader and narrower windows. All regressions cluster on month of birth in order to

avoid the problems associated with speci…cation error in the case of discrete covariates (Lee

and Card, 2007).




                                               14
4      Results

4.1     E¤ect of the reform on educational attainment

The 1973 reform had a dramatic e¤ect on the level and type of educational attainment,

shown in Figure 5. As mentioned previously, the reform forced students to enter vocational

school after 10 years of schooling and therefore required them to receive an additional 2

years of general education. The reform also increased the number of slots in academic high

schools for the remaining two years (in grades 11 and 12). Table 2 provides precise estimates

for the impact of the reform on several di¤erent educational outcomes, corresponding to

equation 1 from the preceding section. The rows show the coe¢ cient on    using

alternative polynomial trends. Column (1) indicates that children born after January 1959

were between 7 and 10 percentage points less likely to receive a vocational education. Given

that the base probability of receiving a vocational education during this period was about

0.27, this represents an extremely large e¤ect. Columns (2) and (3) reveal that students

who were shifted out of vocational schools ended up completing their education in academic

schools instead. The larger increase was among students who completed grades 11-12 in

academic lyceums, and thereby became eligible to apply for university. On the other hand,

columns (4) and (5) indicate that the 1973 reform had only a small e¤ect on post-secondary

educational attainment and virtually no e¤ect on university graduation.16 Eligibility for

university includes students who completed all four years of academic lyceums, as well as

those who actually went on to complete a post-secondary or university education. Column (6)

  16
    Figure 1 makes clear that the importance of post-secondary education is relatively small and diminshed
even further after the reform. Moreover, the coe¢ cient on    in column (4) is only signi…cant in
certain speci…cations.


                                                   15
shows that the 1973 reform increased eligibility for university by approximately 5 percentage

points, or over 13 percent, regardless of which polynomial trend is used to control for the

forcing variable.

   These results are consistent with our understanding of the educational system in Roma-

nia and the speci…c reform in 1973: The policy change switched a large fraction of students

from vocational to academic schools. As a result, many more students were able to take the

baccalaureate exam at the end of high school and become eligible to take the entrance exam

at one of the nation’s state universities. However, this did not translate into an increase in

overall university graduation because the number of university slots were constrained by the

government and remained unchanged during our period of study. Figure 6 plots the propor-

tion of individuals eligible for university and the proportion of individuals graduating from

university by month and week of birth. As expected, Panels A and C show an extremely

sharp discontinuity after January, 1959 (normalized as month 0) for those eligible for univer-

sity. Individuals born merely two weeks apart had very di¤erent likelihoods of being eligible

for university. No such discontinuity can be observed for the fraction of students completing

university in Panels B and D.

   Note that the 1973 reform did not lead to increases in overall educational attainment.

While there was an increase in the number of students who continued to grades 11 and 12 in

academic lyceums and thereby became eligible for university, there was also an increase in the

number of students who completed only 10 years of schooling. Using data from Romanian

LSMS household surveys in 1995 and 1996 to estimate the impact of the 1973 reform on

years of schooling, we found insigni…cant e¤ects ranging from about 0.02 to 0.09 years of



                                             16
schooling.17 Thus, the net e¤ect of the 1973 educational reform on years of schooling was

essentially zero from both a statistical and substantive perspective.



4.2       E¤ect of the reform on access to higher education

Having established that the 1973 educational reform increased the overall fraction of students

eligible to apply to university, we consider the impact of the reform on the socio-economic

composition of students eligible to apply for university. Table 3 presents regression results

for the sample of students eligible to apply for university, corresponding to equation 2 from

the previous section. Column (1) indicates that the 1973 educational reform increased the

proportion of eligible students who were born in a rural region by approximately 4 percentage

points, using any number of di¤erent polynomial trends. Similarly, column (2) shows that the

proportion of eligible students who were born in a poor region increased by over 2 percentage

points. Combining these two dependent variables, column (3) reveals that the proportion of

eligible students who were born in poor and rural regions increased by almost 3 percentage

points, or 10 percent of the mean.

       The e¤ect of the policy on social composition in terms of parental education is even more

striking.18 Columns (4) and (5) display the e¤ect on the proportion of eligible students

whose mother or father had a minimal level of educational attainment. In either case, the

estimated impact of the educational reform on the proportion of individuals with less edu-

cated parents is large and highly signi…cant. Figure 7 also reveals a sharp discontinuous jump

  17
    These results are similar to those for men in Malamud and Pop-Eleches (2010).
  18
    As mentioned earlier, the sample of individuals still living with their parents is not necessarily repre-
sentative of the overall population. However, the probability of living with one’s parents does not reveal a
discontinuity around the birth cohort cuto¤ suggesting this is not a concern given our design.



                                                     17
in the proportion of eligible students who come from poor and disadvantaged backgrounds

according to all …ve markers of social class.19 We interpret these results as evidence that

the marginal person a¤ected by the reform came from a lower social class than the average

person who was eligible to apply for university. In other words, the reform increased the

likelihood that children from less advantaged backgrounds would complete an academic high

school and have the opportunity to apply for university.

       We proceed to examine whether the increase in eligibility for university among disadvan-

taged students led to an increase in the probability of graduating from university. Figure 8

displays the proportion of university graduates who were born in rural regions, poor regions,

rural and poor regions, as well as those whose mother or father have especially low levels of

educational attainment. This graph is analogous to Figure 7 but with the sample restricted

to students who graduated from university. In contrast to the patterns for eligibility, we

do not observe any discontinuities in the composition of social class for university gradua-

tion. These …ndings are con…rmed in Table 4 which shows that the estimated coe¢ cients

on    are essentially zero for almost all of our alternative speci…cations. The e¤ects

are somewhat less precisely estimated in the case of parental education due to sample size

and with the inclusion of some higher order polynomial trends. Nevertheless, the pattern

is consistent across all markers of social class. The 1973 educational reform made students

from disadvantaged background relatively more likely to be eligible for university but this

did not translate into a increase in the proportion of disadvantaged students completing

  19
    The open circles plot residuals from regressions of the dependent variables on …xed e¤ects for calendar
month of birth, to eliminate seasonal di¤erences. The solid lines are …tted values to residuals from regressions
of the dependent variable on a quadratic polynomial in month of birth.




                                                      18
university.20

       We also considered alternative speci…cations in which we estimated the e¤ects of the

1973 reform on eligibility for university and graduation from university separately for each

of the …ve disadvantaged groups. Appendix Table 1 indicates that the e¤ect of the reform

on the probability of becoming eligible for university is generally larger for those who are

more disadvantaged. In contrast, Appendix Table 2 reveals that the educational reform

did not increase the probability of actually attending university for either disadvantaged or

non-disadvantaged students. These estimates largely con…rm the …ndings from the main

speci…cations in the paper.

       Finally, we attempted to calculate the “implied” e¤ect of the 1973 reform on univer-

sity attendance for disadvantaged students based on the rates of university attendance from

earlier cohorts. Using newly available data from the 1977 Romanian Census, we estimated

the probability of attending university for students who had completed di¤erent types of

lyceums just prior to the 1973 educational reform (i.e. cohorts born 1954 to 1958).21 Then

we multiplied the these probability by the increase in enrollment of disadvantaged students

in each type of lyceum. The overall “implied”e¤ect of the 1973 reform on university atten-

dance were approximately 0.008 for individuals from rural and from poor regions and 0.007

for individuals with less-educated parents. In most cases, we could reject these “implied”

e¤ects from the estimated coe¢ cients of university attendance in Appendix Table 2. Thus,

if disadvantaged students who became eligible for university due to the 1973 reform would

  20
     In addition, we examined whether the 1973 reform had a di¤erential e¤ect on males and females. Ap-
pendix Table 3 shows that the reform increased the proportion of males who became eligible for university
but did not change in the proportion of males actually going to university.
  21
     Rates of university attendance were 25 percent in theoretical lyceums, 19 percent in industrial lyceums,
and substantially lower in most other types of lyceums.


                                                     19
have been able to take full advantage of this opportunity, we would have expected to see

much larger e¤ects on university attendance.



4.3     Robustness checks

We have performed a number of additional tests to check the robustness of our results.

Appendix Table 4 examines the sensitivity of the e¤ects on eligibility for university. Panel

A presents three alternative windows around the discontinuity: a one year window including

students born between 1958 and 1959, a two year window including students born between

1957 and 1960, and a four year window including students born between 1955 and 1962. As

in Table 3, the e¤ect of the 1973 educational reform on the proportion of eligible students

from disadvantaged backgrounds is highly signi…cant in each of these speci…cations. Panel

B presents estimates for alternative year cuto¤s; i.e. “placebo experiments”around January

1 of the two preceding years and two following years. We …nd essentially no signi…cant

di¤erences in the proportion of eligible students from disadvantaged backgrounds using these

alternative year cuto¤s around January 1 of 1957, 1958, 1960 and 1961.22 Appendix Table 5

examines the sensitivity of the e¤ects on university graduation. Panel A indicates that there

are no signi…cant di¤erences in the proportion of university graduates from disadvantaged

backgrounds using either broader or narrower windows around the discontinuity. Panel B

shows that there is no signi…cant di¤erence in the proportion of university graduates from

disadvantaged backgrounds using alternative year cuto¤s. We have also con…rmed that the

analogous “placebo”experiments for the e¤ect of the 1973 reform on educational attainment

  22
    Note that we use a one year window for all the placebo experiments to minimize the contamination of
our estimates with the actual reform that came into e¤ect for those born in 1959.



                                                  20
in Table 2 are generally insigni…cant (results not shown).



4.4    Quality of education

As noted earlier, the competitive nature of entry into secondary education resulted in sub-

stantial sorting of students by socioeconomic background. Hence, even before the educational

reform, it is likely that students from disadvantaged backgrounds were enrolled in schools

with less able peers. These schools may have also drawn teachers from lower parts of the

ability distribution. Though the reform would have increased the average quality of peers for

the marginal student a¤ected, the evidence suggests that most of the a¤ected students at-

tended the less prestigious industrial high schools. Therefore, the postponement of tracking

probably did not drastically increase the quality of peers or schools for these disadvantaged

students but, rather, opened up the opportunity to complete an academic track in high

school and apply to university.

   The drastic expansion of general education in Romania so essential to credibly identifying

the e¤ect of vocational training may have also caused a short-run reduction in the quality of

academic education. Moreover, with an educational reform that a¤ected such a large fraction

of the school-age population, the question of how resources were allocated to implement

the reform becomes extremely important. As mentioned previously, the 1973 educational

reform involved the reorganization of existing vocational schools which were transformed

into “combo schools”o¤ering both vocational and general high school education. Figures 2

and 3 show the in‡ux of teachers from vocational to general high school and indicate that

the average student/faculty ratios across the two types of schools were largely maintained.



                                             21
Although we have some anecdotal evidence that retraining occurred, these teachers may

nevertheless have been relatively inexperienced at teaching the new curriculum. Nevertheless,

in a related paper, we provide evidence that changes in the quality of academic schools were

unlikely to explain the absence of e¤ects on labor market outcomes in later years. (Malamud

and Pop-Eleches, 2010)




5     Conclusion

Whether the relationship between family background and access to higher education can be

in‡uenced by the timing of educational transitions in secondary school is an important ques-

tion for human capital policy. This paper examines an educational reform in Romania which

postponed the timing of tracking into academic and vocational schools. As a result, the pro-

portion of students who became eligible to apply to university increased sharply, even while

the number of university slots remained unchanged. Using data from the Romanian Census,

we show that students from poor, rural areas and from less educated families who were less

likely to complete university, were those most a¤ected by the policy. These disadvantaged

students were signi…cantly more likely to become eligible to apply for university after the

reform, suggesting that certain disadvantaged students were able to catch up to some de-

gree with their more privileged counterparts in school. However, we …nd no corresponding

increase in their relative likelihood of university attendance and graduation, indicating that

the postponement of tracking did not help disadvantaged students catch with their more

privileged counterparts in getting access to higher education.

    How do we interpret these …ndings? Although Romania’s labor market under communism


                                             22
was structured rather di¤erently from those in most countries today, the education system

was actually quite similar to most systems with a national curriculum and competitive

entry into high school and university. Moreover, the presence of explicit constraints on

the number of university slots is common in many countries where the central government

funds higher education directly.23 Consequently, our …ndings may apply to other countries

and other contexts where the number of university slots is relatively scarce. If more time

in academic schools had enabled disadvantaged students to catch up with their privileged

counterparts, postponing the timing of selection should have increased university completion

among the disadvantaged. Instead, our …ndings suggest that simply postponing tracking,

without increasing the number of slots available in university, was not su¢ cient to improve

access to higher education. It is plausible that simply providing disadvantaged students with

the opportunity to apply to university could have had an e¤ect on university completion.

That we do not …nd any e¤ect is striking evidence to the contrary.




  23
     Indeed, there is also evidence of supply-side constraints in the United States where there is relatively
less public funding of higher education (Bound and Turner, 2006).

                                                     23
References
 Aakvik, A., Salvanes, K. G., and K. Vaage (2010) “Measuring heterogeneity in the returns
 to schooling in Norway using educational reforms” European Economic Review 54(4):
 483-500

 Blindeanu, E. (1972) Invatamintul Secundar de Cultura Generala Din Diferite Tari, Edi-
 tura Didactica si Pedagogica Bucuresti

 Braham, R.L. (1972) Education in Romania: A Decade of Change, US Government Print-
 ing Press

 Braham, R.L. (1978) The Educational System of Romania, US Government Printing Press

 Brunello, G., K,Ariga and M.Giannini. (2006) The Optimal Timing of School Tracking,
 in Schools and the Equal Opportunity Problem (eds P. Peterson and L.Wöß
                                                                       mann). MIT
 Press: Cambridge MA

 Card, D., Dobkin, C. and N. Maestas (2004) “The Impact of Nearly Universal Insurance
 Coverage on Health Care Utilization and Health: Evidence from Medicare” American
 Economic Review 98(5): 2242–58

 Carniero, P. and J. Heckman (2002) “The Evidence on Credit Constraints in Post-
 Secondary Schooling”Economic Journal 112: 705–734

 Dimitriu, E., Ionescu, O. Nica, I. and I. Orghidan (1981) A Concise History of Education
 in Romania, Editura Stiinti…ca si Enciclopedica

 Dinardo, J. and D. Lee (2004) “Economic Impacts of New Unionization on Private Sector
 Employers: 1984-2001”in Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(4): 1383-1441

 Du‡o, E., P. Dupas, M. Kremer (forthcoming) “Peer E¤ects, Pupil-Teacher Ratios, and
 Teacher Incentives: Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation in Kenya,” American Eco-
 nomic Review.

 Dustmann, C. (2004) “Parental background, secondary school track choice, and wages”
 Oxford Economic Papers 56: 209–230

 Ellwood, D.T. and T.J. Kane (2000) ”Who is Getting a College Education? Family
 Background and the Growing Gaps in Education,” in Securing the Future: Investing in
 Children from Birth to College, (eds. S. Danziger and J. Waldfogel), New York: Ford
 Foundation Series on Asset Building

 Florian V. and C. Serbanescu C. (1998) "Food consumption and rural poverty in Roma-
 nia during transition to market" . In Mergos G. (ed.) . Agricultural price reform under
 transition in Bulgaria, Romania, and Slovenia Chania: CIHEAM-IAMC, 223-232

 Hahn, J., Todd, P., and W. van der Klaauw (2001) “Identi…cation and Estimation of
 Treatment E¤ects with a Regression Discontinuity Design”Econometrica 69(1): 201-209

                                          24
Hanushek, E. and L. Wöß  mann (2006) “Does Educational Tracking a¤ect Performance
and Inequality? Di¤erences-in-Di¤erences Evidence Across Countries”Economic Journal
116: 63-76

Heckman, J.J. (2004) “Human Capital Policy” in Inequality in America: What Role for
Human Capital Policies? (edited by B. Friedman) Cambridge, MA: MIT Press

A. Krueger (2004) “Inequality, Too Much of a Good Thing” in Inequality in America:
What Role for Human Capital Policies? (edited by B. Friedman) Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press

Imbens, G.W. and T. Lemieux (2008) “Regression discontinuity designs: A guide to prac-
tice”Journal of Econometrics 127(2), 615-635

Lee, D. and J. Mccrary (2005) “Crime, Punishment, and Myopia”NBER Working Paper
No. 11491

Lee, D. and D. Card (2007) “Regression Discontinuity Inference with Speci…cation Error”
Journal of Econometrics 142(2): 655-674.

Leschinsky, A. and K.U. Mayer (1990) The Comprehensive School Experiment Revisited:
Evidence from Western Europe Frankfurt am Main: Verlag Peter Lang

Malamud O. and C. Pop-Eleches (2010) “General Education vs. Vocational Training: Ev-
idence from an Economy in Transition”Review of Economics and Statistics 92(1): 43–60

Manning, A. and J.S.Pisckhe (2006) “Comprehensive versus Selective Schooling in England
in Wales: What Do We Know?”IZA Discussion Paper No. 2072

Mare, R.D. (1980) “Social Background and School Continuation Decisions”Journal of the
American Statistical Association 75: 295–305

Maurin E. and S. McNally (2007) “Educational E¤ects of Widening Access to the Acad-
emic Track: A Natural Experiment”IZA Discussion Paper No. 2596

Meghir, C. and M. Palme (2005) “Educational Reform, Ability and Parental Background”
American Economic Review, 95(1): 414-424

Muller, W., and W. Karle (1993) “Social Selection in Educational Systems in Europe.”
European Sociological Review 9: 1–23

Pekkarinen, Uusitalo, and Pakkala (2009) “School tracking and intergenerational income
mobility: Evidence from the Finnish comprehensive school reform” Journal of Public
Economics 93 (7-8): 965-973.

Romanian Government (1968) The Education Law of the Socialist Republic of Romania,
Didactical and Pedagogical Publishing House, Bucharest

Romanian Government (1973) Resolution of the Communist Party’s Central Committee
of June 18 and 19, 1973, Editura Politica, Bucharest

                                         25
Romanian Government (1977) Presidential Decree Nr 191/1977 Article 25, O¢ ical Bul-
letin Nr. 67, Bucharest

Romanian Government, Annual Statistics of the Socialist Republic of Romanian 1960-1980

Shavit, Y., and H. Blossfeld (1993) Persistent Inequality: Changing Educational Attain-
ment in Thirteen Countries. Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press




                                         26
                   Figure 1: Structure of Education in Romaina


                     Panel A: Before 1973 (Individuals born before January 1, 1959)




Lyceum 2nd level         Vocational schools
(2 years)                (1 year)



                                                                     Vocational schools
                                                                     (3 years)
             Lyceum 1st level (2 years)




                        Schools of general education (8 years)




                   Panel B: After 1973 (Individuals born after January 1, 1959)




Lyceum 2nd level (2 years)                 Vocational schools
                                           (1 year)




                                Lyceum 1st level (2 years)




                         Schools of general education (8 years)




                                                                               Source: Braham (1978)
                   Figure 2: Change in lyceum enrollment by main specialty from 1973-74
                                                to 1976-77

               600000

               500000

               400000
  Enrollment




               300000

               200000

               100000

                    0
                        Theoretical     Industrial        Agriculture         Economic   Teaching
                                                      Type of lyceum school


Source: INSSE                               1973-74     1974-75   1975-76     1976-77
                            Figure 3: Enrollment in Vocational schools and
                                   Apprenticeships by school-year

                  300000                                                                   16000

                                                                                           14000
                  250000
                                                                                           12000
                  200000
  # of students




                                                                                                    # of teachers
                                                                                           10000

                  150000                                                                   8000

                                                                                           6000
                  100000
                                                                                           4000
                   50000
                                                                                           2000

                       0                                                                   0
                            71   72   73     74   75    76   77   78    79     80   81         Source:
                                             school-year ending in...                          INSSE

                       Vocational students          Apprenticeships students             Teachers


                            Figure 4: Enrollment in Lyceums by school-year

                  1200000                                                                  60000

                  1000000                                                                  50000

                   800000                                                                  40000
# of students




                                                                                                    # of teachers




                   600000                                                                  30000

                   400000                                                                  20000

                   200000                                                                  10000

                        0                                                                  0
                            71   72   73     74    75   76   77   78    79     80   81
                                             school-year ending in...                       Source:
                                                                                            INSSE
                                           Lyceum students          Teachers
                              Figure 5: Educational attainment for all individuals by birth cohort (Census 1992)


              0.45


               0.4


              0.35


               0.3
 Proportion




              0.25


               0.2


              0.15


               0.1


              0.05


                0
                1951   1952     1953   1954     1955    1956   1957   1958    1959    1960   1961   1962     1963       1964   1965   1966
                                                                      Year of birth
Source:
                                        lower                            vocational                        general 9-10
1992 Census
                                        general 11-12                    post-secondary                    university
Figure 6: Proportion Eligible and Graduating from University

                          Panel A: Eligible for University                      Panel B: University Graduate
                         (by Month -- Month 0 = Jan.1959)                      (by Month -- Month 0 = Jan. 1959)
                   .5




                                                                          .2
      Proportion




                                                             Proportion
                                                                          .1
                   .15




                                                                          0
                         -36              0            36                      -36              0           36
                                    Month of birth                                        Month of birth



                       Panel C: Eligible for University                      Panel D: University Graduate
                     (by Week -- Week 0 = Jan.1-7.1959)                    (by Week -- Week 0 = Jan.1-7.1959)
              .5




                                                                     .2
      Proportion




                                                             Proportion
                                                                     .1
              .15




                                                                     0




                         -156            0            156                      -156            0            156
                                    Week of birth                                         Week of birth




Notes: All panels are restricted to individuals born between January 1, 1956 and December 31,
1961. Panels A and C measure the proportion of individuals who achieved an educational attainment
that allows them to apply for entrance at a university. Panels B and D measure the proportion of
university graduates. Source: 1992 Romanian Census (PAU Sample).
Figure 7: Eligibility to Apply to University (by Month of Birth)

                   .05     Panel A: Born Rural                                    Panel B: Born in Poor Region




                                                                           .05
      Proportion




                                                              Proportion
                   -.05




                                                                           -.05
                          -36              0           36                         -36             0              36
                                     Month of birth                                         Month of birth



                          Panel C: Born Rural & Poor Region                       Panel D: Mother Primary School
               .05




                                                                           .1
      Proportion




                                                              Proportion
               -.05




                                                                           -.1




                          -36              0           36                         -36             0              36
                                     Month of birth                                         Month of birth



                           Panel E: Father Primary School
                   .1
      Proportion
                   -.1




                          -36              0           36
                                     Month of birth




Notes: All panels are restricted to individuals who achieved an educational attainment that allows them to apply
for entrance at a university and who are born between January 1, 1956 and December 31, 1961. The solid lines
are fitted values from regressions of the dependent variable on a quadratic polynomial in month of birth. The
open circles are residuals from regressions of the dependent variable on 11 calendar month dummies.
Background variables are defined in Table 1. Source: 1992 Romanian Census.
Figure 8: Actual Graduation from University (by Month of Birth)


                          Panel A: Born Rural                                   Panel B: Born in Poor Region
                   .1




                                                                          .1
      Proportion




                                                             Proportion
                   -.1




                                                                          -.1
                         -36              0           36                        -36             0              36
                                    Month of birth                                        Month of birth



                         Panel C: Born Rural & Poor Region                      Panel D: Mother Primary School
               .1




                                                                          .2
      Proportion




                                                             Proportion
               -.1




                                                                          -.2




                         -36              0           36                        -36             0              36
                                    Month of birth                                        Month of birth



                          Panel E: Father Primary School
                   .2
      Proportion
                   -.2




                         -36              0           36
                                    Month of birth




Notes: All panels are restricted to individuals who graduated from university and who are born between January
1, 1956 and December 31, 1961. The solid lines are fitted values from regressions of the dependent variable on a
quadratic polynomial in month of birth. The open circles are residuals from regressions of the dependent variable
on 11 calendar month dummies. Background variables are defined in Table 1. Source: 1992 Romanian Census.
     Table 1: Descriptive Statistics

                                                                   Entire sample
                                                      Mean              SD                 N

Educational Attainment
Vocational                                             0.27              0.45           448636
General 9-10                                           0.04              0.19           448636
General 11-12                                          0.27              0.44           448636
Post secondary                                         0.01              0.12           448636
Eligible for University                                0.38              0.48           448636
University Graduate                                    0.09              0.28           448636

Background Characteristics

Rural Born                                             0.72              0.45           449991
Born Poor Region                                       0.51              0.50           450156
Born Rural and Poor Region                             0.40              0.49           449991
Mother Primary Education                               0.64              0.48            86928
Father Primary Education                               0.50              0.50            65447
Male                                                   0.50              0.50           450156


Notes: SD is the standard deviation and N is the sample size. All summary statistics based on all
individuals born between 1956 and 1961 (within 3 years of January 1, 1959). Source: 1992 Romanian
Census.
Table 2: Reduced-form estimates for the effect of the 1973 educational reform on educational outcomes

COEFFICIENT ON                              Vocational              General 9-10             General 11-12           Post Secondary              Eligible for             University
AFTER                                                                                                                                            University               Graduate
                                                 (1)                      (2)                      (3)                      (4)                      (5)                       (6)
                                             -0.093***                 0.026***                 0.050***                   0.001                  0.051***                   -0.001
LINEAR                                         [0.005]                  [0.002]                  [0.003]                  [0.001]                  [0.003]                   [0.001]

                                             -0.092***                 0.026***                 0.049***                  0.001*                  0.050***                   -0.001
QUADRATIC                                      [0.003]                  [0.002]                  [0.003]                  [0.001]                  [0.003]                   [0.001]

                                             -0.080***                 0.020***                 0.046***                  0.002**                 0.045***                  -0.003*
CUBIC                                          [0.004]                  [0.002]                  [0.004]                  [0.001]                  [0.004]                  [0.002]

                                             -0.092***                 0.026***                 0.050***                  0.001**                 0.050***                   -0.001
LINEAR SPLINE                                  [0.003]                  [0.002]                  [0.003]                  [0.001]                  [0.003]                   [0.001]

                                             -0.076***                 0.018***                 0.044***                 0.002***                 0.043***                  -0.004*
QUADRATIC SPLINE                               [0.004]                  [0.002]                  [0.004]                  [0.001]                  [0.005]                  [0.002]

                                             -0.067***                 0.016***                 0.047***                  0.003**                 0.049***                   -0.002
CUBIC SPLINE                                   [0.006]                  [0.002]                  [0.007]                  [0.001]                  [0.007]                   [0.003]

Cal. month dummies                               Y                        Y                         Y                        Y                        Y                        Y
Sample Size                                   448,636                  448,636                   448,636                  448,636                  448,636                  448,636
Mean of dep. variable                           0.27                     0.04                      0.27                     0.01                     0.38                     0.09
Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. All regressions are clustered by month of birth. ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent level respectively.
Samples include cohorts born between January 1, 1956 and December 31, 1961. The dependent variables are defined in Table 1. AFTER is defined as 1 for individuals born on or
after January 1, 1959 and 0 for individuals born on or before December 31, 1958. All regressions include 11 calendar month dummies.
Table 3: Reduced-form estimates for the effect of the 1973 educational reform on eligibility to attend university by different groups

COEFFICIENT ON                                 Rural Born               Born Poor Region             Born Rural and Poor              Mother Primary                Father Primary
AFTER                                                                                                      Region                       Education                     Education
                                                   (1)                           (2)                           (3)                           (4)                           (5)
                                                0.038***                      0.022***                      0.028***                      0.049***                      0.042***
LINEAR                                           [0.007]                       [0.007]                       [0.006]                       [0.010]                       [0.009]

                                                0.037***                      0.022***                      0.027***                      0.046***                      0.042***
QUADRATIC                                        [0.005]                       [0.007]                       [0.006]                       [0.009]                       [0.009]

                                                0.041***                       0.024**                      0.028***                      0.071***                      0.050***
CUBIC                                            [0.006]                       [0.009]                       [0.007]                       [0.010]                       [0.013]

                                                0.035***                      0.021***                      0.027***                      0.046***                      0.042***
LINEAR SPLINE                                    [0.005]                       [0.007]                       [0.006]                       [0.009]                       [0.010]

                                                0.041***                       0.023**                      0.029***                      0.076***                      0.051***
QUADRATIC SPLINE                                 [0.007]                       [0.010]                       [0.008]                       [0.012]                       [0.015]

                                                0.039***                       0.023*                       0.033***                      0.048**                       0.049**
CUBIC SPLINE                                     [0.012]                       [0.013]                       [0.010]                      [0.020]                       [0.022]

Cal. month dummies                                  Y                             Y                            Y                             Y                             Y
Sample Size                                      169,339                       169,450                      169,339                        31,638                        24,557
Mean of dep. variable                              0.58                          0.45                         0.32                          0.42                          0.27


Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. All regressions are clustered by month of birth. ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent level respectively.
Samples include cohorts born between January 1, 1956 and December 31, 1961 who achieved an educational attainment that allows them to apply for entrance at a university. The
dependent variables are defined in Table 1. AFTER is defined as 1 for individuals born on or after January 1, 1959 and 0 for individuals born on or before December 31, 1958. All
regressions include 11 calendar month dummies.
Table 4: Reduced-form estimates for the effect of the 1973 educational reform on actual attendance of university by different groups

COEFFICIENT ON                              Rural Born              Born Poor Region          Born Rural and Poor           Mother Primary               Father Primary
AFTER                                                                                               Region                    Education                    Education
                                                (1)                         (2)                         (3)                         (4)                         (5)
                                               0.002                       0.005                       0.003                      -0.016                       0.018
LINEAR                                        [0.012]                     [0.011]                     [0.010]                     [0.016]                     [0.015]

                                               0.004                       0.005                       0.003                      -0.017                       0.017
QUADRATIC                                     [0.011]                     [0.011]                     [0.010]                     [0.016]                     [0.015]

                                                0.016                      0.018                       0.008                       0.003                       0.011
CUBIC                                          [0.016]                    [0.013]                     [0.014]                     [0.022]                     [0.021]

                                                0.003                      0.005                       0.003                      -0.018                       0.017
LINEAR SPLINE                                  [0.010]                    [0.011]                     [0.010]                     [0.016]                     [0.015]

                                                0.016                      0.022                       0.008                       0.013                       0.01
QUADRATIC SPLINE                               [0.017]                    [0.015]                     [0.016]                     [0.026]                     [0.023]

                                               -0.024                      0.013                       -0.02                       0.001                       0.015
CUBIC SPLINE                                   [0.022]                    [0.020]                     [0.020]                     [0.042]                     [0.032]

Cal. month dummies                               Y                           Y                          Y                            Y                           Y
Sample Size                                    40,065                      40,135                     40,065                       8,326                       6,631
Mean of dep. variable                           0.40                        0.38                       0.21                         0.20                        0.11


Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. All regressions are clustered by month of birth. ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent level
respectively. Samples include cohorts born between January 1, 1956 and December 31, 1961 who graduated from university. The dependent variables are defined in Table 1.
AFTER is defined as 1 for individuals born on or after January 1, 1959 and 0 for individuals born on or before December 31, 1958. All regressions include 11 calendar month
dummies.
Appendix Table 1: Reduced-form estimates for the effect of the 1973 educational reform on eligibility to attend university by different groups

COEFFICIENT ON    Rural Born Rural Born Born Poor Born Poor Born Rural Born Rural Mother     Mother     Father    Father
ELIGIBILITY TO                           Region    Region    and Poor and Poor     Primary   Primary   Primary   Primary
ATTEND UNIVERSITY                                             Region    Region    Education Education Education Education
                                          No              Yes             No             Yes              No             Yes              No             Yes             No              Yes
                                         (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)             (7)             (8)            (9)             (10)
                                      0.045***        0.056***        0.047***        0.055***        0.047***        0.058***        0.024**         0.050***       0.046***        0.051***
LINEAR                                 [0.006]         [0.003]         [0.004]         [0.005]         [0.004]         [0.005]        [0.012]          [0.006]        [0.010]         [0.008]

                                      0.044***        0.056***        0.046***        0.055***        0.047***        0.058***        0.024**         0.050***       0.046***        0.051***
QUADRATIC                              [0.006]         [0.003]         [0.004]         [0.005]         [0.004]         [0.005]        [0.012]          [0.006]        [0.010]         [0.008]

                                      0.029***        0.054***        0.042***        0.049***        0.040***        0.054***          0.011         0.062***       0.047***        0.051***
CUBIC                                  [0.007]         [0.004]         [0.006]         [0.006]         [0.005]         [0.007]         [0.014]         [0.008]        [0.013]         [0.010]

                                      0.045***        0.056***        0.047***        0.055***        0.047***        0.058***        0.024**         0.049***       0.045***        0.051***
LINEAR SPLINE                          [0.006]         [0.003]         [0.004]         [0.005]         [0.004]         [0.005]        [0.012]          [0.006]        [0.010]         [0.007]

                                      0.022***        0.054***        0.041***        0.047***        0.038***        0.053***          0.009         0.064***       0.048***        0.051***
QUADRATIC SPLINE                       [0.008]         [0.005]         [0.006]         [0.007]         [0.005]         [0.008]         [0.016]         [0.009]        [0.015]         [0.011]

                                        0.030*        0.058***        0.043***        0.055***        0.041***        0.062***          0.034         0.055***        0.069**        0.062***
CUBIC SPLINE                            [0.015]        [0.006]         [0.009]         [0.011]         [0.007]         [0.010]         [0.024]         [0.014]        [0.028]         [0.016]

Cal. month dummies                        Y               Y               Y               Y               Y               Y              Y               Y               Y               Y
Sample Size                            127,496         320,977         221,589         227,047         267,567         180,906         31,089          55,515          32,637          32,545
Mean of dep. variable                    0.52            0.27            0.42            0.34            0.43            0.30           0.59            0.24            0.55            0.20
Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. All regressions are clustered by month of birth. ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent level respectively. Samples
include cohorts born between January 1, 1956 and December 31, 1961. The dependent variable is an indicator variable for having achieved an educational attainment that allows a child to
apply for entrance at a university. AFTER is defined as 1 for individuals born on or after January 1, 1959 and 0 for individuals born on or before December 31, 1958. All regressions
include 11 calendar month dummies. Regressions are restricted to children with certain background variables, which are defined in Table 1.
Appendix Table 2: Reduced-form estimates for the effect of the 1973 educational reform on actual attendance of university by different groups

COEFFICIENT ON    Rural Born Rural Born Born Poor Born Poor Born Rural Born Rural Mother     Mother     Father    Father
ACTUAL UNIVERSITY                        Region    Region    and Poor   and Poor   Primary   Primary   Primary   Primary
ATTENDANCE                                                    Region     Region   Education Education Education Education
                                           No             Yes              No             Yes              No             Yes             No              Yes             No              Yes
                                          (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)             (7)             (8)             (9)            (10)
                                         0.004          -0.001           0.000          -0.001           0.000          -0.001          0.015*          -0.002           0.005          0.004
LINEAR                                  [0.004]         [0.002]         [0.002]         [0.002]         [0.002]         [0.002]         [0.008]         [0.002]         [0.009]        [0.003]

                                         0.004          -0.001           0.000          -0.001           0.000          -0.001          0.015*          -0.002           0.005          0.004
QUADRATIC                               [0.004]         [0.001]         [0.002]         [0.002]         [0.002]         [0.002]         [0.008]         [0.002]         [0.009]        [0.003]

                                        -0.006           0.000          -0.004          -0.001          -0.003          -0.001           0.017           0.002           0.010          0.002
CUBIC                                   [0.005]         [0.002]         [0.003]         [0.002]         [0.003]         [0.003]         [0.010]         [0.003]         [0.011]        [0.004]

                                         0.004          -0.001           0.000          -0.001           0.000          -0.001          0.015*          -0.002           0.005          0.004
LINEAR SPLINE                           [0.004]         [0.001]         [0.002]         [0.002]         [0.002]         [0.002]         [0.008]         [0.002]         [0.009]        [0.003]

                                        -0.007          -0.001          -0.006*         -0.001          -0.004          -0.002           0.019           0.003           0.014          0.002
QUADRATIC SPLINE                        [0.006]         [0.002]         [0.003]         [0.003]         [0.003]         [0.003]         [0.012]         [0.004]         [0.012]        [0.005]

                                         0.008          -0.005          -0.003           0.000           0.002          -0.007           0.017           0.002           0.022          0.005
CUBIC SPLINE                            [0.007]         [0.003]         [0.005]         [0.004]         [0.004]         [0.005]         [0.014]         [0.007]         [0.016]        [0.007]

Cal. month dummies                         Y               Y               Y              Y               Y               Y               Y               Y               Y               Y
Sample Size                             127,496         320,977         221,589        227,047         267,567         180,906          31,089          55,515          32,637          32,545
Mean of dep. variable                     0.19            0.05            0.11           0.07            0.12            0.05            0.21            0.03            0.18            0.02
Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. All regressions are clustered by month of birth. ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent level respectively. Samples
include cohorts born between January 1, 1956 and December 31, 1961. The dependent variable is an indicator variable for having graduated from university. AFTER is defined as 1 for
individuals born on or after January 1, 1959 and 0 for individuals born on or before December 31, 1958. All regressions include 11 calendar month dummies. Regressions are restricted to
children with certain background variables, which are defined in Table 1.
Appendix Table 3: Reduced-form estimates for the effect of the 1973 educational reform by gender

COEFFICIENT ON AFTER                                   Male                                                   Male


                                         Sample: eligibility to attend                          Sample: actual attendance of
                                                 university                                              university
                                                        (1)                                                    (2))
                                                     0.024***                                                 0.011
LINEAR                                                [0.006]                                                [0.012]

                                                     0.024***                                                 0.009
QUADRATIC                                             [0.005]                                                [0.011]

                                                     0.028***                                                 0.007
CUBIC                                                 [0.007]                                                [0.012]

                                                     0.025***                                                 0.010
LINEAR SPLINE                                         [0.005]                                                [0.011]

                                                     0.032***                                                 0.009
QUADRATIC SPLINE                                      [0.007]                                                [0.013]

                                                     0.023**                                                  0.026
CUBIC SPLINE                                         [0.010]                                                 [0.018]

Cal. month dummies                                      Y                                                      Y
Sample Size                                          169,450                                                 40,135
Mean of dep. variable                                  0.48                                                   0.54


Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. All regressions are clustered by month of birth. ***, ** and * indicate statistical
significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent level respectively. Samples include cohorts born between January 1, 1956 and December 31,
1961 who achieved an educational attainment that allows them to apply for entrance at a university (column 1) and who graduated
from university (column 2). The dependent variables is an indicator variable for being male. AFTER is defined as 1 for individuals
born on or after January 1, 1959 and 0 for individuals born on or before December 31, 1958. All regressions include 11 calendar
month dummies.
Appendix Table 4: Robustness checks for eligibility to attend university

                                            Rural Born          Born Poor Region           Born Rural and          Mother Primary            Father Primary
                                                                                            Poor Region              Education                 Education
                                                 (1)                      (2)                      (3)                      (4)                     (5)
Panel A: Alternative windows
                                              0.045**                  0.028**                 0.039***                 0.053***                0.061***
          1 year window                       [0.016]                  [0.011]                  [0.012]                  [0.019]                 [0.018]
                                             0.041***                  0.020**                 0.025***                 0.057***                0.053***
          2 year window                       [0.006]                  [0.008]                  [0.007]                  [0.012]                 [0.011]
                                             0.042***                 0.022***                 0.028***                 0.049***                0.035***
          4 year window                       [0.004]                  [0.006]                  [0.005]                  [0.008]                 [0.008]

Panel B: Placebo year cutoffs
            1957                               0.007                    0.012                    0.011                   -0.009                  0.049**
                                              [0.016]                  [0.013]                  [0.014]                  [0.013]                 [0.018]
                1958                           0.011                    0.001                    0.008                    0.004                  0.031**
                                              [0.016]                  [0.015]                  [0.012]                  [0.021]                 [0.012]
                1959                          0.045**                  0.028**                 0.039***                 0.053***                0.061***
                                              [0.016]                  [0.011]                  [0.012]                  [0.019]                 [0.018]
                1960                          -0.008                    0.019                    0.016                   -0.010                    0.001
                                              [0.009]                  [0.011]                  [0.011]                  [0.016]                  [0.019]
                1961                           0.005                   -0.006                   -0.001                   -0.027                    0.006
                                              [0.015]                  [0.007]                  [0.012]                  [0.016]                  [0.015]

Notes: Robust standard errors are provided in brackets. All regressions are clustered by month of birth. ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1,
5 and 10 percent level respectively. In Panel B, samples include cohorts born one year on either side of the cutoff. The dependent variables are defined in
Table 1. All regressions include a quadratic in month of birth and calendar of month dummies, except for the 1 year window which only includes a quadratic
in month of birth. AFTER is defined as 1 for individuals born on or after January 1 of the respective year and 0 for individuals born on or before December 31
of the previous respective year.
Appendix Table 5: Robustness checks for actual attendance of university

                                            Rural Born          Born Poor Region           Born Rural and          Mother Primary            Father Primary
                                                                                            Poor Region              Education                 Education
                                                 (1)                      (2)                      (3)                      (4)                     (5)
Panel A: Alternative windows
                                               0.010                    0.023                    0.012                   -0.004                    0.026
         1 year window                        [0.029]                  [0.018]                  [0.020]                  [0.036]                  [0.027]
                                               0.011                    0.011                    0.002                   -0.019                    0.007
         2 year window                        [0.013]                  [0.014]                  [0.013]                  [0.021]                  [0.019]
                                               0.011                    0.002                    0.004                    0.005                    0.020
         4 year window                        [0.009]                  [0.010]                  [0.009]                  [0.014]                  [0.013]

Panel B: Placebo year cutoffs
                                               0.012                   -0.001                    0.012                   -0.037                    0.036
                1957                          [0.026]                  [0.023]                  [0.022]                  [0.043]                  [0.022]
                                               0.003                    0.008                    0.013                   -0.007                   -0.013
                1958                          [0.023]                  [0.021]                  [0.020]                  [0.039]                  [0.026]
                                               0.010                    0.023                    0.012                    -0.004                   0.026
                1959                          [0.029]                  [0.018]                  [0.020]                  [0.036]                  [0.027]
                                               0.011                    0.004                    0.018                    0.007                    0.035
                1960                          [0.027]                  [0.022]                  [0.021]                  [0.028]                  [0.021]
                                               0.002                    0.003                    0.004                   -0.033                  -0.042**
                1961                          [0.027]                  [0.018]                  [0.013]                  [0.021]                  [0.020]
Notes: Robust standard errors are provided in brackets. All regressions are clustered by month of birth. ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1,
5 and 10 percent level respectively. In Panel B, samples include cohorts born one year on either side of the cutoff. The dependent variables are defined in
Table 1. All regressions include a quadratic in month of birth and calendar of month dummies, except for the 1 year window which only includes a quadratic
in month of birth. AFTER is defined as 1 for individuals born on or after January 1 of the respective year and 0 for individuals born on or before December 31
of the previous respective year.
