NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ESTIMATING THE SOCIAL COST OF CARBON FOR USE IN U.S. FEDERAL RULEMAKINGS:
A SUMMARY AND INTERPRETATION
Michael Greenstone
Elizabeth Kopits
Ann Wolverton
Working Paper 16913
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16913

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2011

The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of
the U.S Environmental Protection Agency, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research. Elizabeth Kopits and Ann Wolverton are economists at the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency. Michael Greenstone is a professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
They all worked at the Council of Economic Advisers in 2009 and/or 2010 and actively participated
in the process to develop a social cost of carbon for the United States.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Michael Greenstone, Elizabeth Kopits, and Ann Wolverton. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Estimating the Social Cost of Carbon for Use in U.S. Federal Rulemakings: A Summary and
Interpretation
Michael Greenstone, Elizabeth Kopits, and Ann Wolverton
NBER Working Paper No. 16913
March 2011
JEL No. Q51,Q54,Q58
ABSTRACT
The United States Government recently concluded a year-long process to develop a range of values
representing the monetized damages associated with an incremental increase in carbon dioxide (CO2)
emissions, commonly referred to as the social cost of carbon (SCC). These values are currently used
in benefit-cost analyses to assess potential federal regulations. For 2010, the central value of the SCC
is $21 per ton of CO2 emissions and sensitivity analyses are to be conducted at $5, $35, and $65 (2007$).
This paper summarizes the methodology and process used to develop the SCC values, complemented
with our own commentary about how the SCC can be used to inform regulatory decisions and areas
where further research would be particularly useful.

Michael Greenstone
MIT Department of Economics
50 Memorial Drive, E52-359
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
mgreenst@mit.edu
Elizabeth Kopits
National Center for Environmental Economics
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
1200 Pennsylvania Ave, NW
MC 1809T
Washington, DC 20460
kopits.elizabeth@epa.gov

Ann Wolverton
National Center for Environmental Economics
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
1200 Pennsylvania Ave., NW
MC 1809T
Washington, DC 20460
wolverton.ann@epamail.epa.gov

I.

Introduction

The climate is a key ingredient in the Earth's complex system that sustains human life and
wellbeing. According to the United Nation's Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC), the emissions of greenhouse gases (GHG) due to human activity, largely combustion of
fossil fuels such as coal, are "very likely" altering the earth's climate, most notably by increasing
temperature, changing precipitation patterns and increasing weather variability. Without
coordinated policy around the globe, state-of-the-art climate models predict that the mean
temperature in the United States will increase by about 3 to 8 °F (1.7 to 4.4 °C) by the end of the
century compared to today (IPCC 2007). Further, the distribution of daily temperatures is
projected to increase in ways that pose serious challenges to wellbeing; for example, the number
of days per year when the typical American will experience a mean (average of the minimum
and maximum) temperature that exceeds 90 °F is projected to increase from the current 1.3 days
to 32.2 days (Deschenes and Greenstone, forthcoming).
Over the past several years, it appeared that the United States and possibly other major emitters
were poised to confront climate change by adopting a coordinated set of policies that could have
included linked cap-and-trade systems. However, the failure of the United States to institute
such a system domestically and the non-binding commitments from the Copenhagen Accord
seem to have placed such a solution to climate change out of reach for at least several years.
Instead, the United States and many other countries are likely to pursue a series of smaller
policies, all of which aim to reduce GHG emissions but individually are expected to have only a
marginal impact on atmospheric concentrations. These policies will appear in a wide variety of
domains, ranging from subsidies for the installation of low carbon energy sources to regulations
requiring energy efficiency standards in buildings, motor vehicles, and even vending machines to
rebates for home insulation materials. Although many of these policies have other goals, there
may be increased use of them as a means of reducing GHG emissions. Note that these policies
will reduce GHG emissions at different rates and at different costs.
In the presence of the nearly limitless potential policies to reduce GHG emissions, how is
government to set out a rational climate policy? The key step is to determine the monetized
damages associated with an incremental increase in carbon emissions, which is referred to as the
social cost of carbon (SCC). 1 It is intended to include (but is not limited to) changes in net
agricultural productivity, human health, property damages from increased flood risk, and the
value of ecosystem services. Monetized estimates of the economic damages associated with
1

Under Executive Order 12866, agencies in the Executive branch of the U.S. Federal government are required, to
the extent permitted by law, “to assess both the costs and the benefits of the intended regulation and, recognizing
that some costs and benefits are difficult to quantify, propose or adopt a regulation only upon a reasoned
determination that the benefits of the intended regulation justify its costs.”

1

carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions allow the social benefits of regulatory actions that are expected
to reduce these emissions to be incorporated into cost-benefit analyses. 2 Indeed, as the
Environmental Protection Agency begins to regulate greenhouse gases under the Clean Air Act,
the SCC can help to identify the regulations where the net benefits are positive.
The United States government recently developed four SCC estimates for use in regulatory
analyses and has been using them regularly since their release (Interagency Working Group
2010). For 2010, the central value is $21 per ton of CO2 emissions and sensitivity analysis is to
be conducted at $5, $35, and $65.3 The $21, $5, and $35 values are based on the average SCC
across the models and scenarios examined for the 5, 3, and 2.5 percent discount rates,
respectively. The $65 value—the 95th percentile of the SCC distribution at a 3 percent discount
rate—was chosen to represent potential higher-than-expected impacts from temperature change.
These SCC estimates also grow over time based on rates endogenously determined within each
model. For instance, the central value increases to $24 per ton of CO2 in 2015 and $26 per ton of
CO2 in 2020.
The 2009-2010 interagency process that developed these SCC values was the first U.S. federal
government effort to promote consistency in the way that agencies calculate the social benefits of
reducing CO2 emissions in regulatory impact analyses. 4 Prior to 2008, reductions in CO2
emissions were not valued in federal benefit–cost analyses. From 2008 to 2009, SCC estimates
were used in some regulatory analyses, but the values employed varied substantially among
agencies. The interagency process aimed to develop a defensible, transparent, and economically
rigorous way to value reductions in CO2 emissions that result from Federal regulations.
Specifically, the goal was to develop a range of SCC values in a way that used a defensible set of
input assumptions, was grounded in the existing literature, and allowed key uncertainties and
model differences to transparently and consistently inform the range of SCC estimates used in
the rulemaking process.
We, the authors of this article, were involved in the interagency effort and the intent of this
article is to summarize the group’s efforts – in many instances, borrowing language directly from
2

Most regulatory actions are expected to have small, or “marginal,” impacts on cumulative global emissions,
making the use of SCC an appropriate measure.
3
All values of the SCC are presented as the cost per metric ton of carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions and are expressed
in 2007 dollars.
4
Much of what is summarized in the body of this article is taken directly from the interagency working group report,
which can be read in full at http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/omb/inforeg/for-agencies/Social-Cost-ofCarbon-for-RIA.pdf. The document is authored by a wider set of analysts than conveyed by the authorship of this
summary article. The interagency process was convened by the Council of Economic Advisers and the Office of
Management and Budget, with regular input from other offices within the Executive Office of the President,
including the Council on Environmental Quality, National Economic Council, Office of Energy and Climate
Change, and Office of Science and Technology Policy. Agencies that actively participated included the
Environmental Protection Agency, and the Departments of Agriculture, Commerce, Energy, Transportation, and
Treasury.

2

the interagency report - complemented with some of our own commentary, especially about how
the SCC can be used to inform regulatory decisions. We hope readers of this paper will help to
fill the research gaps identified by the interagency group and summarized in this paper so that the
next effort to revise these values retains its rigor while improving upon the methodology
described herein. The interagency group explicitly aims to periodically update the current set of
SCC estimates to reflect scientific and economic advances.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II provides background on
integrated assessment models (IAMs) and describes key modeling assumptions used to develop
the SCC. Section III presents and discusses the estimation process and resulting values. We
highlight ways in which the SCC has already been applied in national decision-making in
Section IV. Areas of future research are summarized in Section V. Section VI concludes.
Sections II, III, and V draw especially heavily from the interagency report.
II.

Integrated Assessment Models and Key Assumptions

Analysts face a number of significant challenges when attempting to quantify the economic
impacts of CO2 emissions. In particular, analysts must make assumptions about four main steps
of the estimation process: (1) the future emissions of greenhouse gases; (2) the effects of past and
future emissions on the climate system; (3) the impact of changes in climate on the physical and
biological environment; and, (4) the translation of these environmental impacts into economic
damages. Integrated assessment models (IAMs) have been developed to combine these steps
into a single modeling framework; the word “integrated” refers to the fact that they integrate
knowledge from science and economics. However, they gain this advantage at the expense of a
more detailed representation of the underlying climatic and economic systems.
This section describes the IAMs and the common set of modeling assumptions the interagency
group used to develop the SCC.
A. Background on IAMs and their Damage Functions
The interagency group relied on three IAMs commonly used to estimate the SCC: the FUND,
DICE, and PAGE models.5 These models are frequently cited in the peer-reviewed literature and
are used in the IPCC assessment. Each model was given equal weight in the SCC values
developed through this process, bearing in mind their different limitations.
5

The DICE (Dynamic Integrated Climate and Economy) model by William Nordhaus evolved from a series of
energy models and was first presented in 1990 (Nordhaus and Boyer 2000, Nordhaus 2008). The PAGE (Policy
Analysis of the Greenhouse Effect) model was developed by Chris Hope in 1991 for use by European decisionmakers in assessing the marginal impact of carbon emissions (Hope 2006, Hope 2008). The FUND (Climate
Framework for Uncertainty, Negotiation, and Distribution) model, developed by Richard Tol in the early 1990s,
originally to study international capital transfers in climate policy is now widely used to study climate impacts (e.g.,
Tol 2002a, Tol 2002b, Anthoff et al. 2009, Tol 2009a, Tol 2009b).

3

DICE, PAGE, and FUND all take stylized, reduced-form approaches (see NRC 2009 and
Nordhaus 2008). Other IAMs may better reflect the complexity of the science in their modeling
frameworks but do not link physical impacts to economic damages. Underlying the three IAMs
selected for this exercise are a number of simplifying assumptions and judgments reflecting the
various modelers’ best attempts to synthesize the available scientific and economic research
characterizing these relationships.
The three IAMs translate emissions into changes in atmospheric greenhouse gas concentrations,
atmospheric concentrations into changes in temperature, and changes in temperature into
economic damages. The emissions projections used in the models are based on specified socioeconomic (GDP and population) pathways. These emissions are translated into concentrations
using the carbon cycle built into each model, and concentrations are translated into warming
based on each model’s simplified representation of the climate and a key parameter, climate
sensitivity. Finally, transforming the stream of economic damages over time into a single value
requires judgments about how to discount them.
Each model takes a slightly different approach to model how changes in emissions result in
changes in economic damages. In PAGE, for example, the consumption-equivalent damages in
each period are calculated as a fraction of GDP, depending on the temperature in that period
relative to the pre-industrial average temperature in each region. In FUND, damages in each
period also depend on the rate of temperature change from the prior period. In DICE,
temperature affects both consumption and investment.
The three damage functions are presented in Figure 1, using the modeler’s default scenarios and
mean input assumptions.6 The x-axis represents increases in annual temperature in 2100, while
the y-axis represents the annual consumption loss in 2100 as a share of global GDP. Significant
differences between the three models are evident at both lower and higher increases in globalaverage temperature.
The FUND damage function predicts that temperature increases up to about 3 °C are beneficial.
This is in part because FUND allows for greater adaptation (and therefore lower damages) when
climate change happens more slowly. The combined effect of CO2 fertilization in the
agricultural sector, positive impacts to some regions from higher temperatures, and sufficiently
slow increases in temperature across these sectors can result in negative economic damages from
climate change. At higher temperature increases, FUND is notable for its exclusion of
catastrophic damages.
6

Each specific combination of climate sensitivity, socio-economic, and emissions parameters produces a different
realization of damages for each IAM. The damage functions represented in Figure 1 are the outcome of default
assumptions. For instance, under alternate assumptions, the damages from FUND may cross from negative to
positive at less than or greater than 3 °C. Note the graph shows annual temperature, not equilibrium temperature.

4

The DICE and PAGE damage functions are similar but project substantially larger losses across
the range of temperatures. Both include the possibility of catastrophic damages at higher
temperatures. For instance, PAGE models the threshold temperature, the rate at which the
probability of experiencing a discontinuity increases above the threshold, and the magnitude of
the resulting catastrophe. PAGE and DICE also differ from FUND in their assumptions
regarding adaptation. For instance, PAGE assumes that the developed countries can ultimately
eliminate up to 90 percent of all economic impacts beyond the tolerable 2 °C increase and that
developing countries can eventually eliminate 50 percent of their economic impacts. The DICE
model does not contain structural components that represent adaptation explicitly, though it is
included implicitly through the choice of studies used to calibrate the aggregate damage function.
Figure 1: Annual Consumption Loss as a Fraction of Global GDP in 2100 Due to an
Increase in Annual Global Temperature in the DICE, FUND, and PAGE models

Source: Figure 1A, Interagency report. EPA analysts estimated the damage
functions using the default assumptions available in each model. These damage
functions do not reflect the interagency group's assumptions that differ from those
used by the relevant model developer nor the probabilistic treatment of various
parameters in FUND or DICE.
It is also worth noting that the models vary in what is treated probabilistically. In DICE,
parameters are handled deterministically and represented by fixed constants; in PAGE, most
parameters are represented by probability distributions. For this exercise, parameters in FUND
were also treated probabilistically.
5

Overall, the power of the IAMs is that they offer guidance to the incredibly complex question of
what an extra ton of greenhouse damages will do to human wellbeing. This is no small task and
this is what makes them so appealing. However, the results are highly dependent on a series of
assumptions that cannot easily be verified. Indeed, the evident differences across the damage
functions underscore the need for a thorough review of damage functions to better understand
how the models incorporate adaptation, technological change, and catastrophic damages.
Section V highlights key gaps in how the models account for various scientific and economic
processes.
B. Key Modeling Assumptions of the Interagency Group
The parameters and assumptions embedded in the three models also vary widely. A key
objective of the interagency process was to enable a consistent exploration of the three models
while respecting the different approaches to quantifying damages taken by the main modelers in
the field. An extensive review of the literature was conducted to select three sets of input
parameters for these models: climate sensitivity, socio-economic and emissions trajectories, and
discount rates. A probability distribution for climate sensitivity was specified as an input into all
three models. In addition, the interagency group used a range of scenarios for the socioeconomic parameters and a range of values for the discount rate. All other model features were
left unchanged, relying on the model developers’ best estimates and judgments, including how to
represent the effects of climate change (represented by the increase in global-average surface
temperature) on the consumption-equivalent value of both market and non-market goods
(represented as a fraction of global GDP).
1. Socio-economic and Emissions Trajectories. Socio-economic pathways are closely tied to
climate damages because, all else equal, more and wealthier people tend to emit more
greenhouse gases and also have a higher (absolute) willingness to pay to avoid climate
disruptions. For this reason, it is standard to model several input parameters in tandem: GDP,
population, CO2 emissions, and non-CO2 radiative forcing. A wide variety of scenarios have
been developed and used for climate change policy simulations (e.g., IPCC Special Report on
Emissions Scenarios (SRES) 2000, U.S. Climate Change Science Program (CCSP) 2007,
Stanford Energy Modeling Forum (EMF) 2009). In determining which scenarios are appropriate
for inclusion, the interagency group aimed to select scenarios that span most of the plausible
ranges of outcomes for these variables.
To accomplish this task in a transparent manner, the interagency group relied on the Stanford
Energy Modeling Forum exercise, EMF-22. EMF-22 uses ten well-recognized models to
evaluate substantial, coordinated global action to meet specific stabilization targets. A key
advantage of relying on these data is that GDP, population, and emission trajectories are
internally consistent for each model and scenario evaluated. The EMF-22 modeling effort also is
6

preferable to the IPCC SRES due to their age (SRES were developed in 1997) and the fact that 3
of 4 of the SRES scenarios are now extreme outliers in one or more variables. Although the
EMF-22 scenarios have not undergone the same level of scrutiny as the SRES scenarios, they are
recent, peer-reviewed, published, and publicly available.
Five trajectories were selected from EMF-22 (see Table 1) and were given equal weight in the
derivation of the SCC. Four of these represent potential business-as-usual (BAU) growth in
population, wealth, and emissions and are associated with CO2 (only) concentrations ranging
from 612 to 889 parts per million (ppm) in 2100. The fifth represents an emissions pathway that
achieves stabilization at 550 ppm CO2e (i.e., CO2-only concentrations of 425 – 484 ppm or a
radiative forcing of 3.7 W/m2) in 2100, a lower-than-BAU trajectory.7 Out of the ten models
included in the EMF-22 exercise, the interagency group used the GDP, population, and emission
BAU trajectories predicted by the MiniCAM, MESSAGE, and IMAGE models, and the
optimistic scenario from the MERGE model. 8 For the 550 ppm CO2e scenario, the group
averaged the GDP, population, and emission trajectories implied by these same four models.9
Table 1: Socioeconomic and Emissions Projections from Select EMF-22 Reference
Scenarios
A. Fossil and Industrial CO2 Emissions (GtCO2/yr)
Annualized % Change
EMF – 22 Based Scenarios
2000
2050
2100
2000-2050 2050-2100
IMAGE
26.6
45.3
60.1
1.1%
0.6%
MERGE Optimistic
24.6
66.5
117.9
2.0%
1.2%
MESSAGE
26.8
43.5
42.7
1.0%
0.0%
MiniCAM
26.5
57.8
80.5
1.6%
0.7%
550 ppm average*
26.2
20.0
12.8
-0.5%
-0.9%
B. GDP per capita (using market exchange rates, 2005$)
Annualized % Change
EMF – 22 Based Scenarios
2000
2050
2100
2000-2050 2050-2100
IMAGE
6,328
17,367
43,582
2.0%
1.9%
MERGE Optimistic
6,050
13,633
27,629
1.6%
1.4%
MESSAGE
6,246
16,351
32,202
1.9%
1.4%
7

Such an emissions path would be consistent with widespread action by countries to mitigate GHG emissions,
though it could also result from technological advances.
8
The MiniCAM model is developed by the Joint Global Change Research Institute (JCGRI - Pacific Northwest
National Laboratory and the University of Maryland), MESSAGE is developed by the International Institute for
Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA), IMAGE is developed by the Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency
(MNP, formerly RIVM), and MERGE is housed at Stanford University.
9
The interagency group considered formally assigning probability weights to different states of the world, but this
proved challenging to do in an analytically rigorous way given the dearth of information on the likelihood of a full
range of future socio-economic pathways. Of course, giving equal weighting to each of the five scenarios is
identical to placing a probability of 0.2 on each of the scenarios.

7

MiniCAM
550 ppm average*

6,017
6,082

14,284
15,793

42,471
37,132

1.7%
1.9%

2.2%
1.7%

C. Global Population (billions)
Annualized % Change
EMF – 22 Based Scenarios
2000
2050
2100
2000-2050
2050-2100
IMAGE
6.1
9.0
9.1
0.8%
0.0%
MERGE Optimistic
6.0
9.0
9.7
0.8%
0.1%
MESSAGE
6.1
9.4
10.4
0.9%
0.2%
MiniCAM
6.0
8.8
8.7
0.8%
0.0%
550 ppm average*
6.1
8.7
9.1
0.7%
0.1%
*Average of the GDP, population, and emission trajectories implied by IMAGE, MERGE
Optimistic, MESSAGE, and MiniCAM under the 550 ppm CO2-e full participation, not to
exceed, stabilization scenario considered by EMF-22.
Source: The socioeconomic scenarios are available through Stanford’s Energy Modeling Forum
(EMF):
http://emf.stanford.edu/events/emf_briefing_on_climate_policy_scenarios_us_domestic_and_int
ernational_policy_architectures/. The models were calibrated off a 2000 base year.
There are several noteworthy details here. First, the EMF BAU scenarios represent the
modelers’ judgment of a likely pathway absent mitigation policies to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions, rather than the wider range of possible outcomes. Nevertheless, these views span a
wide range, from the more optimistic (e.g., abundant low-cost, low-carbon energy) to more
pessimistic (e.g., constraints on the availability of nuclear and renewables). 10 Second, the
emission trajectories underlying some BAU scenarios (e.g., MESSAGE’s Optimistic scenario)
also are consistent with modest policy action to address climate change. Third, the socioeconomic trajectories associated with a 550 ppm CO2e concentration scenario are not derived
from an assessment of what policy is optimal from a benefit-cost standpoint. Rather, it is
indicative of one possible future outcome. The group chose not to include socio-economic
trajectories that achieve even lower GHG concentrations at this time, given the difficulty many
models had in converging to meet these targets.11
2. Equilibrium Climate Sensitivity. Equilibrium climate sensitivity (ECS) is a key input
parameter for the DICE, PAGE, and FUND models. It is defined as the long-term increase in the
annual global-average surface temperature from a doubling of atmospheric CO2 concentration,

10

For instance, in the MESSAGE model’s reference case, total primary energy production from nuclear, biomass,
and non-biomass renewables is projected to increase from about 15 percent of total primary energy in 2000 to 54
percent in 2100. In comparison, the MiniCAM reference case shows 10 percent in 2000 and 21 percent in 2100.
11
In addition to fossil and industrial CO2 emissions, each EMF scenario provides projections of methane, nitrous
oxide, fluorinated greenhouse gases, and net land use CO2 emissions out to 2100. These assumptions are used in the
three models while retaining the default radiative forcings due to other factors (e.g., aerosols and other gases).

8

relative to pre-industrial levels (or stabilization at a concentration of approximately 550 ppm).12
Uncertainties in this important parameter have received substantial attention in the peer-reviewed
literature.
The most authoritative statement about equilibrium climate sensitivity appears in the Fourth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC):
Basing our assessment on a combination of several independent lines of evidence…including
observed climate change and the strength of known feedbacks simulated in [global climate
models], we conclude that the global mean equilibrium warming for doubling CO2, or
‘equilibrium climate sensitivity’, is likely to lie in the range 2 °C to 4.5 °C, with a most likely
value of about 3 °C. Equilibrium climate sensitivity is very likely larger than 1.5 °C. 13
For fundamental physical reasons as well as data limitations, values substantially higher
than 4.5 °C still cannot be excluded, but agreement with observations and proxy data is
generally worse for those high values than for values in the 2 °C to 4.5 °C range. (Meehl et
al., 2007, p 799)
After consulting with several lead authors of this chapter of the IPCC report, the interagency
group selected four candidate probability distributions and calibrated them to be consistent with
the above statement: Roe and Baker (2007), log-normal, gamma, and Weibull. Table 2 gives
summary statistics for the four calibrated distributions.
Table 2: Summary Statistics for Four Calibrated Climate Sensitivity Distributions
Roe & Baker Log-normal Gamma
Weibull
Pr(ECS < 1.5°C)
0.013
0.050
0.070
0.102
Pr(2°C < ECS < 4.5°C) 0.667
0.667
0.667
0.667
th
5 percentile
1.72
1.49
1.37
1.13
th
10 percentile
1.91
1.74
1.65
1.48
Mode
2.34
2.52
2.65
2.90
th
Median (50 percentile) 3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
Mean
3.50
3.28
3.19
3.07
th
90 percentile
5.86
5.14
4.93
4.69
th
95 percentile
7.14
5.97
5.59
5.17
12

The equilibrium climate sensitivity includes the response of the climate system to increased greenhouse gas
concentrations over the short to medium term (up to 100-200 years), but it does not include long-term feedback
effects due to possible large-scale changes in ice sheets or the biosphere, which occur on a time scale of many
hundreds to thousands of years (e.g., Hansen et al. 2007).
13
The IPCC definition of “likely” as greater than 66 percent probability (Le Treut et al. 2007). “Very likely”
indicates a greater than 90 percent probability.

9

Source: Table 1, Interagency report.
Each distribution was calibrated by applying three constraints from the IPCC:
(1) a median equal to 3 °C, to reflect the judgment of “a most likely value of about 3 °C”; 14
(2) two-thirds probability that the equilibrium climate sensitivity lies between 2 and 4.5 °C;
and
(3) zero probability that it is less than 0 °C or greater than 10 °C (see Hegerl et al. 2006, p.
721).
The interagency group selected the calibrated Roe and Baker distribution from the four
candidates for two reasons. First, the Roe and Baker distribution is the only one of the four that
is based on a theoretical understanding of the response of the climate system to increased
greenhouse gas concentrations (Roe and Baker 2007, Roe 2008). In contrast, the other three
distributions are mathematical functions that are arbitrarily chosen based on simplicity,
convenience, and general shape. The Roe and Baker distribution results from three assumptions
about climate response: (i) absent feedback effects, the equilibrium climate sensitivity is equal to
1.2 °C; (ii) feedback factors are proportional to the change in surface temperature; and (iii)
uncertainties in feedback factors are normally distributed. There is widespread agreement on the
first point and the second and third points are common assumptions.
Second, the calibrated Roe and Baker distribution better reflects the IPCC judgment that “values
substantially higher than 4.5 °C still cannot be excluded.” Although the IPCC made no
quantitative judgment, the 95th percentile of the calibrated Roe and Baker distribution (7.1 °C) is
much closer to the mean and the median (7.2 °C) of the 95th percentiles of 21 previous studies
summarized by Newbold and Daigneault (2009). It is also closer to the mean (7.5 °C) and
median (7.9 °C) of the nine truncated distributions examined by the IPCC (Hegerl, et al., 2006)
than are the 95th percentiles of the three other calibrated distributions (5.2-6.0 °C).
Finally, the IPCC stated that the equilibrium climate sensitivity “is very likely larger than 1.5
°C”. Although the calibrated Roe and Baker distribution, for which the probability of equilibrium
climate sensitivity being greater than 1.5 °C is almost 99 percent, is not inconsistent with the
14

Strictly speaking, “most likely” refers to the mode of a distribution rather than the median, but common usage
would allow the mode, median, or mean to serve as candidates for the central or “most likely” value and the IPCC
report is not specific on this point. For the distributions we considered, the median was between the mode and the
mean. For the Roe and Baker distribution, setting the median equal to 3 °C, rather than the mode or mean, gave a
95th percentile that is more consistent with IPCC judgments and the literature. For example, setting the mean and
mode equal to 3 °C produced 95th percentiles of 5.6 and 8.6 °C, respectively, which are in the lower and upper end
of the range in the literature. Finally, the median is closer to 3 °C than is the mode for the truncated distributions
selected by the IPCC (Hegerl, et al., 2006); the average median is 3.1 °C and the average mode is 2.3 °C, which is
most consistent with a Roe and Baker distribution with the median set equal to 3 °C.

10

IPCC definition of “very likely” as “greater than 90 percent probability,” it reflects a greater
degree of certainty about very low values of equilibrium climate sensitivity than was expressed
by the IPCC.
To show how the calibrated Roe and Baker distribution compares to different estimates of the
probability distribution function of equilibrium climate sensitivity in the empirical literature,
Figure 2 overlays it on distributions estimated in other recent studies. These functions are scaled
to integrate to unity between 0 °C and 10 °C. The horizontal bars show the respective 5 percent
to 95 percent ranges; dots indicate the median estimate.

Figure 2: Estimates of the Probability Density Function for Equilibrium Climate
Sensitivity (°C)

Calibrated
Roe & Baker

Source: Figure 2, Interagency report. This graph displays Figure 9.20 from IPCC (2007), plus
the calibrated Roe and Baker distribution on the IPCC graphic for comparison purposes.
3. Discount Rates. The discount rate is intended to reflect society's marginal rate of substitution
between consumption in different time periods. For rules with both intra- and intergenerational
effects, Federal agencies traditionally employ constant discount rates of 3 and 7 percent (OMB
2003). However, the choice of a discount rate over especially long periods of time raises highly
contested and exceedingly difficult questions of science, economics, philosophy, and law.

11

Discounting plays a critical role in determining the SCC estimates. To see this, note that the
SCC is calculated by first estimating the damages from an additional unit of CO2 emitted in a
particular year in terms of reduced consumption due to the impacts of elevated temperatures into
the future. Because CO2 has a half life of approximately 100 years, the damages from a unit of
emissions occur over many decades. The selected discount rate is used to calculate the present
value of the stream of damages in the year when the additional unit of emissions was released.
Arrow et al. (1996) outlined two main approaches to determine the discount rate for climate
change analysis, which they labeled “descriptive” and “prescriptive”. The descriptive approach
reflects a positive (non-normative) perspective based on observations of people’s actual
choices—e.g., savings versus consumption decisions over time, and allocations of savings
among more and less risky investments. Advocates of this approach generally call for inferring
the discount rate from market rates of return. The prescriptive approach specifies a social
welfare function that formalizes the normative judgments that the decision-maker wants
explicitly to incorporate into the policy evaluation—e.g., how interpersonal comparisons of
utility should be made and how the welfare of future generations should be weighed against that
of the present generation.15
Historically Observed Interest Rates
Advocates of the descriptive approach generally call for inferring the discount rate from
observed market rates of return “because of a lack of justification for choosing a social welfare
function that is any different than what decision makers [individuals] actually use” (Arrow et al.
1996). The standard analytic framework used to develop intuition about the discount rate
typically assumes a representative agent with perfect foresight and no credit constraints.
However, individuals use a variety of savings instruments with associated interest rates that vary
with risk level, time horizon, and tax characteristics. For example, the interest rate associated
with holding equity, gold, commodities, and riskless Treasury bonds vary greatly, so there is not
a single interest rate to appeal to as is often assumed in economic models.
Is one of these interest rates best suited for discounting in the context of climate change? Recall,
an expenditure today to mitigate greenhouse gas emissions that is financed out of current
consumption is like any other investment. Its return is measured in the higher level of
consumption available in the future due to reduced changes in climate, for example smaller
15

One theoretical foundation for the cost-benefit analyses in which the social cost of carbon will be used—the
Kaldor-Hicks potential-compensation test—also suggests that market rates should be used to discount future benefits
and costs, because it is the market interest rate that would govern the returns potentially set aside today to
compensate future individuals for climate damages that they bear (e.g., Just et al. 2004). As some have noted, the
word “potentially” is an important qualification; there is no assurance that such returns will actually be set aside to
provide compensation, and the very idea of compensation is difficult to define in the intergenerational context. On
the other hand, societies provide compensation to future generations through investments in human capital and the
resulting increase in knowledge, as well as infrastructure and other physical capital.

12

temperature increases. Indeed, the treatment of climate mitigation as an investment with an
uncertain return underscores the logic of using a market interest rate for the discount rate. In this
light, it is evident that climate mitigation should be compared with standard public investments
that increase the wellbeing of future generations and that, in fact, future generations would want
the current generation to make investment choices in this manner.
The crucial question then is how the returns to climate mitigation co-vary with the returns to the
uncertain returns to investments in the overall economy, which is frequently proxied by overall
equity returns. 16 There are three focal cases worth considering. The first case is when the
returns are perfectly correlated with the economy’s overall growth rate, which would be the case
if the damages from climate change are a fixed share of GDP. In this case, the proper discount
rate is the expected return on investments in the economy as a whole.
The second case is when the returns to climate mitigation investments are orthogonal to the
economy’s overall growth rate. Here, the appropriate discount rate is the riskless interest rate.
The third case is when the returns to climate mitigation are negatively correlated with the
economy’s growth rate. So, for example, a climate mitigation project may pay off in states of the
world where the overall economy is doing poorly and the marginal utility of an additional unit of
consumption is especially high. In this case, these investments have a low expected return but
pay off when it is most valuable. In this case, it would be appropriate to use discount rates that
are smaller than the riskless rate. 17 Thus, depending on the correlation between mitigation
investments and the overall economy, it is possible to defend the setting of the discount rate
equal to the post-tax equity return, post-tax riskless return, and even rates below the post-tax
riskless rate.
The Ramsey Equation
Ramsey discounting also provides a useful framework to inform the choice of a discount rate.
Under this approach, the analyst applies either positive or normative judgments in selecting
values for the key parameters of the Ramsey equation: η (coefficient of relative risk aversion or
elasticity of the marginal utility of consumption) and ρ (pure rate of time preference).18 These
16

The correlation between these investments and overall economy-wide growth can be thought of like the Beta in
the CAPM model, which measures how changes in market returns affect an individual investment’s returns. Becker,
Murphy, and Topel (2011) and Weitzman (2007) have insightful discussions of these issues.
17
Heal (2009) and Sterner and Persson (2008) also point out that if models do not properly account for the depletion
of natural capital resulting from climate change, then market rates will be biased upwards. Climate policy is also
justified as a form of insurance to avoid the small chance of a large catastrophe far out in the future (Weitzman
2007).
18
The parameter η captures diminishing marginal utility: consumption in the future is likely to be higher than
consumption today, so diminishing marginal utility of consumption implies that the same monetary damage will
cause a smaller reduction of utility for wealthier individuals, either in the future or in current generations. The

13

are then combined with g (growth rate of per-capita consumption) to equal the interest rate at
which future monetized damages are discounted: ρ + η·g.
Most papers in the climate change literature adopt values for η in the range of 0.5 to 3, although
not all authors articulate whether their choice is based on prescriptive or descriptive reasoning.19
Dasgupta (2008) argues that η should be greater than 1 and may be as high as 3, since η equal to
1 suggests savings rates that do not conform to observed behavior. With respect to the pure rate
of time preference, most papers in the climate change literature adopt values for ρ in the range of
0 to 3 percent per year. The very low rates tend to follow from moral judgments involving
intergenerational neutrality. Some have argued that to use any value other than ρ = 0 would
unjustly discriminate against future generations (e.g., Arrow et al. 1996, Stern et al. 2006).
However, even in an inter-generational setting, it may make sense to use a small positive pure
rate of time preference because of the small probability of unforeseen cataclysmic events (Stern
et al. 2006).
Some economists and non-economists have argued for constant discount rates below 2 percent
based on the prescriptive approach. When grounded in the Ramsey framework, proponents of
this approach have argued that a ρ of zero avoids giving preferential treatment to one generation
over another. The choice of η has also been posed as an ethical choice linked to the value of an
additional dollar in poorer countries compared to wealthier ones. Stern et al. (2006) applies this
perspective through his choice of ρ = 0.1 percent per year η = 1, yielding an annual discount rate
of 1.4 percent when combined with the growth rate. Recently, Stern (2008) revisited the values
used in Stern et al. (2006), stating that there is a case to be made for raising η due to the amount
of weight lower values place on damages far in the future (over 90 percent of expected damages
occur after 2200 with η = 1).
Uncertainty in the Discount Rate
While the consumption rate of interest is an important driver of the benefits estimate, it is
uncertain over time. Ideally, one would formally model this uncertainty. Weitzman (1998)
showed theoretically and Newell and Pizer (2003) and Groom et al. (2006) confirm empirically
that discount rate uncertainty can have a large effect on net present values. A main result from
these studies is that if there is a persistent element to the uncertainty in the discount rate (e.g., the
rate follows a random walk), then it will result in an effective (or certainty-equivalent) discount
parameter ρ measures the pure rate of time preference: people’s behavior reveals a preference for an increase in
utility today versus the future. Consequently, it is standard to place a lower weight on utility in the future.
19
A benchmark value of 2 is near the middle of the range of values estimated or used by Szpiro (1986), Hall and
Jones (2007), Arrow (2007), Dasgupta (2006, 2008), Weitzman (2007, 2009), and Nordhaus (2008). However,
Chetty (2006) shows that existing evidence of the effects of wage changes on labor supply imposes a tight upper
bound on the curvature of utility over wealth and concludes that the standard expected utility model cannot generate
high levels of risk aversion without contradicting established facts about labor supply. Recent work also has jointly
estimated the components of the Ramsey equation (Evans and Sezer 2005; Anthoff, et al. 2009b).

14

rate that declines over time. Consequently, lower discount rates tend to dominate over the very
long term (see Weitzman 1998, 1999).
The proper way to model discount rate uncertainty remains an active area of research. Newell
and Pizer (2003) employ a model of how long-term interest rates change over time to forecast
future discount rates. Their model incorporates some of the basic features of how interest rates
move over time, and its parameters are estimated based on historical observations of long-term
rates. Subsequent work on this topic, notably Groom et al. (2006), uses more general models of
interest rate dynamics to allow for better forecasts. Specifically, the volatility of interest rates
depends on whether rates are currently low or high and variation in the level of persistence over
time. A key question that has emerged but not yet been resolved is the trade-off between
potential time inconsistency in choices from allowing for uncertainty in the discount rate and
giving greater weight to far future outcomes (Heal 2009).

The Discount Rates Selected for Estimating the SCC
The interagency group drew on both descriptive and prescriptive approaches but relied primarily
on the descriptive approach to inform the choice of discount rate. With recognition of its
limitations, the interagency group felt that this approach was the most defensible and transparent
given its consistency with the standard contemporary theoretical foundations of benefit-cost
analysis. The logic of this framework also suggests that market rates should be used for
discounting future consumption-equivalent damages. Regardless of the theoretical approach
used to derive the appropriate discount rate(s), it is important to note the inherent conceptual and
practical difficulties of adequately capturing consumption trade-offs over many decades or even
centuries.
In light of disagreement in the literature on the appropriate market interest rate to use in this
context and uncertainty about how interest rates may change over time, the interagency group
used three certainty-equivalent constant discount rates to span a plausible range of discount rates:
2.5, 3, and 5 percent per year.
The central value, 3 percent, is consistent with estimates provided in the economics literature and
the U.S. government's Office of Management and Budget's (OMB) Circular A-4 guidance (OMB
2003) for the consumption rate of interest. Further, 3 percent roughly corresponds to the aftertax riskless interest rate. The upper value of 5 percent is included to represent the possibility that
climate damages are positively correlated with market returns. Additionally, this discount rate

15

may be justified by the high interest rates that many consumers use to smooth consumption
across periods.20
The low value, 2.5 percent, is included to incorporate the concern that interest rates are highly
uncertain over time. It represents the average of the certainty-equivalent rates from the meanreverting and random walk approaches from Newell and Pizer (2003) starting at a discount rate
of 3 percent.21 Further, a rate below the riskless rate would be justified if climate investments
are negatively correlated with the overall market rate of return. Finally, the use of this lower
value is consistent with certain judgments about the prescriptive or normative approach, as well
as being more in line with ethical objections that have been raised about higher discount rates
due to assumptions about positive values of ρ (e.g. Stern et al. 2006; Stern 2008; Sterner and
Persson 2008; Heal 2009).
4. Global or Domestic SCC
An important question in setting the SCC is whether to include damages that are projected to
occur outside the United States. Under current federal guidance (OMB 2003), analysis of
economically significant proposed and final regulations from the domestic perspective is
required, while analysis from the international perspective is optional. With a 2.5 or 3 percent
discount rate, the U.S. benefit is about 7-10 percent of the global benefit, on average, across the
scenarios analyzed. Alternatively, if the fraction of GDP lost due to climate change is assumed
to be similar across countries, the domestic benefit would be proportional to the U.S. share of
global GDP, which is currently about 23 percent.
The interagency group concluded that a global measure of the benefits from reducing U.S.
emissions is preferable because the climate change problem is highly unusual in at least two
respects. First, it involves a global externality: Emissions of most greenhouse gases contribute to
damages around the world even when they are emitted in the United States. Consequently, to
address the global nature of the problem, the SCC should incorporate the full (global) damages
caused by GHG emissions. Second, climate change presents a problem that the United States
alone cannot solve. Even if the United States were to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions to
zero, that step would be far from enough to avoid substantial climate change. Other countries

20

As a measure of the post-tax riskless rate, the interagency group calculated the average real return from Treasury
notes over the longest time period available (from Newell and Pizer 2003) and adjusted for Federal taxes (the
average marginal rate from tax years 2003-2006 is about 27 percent). This calculation produces a real interest rate
of about 2.7 percent, roughly consistent with OMB Circular A-4’s recommendation to use 3 percent to represent the
consumption rate of interest. A measure of the post-tax risky rate for investments whose returns are positively
correlated with overall equity market returns can be obtained by adjusting pre-tax rates of household returns to risky
investments (approximately 7 percent) for taxes, yielding a real rate of roughly 5 percent.
21
Calculations done by William Pizer using the original simulation program from Newell and Pizer (2003).

16

would also need to take action to reduce emissions if significant changes in the global climate are
to be avoided.
5. Utility Functions and Equity Weighting
A final modeling question when quantifying the damages associated with a change in emissions
is whether to employ “equity weighting” to aggregate changes in consumption across regions.
Such weighting takes into account the relative reductions in wealth in different regions of the
world (e.g., Anthoff, et al. 2009a). A per-capita loss of $500 in GDP, for instance, is weighted
more heavily in a country with a per-capita GDP of $2,000 than in one with a per-capita GDP of
$40,000. In standard economics terms, this would be consistent with a declining marginal utility
of income.
Ultimately, the interagency group concluded that this approach would not be appropriate for
estimating a SCC value used in domestic regulatory analysis due to both practical and theoretical
problems. First, it would require the development of a global utility function. Second, emissions
reductions also impose costs, and hence a full accounting would have to consider that a given
cost of emissions reductions imposes a greater utility or welfare loss on a poor nation than on a
wealthy one.22 Finally, the use of equity weighting directly in benefit-cost analysis, as opposed
to conducting a separate distributional analysis, would be a departure from standard operating
procedures for the United States Government.
III. Calculating and Selecting SCC Values
Although there is a wide variety of SCC values in the published literature from each of these
models, the group's goal of developing SCC estimates based on a consistent set of assumptions
could not be met by relying on this literature. Instead, the group obtained access to the three
integrated assessments models (FUND, DICE, and PAGE) and ran each of them with the
common set of modeling assumptions outlined in the previous section:




A Roe and Baker distribution for the climate sensitivity parameter bounded between 0
and 10 with a median of 3 °C and a cumulative probability between 2 and 4.5 °C of twothirds;
Five sets of GDP, population and carbon emissions trajectories based on the selected
EMF-22 scenarios; and
Constant annual discount rates of 2.5, 3, and 5 percent.

22

Indeed, the use of equity weighting for global differences in costs and benefits would greatly complicate a global
trading system for pollution permits under a cap and trade regime.

17

Because the climate sensitivity parameter is modeled probabilistically, and because PAGE and
FUND incorporate uncertainty in other model parameters, the final output from each model run
is a distribution over the SCC in year t.
To maintain consistency across the three IAMs, climate damages are calculated as lost
consumption in each future year. The basic computational steps for calculating the SCC in a
particular year t are:
1.

Input the path of emissions, GDP, and population23 and calculate the year by year
paths of temperature and per capita consumption associated with the baseline path
of emissions.

2.

Add an additional unit of carbon emissions in year t and recalculate the year by
year paths of temperature and per capita consumption in all years beyond t
resulting from this adjusted path of emissions.

3.

Compute the marginal damages in each year as the difference between the per
capita consumption computed in step 1 and step 2.24

4.

Discount the resulting path of marginal damages back to the year of emissions
using the fixed discount rates and calculate the SCC as the net present value of the
discounted path of damages.

The steps above were repeated in each model for multiple future years to cover the time horizons
anticipated for upcoming rulemaking analysis. Because the climate sensitivity parameter is
modeled probabilistically, and because PAGE and FUND incorporate uncertainty in other model
parameters, the final output from each model run is a distribution over the SCC in year t.
Therefore, this exercise produced 45 separate distributions of the SCC for a given year, the
product of 3 models, 3 discount rates, and 5 socioeconomic scenarios, clearly too many separate
distributions to inform policy decision-making.

23

To run each model through 2300 requires assumptions about GDP, population, greenhouse gas emissions, and
radiative forcing trajectories after 2100, the last year for which these projections are available from the EMF-22
models. These inputs were extrapolated from 2100 to 2300 as follows: (1) population growth rate declines linearly,
reaching zero in the year 2200; (2) GDP/per capita growth rate declines linearly, reaching zero in the year 2300; (3)
the decline in the fossil and industrial carbon intensity (CO2/GDP) growth rate over 2090-2100 is maintained from
2100 through 2300; (4) net land use CO2 emissions decline linearly, reaching zero in the year 2200; and (5) non-CO2
radiative forcing remains constant after 2100.
24
DICE is run in 10 year time steps, FUND in annual time steps, while the time steps in PAGE vary.

18

To produce a range of plausible estimates that still reflects the uncertainty in the estimation
exercise, the distributions from each of the models and scenarios are equally weighed and
combined to produce three separate probability distributions for SCC in a given year, one for
each assumed discount rate. For example, Figure 3 reports on the distribution of 2010 SCC
values associated with a 3% discount rate from 150,000 model runs; each of the 15 modelsocioeconomic scenario pairs is run a total of 10,000 times to adequately sample the distribution
of equilibrium climate sensitivities. The 5th, 25th, 50th, 75th, and 95th percentile values are -$9,
$4, $14, $28, and $65, respectively.
Figure 3. Histogram of Global SCC Estimates in 2010 (2007$/ton CO2), 3% discount rate
25%

% of Model Runs

20%

15%

10%

5%

>200

190‐200

180‐190

170‐180

160‐170

150‐160

140‐150

130‐140

120‐130

110‐120

100‐110

90‐100

80‐90

70‐80

60‐70

50‐60

40‐50

30‐40

20‐30

10‐20

0‐10

‐10‐0

‐20‐ ‐10

<=‐20

0%

2010 SCC Estimate ($/ton CO2) (2007$)

Source: DICE, PAGE, and FUND model runs used to generate interagency SCC values.
These distributions are then used to define a range of point estimates for the global SCC. In this
way, no IAM or socioeconomic scenario is given greater weight than another. Because the
literature shows that the SCC is quite sensitive to assumptions about the discount rate, and
because no consensus exists on the appropriate rate to use in an intergenerational context, the
interagency group chose to present SCCs based on the average values across models and
socioeconomic scenarios for each discount rate.

19

The interagency group selected four SCC values for use in regulatory analyses. Three values are
based on the mean SCC across models and socio-economic and emissions scenarios at the 2.5, 3,
and 5 percent discount rates. The fourth value was included to represent the higher-thanexpected economic impacts from climate change further out in the tails of the SCC distribution.
For this purpose, the group selected the SCC value for the 95th percentile at a 3 percent discount
rate. The central value is the average SCC across models at the 3 percent discount rate. For
purposes of capturing the uncertainties involved in regulatory impact analysis, the group
emphasized the importance and value of considering the full range.
Before examining the specific results, it is important to recall two features of these models.
First, catastrophic impacts are incorporated into the SCC values through consideration of their
effects in the PAGE and DICE models, as well as the use of a probability density function for
equilibrium climate sensitivity. Treating climate sensitivity probabilistically results in more high
temperature outcomes, which in turn lead to higher projections of damages. Although FUND
does not include catastrophic damages, its probabilistic treatment of the equilibrium climate
sensitivity parameter will directly affect the non-catastrophic damages that are a function of the
rate of temperature change. Second, the three models vary widely in how they account for
compensatory adjustments or adaptation in response to climate change that mitigates its impact
on wellbeing. FUND allows for induced adaptation in certain sectors; PAGE assumes adaptation
reduces climate impacts but it is exogenously imposed. DICE does not assume any additional
adaptation beyond what is included in the studies used to calibrate the damage function.
Table 3 presents SCC estimates for 2010 by model, scenario, and discount rate to illustrate the
variability in the SCC across these input parameters. Higher discount rates naturally result in
lower SCC values (and vice versa) for each socioeconomic trajectory. It is evident that there are
differences in the SCC estimated across the three main models. FUND produces the lowest
estimates, while PAGE generally produces the highest estimates. These results are qualitatively
similar to the published SCC values based on the latest versions of each model, although those
values do not rely on the same set of assumptions.25

25

For example, the interagency group calculated that FUND yields 2010 SCC estimates (in 2007 dollars) at or near
zero for a 5 percent discount rate and around $9 per ton for a 3 percent discount rate; DICE produces a SCC of
around $9 per ton for a 5 percent discount rate (based on Nordhaus 2008); and PAGE yields a SCC close to $8 per
ton for a 4 percent discount rate (based on Hope 2006, 2008). These comparisons are only approximate since the
literature generally relies on Ramsey discounting, while constant discount rates are used here.

20

Table 3: Social Cost of CO2 Estimates by Model, Socio-Economic Trajectory, and Discount
Rate for 2010 (in 2007 dollars)
Discount
rate:

FUND

PAGE

DICE

Model

5%

3%

2.5%

Mean

Mean

Mean

10.8

35.8

54.2

95th
Percentile
70.8

MERGE

7.5

22.0

31.6

42.1

Message

9.8

29.8

43.5

58.6

MiniCAM

8.6

28.8

44.4

57.9

550 ppm Average**

8.2

24.9

37.4

50.8

IMAGE

8.3

39.5

65.5

142.4

MERGE

5.2

22.3

34.6

82.4

Message

7.2

30.3

49.2

115.6

MiniCAM

6.4

31.8

54.7

115.4

550 ppm Average**

5.5

25.4

42.9

104.7

IMAGE

-1.3

8.2

19.3

39.7

MERGE

-0.3

8.0

14.8

41.3

Message

-1.9

3.6

8.8

32.1

MiniCAM

-0.6

10.2

22.2

42.6

550 ppm Average**

-2.7

-0.2

3.0

19.4

Socioeconomic
reference scenario
IMAGE

3%

Source: Table 3, Interagency report.
* Descriptions of the socioeconomic scenarios are available through Stanford’s Energy Modeling
Forum (EMF):
http://emf.stanford.edu/events/emf_briefing_on_climate_policy_scenarios_us_domestic_and_int
ernational_policy_architectures/. Over 2000-2100, the assumed annualized percentage change in
CO2 emissions is 0.8%, 1.6%, 0.5%, 1.1%, and -0.7% for IMAGE, MERGE, MESSAGE,
MiniCAM, and the 550 scenario, respectively. The assumed annualized percentage change in per
capita GDP is 1.9%, 1.5%, 1.7%, 2.0%, 1.8% for IMAGE, MERGE, MESSAGE, MiniCAM, and
the 550 ppm scenario, respectively. The assumed annualized percentage change in population is
0.4% for IMAGE, MiniCAM, and the 550 ppm scenario, and 0.5% for MERGE and MESSAGE.
**Average of the GDP, population, and emission trajectories implied by the IMAGE, MERGE
Optimistic, MESSAGE, and MiniCAM models under the 550 ppm CO2-e full participation, not
to exceed, stabilization scenario considered by EMF-22.
The SCC estimates from FUND are sensitive to differences in emissions paths but relatively
insensitive to differences in GDP paths across scenarios, while the reverse is true for DICE and
21

PAGE. This likely occurs because of several structural differences among the models.
Specifically in DICE and PAGE, the fraction of economic output lost due to climate damages
increases with the level of temperature alone, whereas in FUND the fractional loss also increases
with the rate of temperature change. Furthermore, in FUND increases in income over time
decrease vulnerability to climate change (a form of adaptation), whereas this does not occur in
DICE and PAGE.
Table 4 shows the four selected SCC values in five-year increments from 2010 to 2050. The
values for 2010, 2020, 2040, and 2050 are calculated by first combining all outputs (10,000
estimates per model run) from all scenarios and models for a given discount rate in these years.
Values for the years in between are calculated using a simple linear interpolation. The SCC
increases over time because future emissions are expected to produce larger incremental
damages as physical and economic systems become more stressed in response to greater climatic
change. This approach allows for the calculation of the growth rate of the SCC to be estimated
directly using DICE, PAGE, and FUND. This helps to ensure that the estimates are internally
consistent with other modeling assumptions.
Table 4: Social Cost of CO2, 2010 – 2050 (in 2007 dollars)
Discount Rate
5%
3%
Year
Avg
Avg
2010
4.7
21.4
2015
5.7
23.8
2020
6.8
26.3
2025
8.2
29.6
2030
9.7
32.8
2035
11.2
36.0
2040
12.7
39.2
2045
14.2
42.1
2050
15.7
44.9
Annualized %
3.1%
1.9%
Change, 2010-2050
Source: Table 4, Interagency report, modified.

2.5%
Avg
35.1
38.4
41.7
45.9
50.0
54.2
58.4
61.7
65.0
1.6%

3%
95th
64.9
72.8
80.7
90.4
100.0
109.7
119.3
127.8
136.2
1.9%

IV. The Social Cost of Carbon in Action
Benefit-cost analysis is an important tool for assessing policies affecting CO2 and other
greenhouse gas emissions but it is not possible without a value for the social cost of carbon. The
SCC provides a tool to monetize or summarize the economic value of the climate change
induced alterations in human health, ecosystems, agriculture and other facets of life on Earth that
22

result from a marginal change in CO2 emissions. It therefore allows for a comparison of the
costs associated with policies that reduce CO2 emissions and the benefits in terms of avoided
climate change. The result is that it is possible to separate the policies or regulations that are on
net beneficial for society from those that have costs that exceed their benefits.
The SCC has already taken hold in the evaluation of national policy choices. Since the release of
these SCC values, the monetized benefits of CO2 emission reductions have been included in at
least 7 major rules (those with costs or benefits above $100 million) across three Federal
departments and agencies. They are also making their way into testimonies and declarations
used in court cases; for example, the SCC was used in a Colorado Public Utility Commission
hearing regarding Xcel's plan to retire 900 megawatts of coal-fired generation to comply with
state law, and more recently in the DC Circuit Court regarding EPA greenhouse regulations.
Table 5 illustrates the central role that the SCC can play in regulatory decision-making by
comparing the upfront technology costs to the stream of social benefits out to 2050 from the
recent joint U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT) and Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) greenhouse gas emission and fuel efficiency standards for light-duty vehicles in model
years 2012 – 2016. Overall, EPA estimates the upfront technology costs of the light-duty GHG
rule to be approximately $350 billion (2007 dollars). Societal benefits – which account for the
impact on energy security, refueling, local air pollutants, accidents, noise, and congestion – are
estimated to be $280 billion before accounting for the impact of the rule on CO2 emissions.
Therefore, without accounting for CO2 emissions, the proposal would cause nearly $70 billion
more in upfront costs than it would accrue in social benefits.26 Once the value of CO2 emission
reductions is incorporated (using the central SCC value), the regulations are estimated to provide
over $100 billion in net benefits to society.
Table 5: Estimated Upfront Technology Costs and Social Benefits of EPA/DOT GHG
Emission Standards for Light-Duty Vehicles, 2010 - 2050 (NPV, 3% discount rate)
Billions of 2007 dollars
Technology Costs
$345.9
Social Benefits without SCC
$277.5
Social Benefits of CO2 Reductions (using central SCC value)
$176.7
Social Benefits - Technology Costs without SCC
-$68.4
Social Benefits - Technology Costs with SCC
$108.3
Source: U.S. EPA (2010).
26

For this rulemaking, the DOT and EPA estimated more than $1.5 trillion in fuel savings through 2050 by
assuming that consumers take none of these fuel savings into account at the time of purchase. These dwarf all other
cost and benefit categories. We excluded any assessment of private fuel savings, because, although there is an
emerging literature, many consider the question of how consumers account for fuel savings in their purchase
decisions an unsettled empirical question. Further, after accounting for the value of CO2 emissions (using the central
SCC value), this rule's benefits exceed its costs without making this assumption about consumer's behavior.

23

V. Directions for Research
Although the scientific and economic literature upon which the SCC is based continues to
evolve, the SCC estimates presented in the previous section are the result of the most rigorous
process undertaken to date for determining how Federal agencies should value reductions in CO2
emissions. Indeed, we believe that in many respects the interagency group was able to
incorporate the latest research across the multiple disciplines that are key inputs into determining
the SCC. This process represents a step forward in increasing transparency and consistency in
benefit–cost analyses of federal regulatory actions and can serve as a model for future revisions
of the social cost of carbon estimates to keep pace with the latest research. During the course of
the modeling, it became apparent to the interagency group that there are several areas in
particular need of additional exploration and research. This section summarizes several of these
areas below in the hope that their identification will lead to further original research and
ultimately updated and improved estimates of the SCC for regulatory analysis.27
A. Incomplete Treatment of Non-catastrophic Damages
The impacts of climate change are expected to be widespread, diverse, and heterogeneous. In
addition, the exact magnitude of these impacts is uncertain because of the inherent complexity of
climate processes, the economic behavior of current and future populations, and the rate of
technological change and adaptation. Current IAMs do not assign value to all of the important
physical, ecological, and economic impacts of climate change recognized in the literature
because of lack of precise information on the nature of damages and because the science
incorporated into these models understandably lags behind the most recent research.28 The area
of quantification and monetization of climate change impacts is one where there is significant
room for new research.
B. Incomplete Treatment of Potential Catastrophic Damages
There has been considerable recent discussion of the risk of catastrophic impacts and how best to
account for extreme scenarios, such as large releases of methane from melting permafrost and
warming oceans. The damage functions underlying the three IAMs used to estimate the SCC
may not capture the economic effects of such climate change-induced “catastrophes” and may
therefore lead to underestimates of the SCC (Mastrandrea 2009). In particular, the models’

27

To help motivate and inform this process, EPA and DOE also sponsored a pair of invitational workshops in late
2010 and early 2011. The first workshop focused on conceptual and methodological issues related to integrated
assessment modeling and valuing climate change impacts, while the second workshop reviewed research on
estimating impacts and valuing damages on a sectoral basis. For more information, see
http://yosemite.epa.gov/ee/epa/eed.nsf/webpages/homepage.
28
Ocean acidification is one example of a potentially large damage from CO2 emissions not quantified by any of the
three models. Species and wildlife loss is another example that is exceedingly difficult to monetize.

24

functional forms may not adequately capture three categories of losses that many consider
catastrophic:
(1) potentially discontinuous “tipping point” behavior in Earth systems;
(2) inter-sectoral and inter-regional interactions, including global security impacts of
high-end warming; and
(3) limited near-term substitutability between damage to natural systems and increased
consumption.
(1) Tipping points. The damage functions in these IAMs are typically calibrated by estimating
damages at moderate temperature increases (e.g., DICE is calibrated at 2.5 °C) and extrapolated
to far higher temperatures by assuming that damages increase as some power of the temperature
change. Recent science suggests that there are a number of potential climatic “tipping points” at
which the Earth system may exhibit discontinuous behavior with potentially severe social and
economic consequences (e.g., Lenton et al, 2008, Kriegler et al., 2009). Many of these tipping
points are estimated to have thresholds between about 3 °C and 5 °C (Lenton et al., 2008).29
The implications of these tipping points have received increased attention in the economics
literature. Weitzman (2009) suggests that catastrophic damages are extremely large—so large, in
fact, that the damages from a low probability, catastrophic event far in the future dominate the
effect of the discount rate in a present value calculation and result in an infinite willingness-topay for mitigation today. However, Nordhaus (2009) concluded that the conditions under which
Weitzman's results hold “are limited and do not apply to a wide range of potential uncertain
scenarios." Using a simplified IAM, Newbold and Daigneault (2009) confirmed that the
aggregate benefit estimates can be highly sensitive to the shapes of both the climate sensitivity
distribution and the damage function at high temperature changes. Pindyck (2009) also used a
simplified IAM to examine high-impact low-probability risks and found only a modest risk
premium. Given this difference in opinion, further research is needed before its practical
significance can be fully understood and a reasonable approach developed to account for such
risks in regulatory analysis.
(2) Failure to incorporate inter-sectoral and inter-regional interactions. The damage functions
do not fully incorporate either inter-sectoral or inter-regional interactions. For instance while
29

Probabilities of several of these tipping points were assessed through expert elicitation in 2005–2006 by Kriegler
et al. (2009). It is important to note that crossing a climatic tipping point will not necessarily lead to an economic
catastrophe in the sense used in the IAMs. A tipping point is a critical threshold across which some aspect of the
Earth system starts to shift into a qualitatively different state (for instance, one with dramatically reduced ice sheet
volumes and higher sea levels). In the IAMs, a catastrophe is a low-probability environmental change with high
economic impact.

25

damages to the agricultural sector are incorporated, the effects of changes in food supply on
human health are not fully captured and depend on the modeler’s choice of studies used to
calibrate the IAM. Likewise, the effects of climate damages in one region of the world on
another region are not included in some of the models. These inter-regional interactions, though
difficult to quantify, are the basis for climate-induced national and economic security concerns
(e.g., Campbell et al., 2007; U.S. Department of Defense 2010) and are more likely at higher
levels of warming.
(3) Imperfect substitutability of environmental amenities. The three IAMs used here assume that
it is possible to compensate for the economic consequences of damages to natural systems
through increased consumption of non-climate goods, a common assumption in many economic
models. In the context of climate change, however, it is possible that the damages to natural
systems could become so great that no increase in consumption of non-climate goods would
provide complete compensation (Levy et al., 2005; Sterner and Persson 2008). For instance, as
water supplies become scarcer or ecosystems become more fragile and less bio-diverse, the
services they provide may become increasingly more costly to replace.
C. Incomplete Treatment of Adaptation and Technological Change
Each of the three IAMs used here assumes a certain degree of adaptation. For instance, the
largest single benefit category from greenhouse gas mitigation in FUND is the lower electricity
costs from reduced air conditioning usage (NRC 2009).
Climate change also will increase returns on investment to develop technologies that allow
individuals to cope with adverse climate conditions. IAMs do not adequately account for this
directed technological change.30 For example, scientists may develop crops that are better able
to withstand higher and more variable temperatures. Although DICE and FUND have both
calibrated their agricultural sectors under the assumption that farmers will change land use
practices in response to climate change (Mastrandrea, 2009), they do not take into account
technological changes that lower the cost of this adaptation over time. On the other hand, the
calibrations also do not account for increases in climate variability, pests, or diseases, which
could make adaptation more difficult than assumed by the IAMs for a given temperature change.
In this respect, it is difficult to determine whether the incomplete treatment of adaptation and
technological change in these IAMs under or overstate the likely damages.
D. Risk Aversion
A key question unanswered during the interagency process is what to assume about relative risk
aversion with regard to high-impact outcomes. The group's calculations do not take into account
30

A full accounting of the benefits of this directed technical change would require accounting for the loss associated
with reduced investment in areas that would otherwise have provided the highest expected returns.

26

the possibility that individuals may have a higher willingness to pay to reduce the likelihood of
low-probability, high-impact damages than they do to reduce the likelihood of higher-probability
but lower-impact damages with the same expected cost. (Indeed, the inclusion of the 95th
percentile estimate in the final set of SCC values was largely motivated by this concern.) Using
FUND, Anthoff et al (2009) explored the sensitivity of the SCC to Ramsey equation parameter
assumptions based on observed behavior. They conclude that “the assumed rate of risk aversion
is at least as important as the assumed rate of time preference in determining the social cost of
carbon.” The need for further research in this area was recognized by Nordhaus (2008) who
pointed to the need to explore the relationship between risk and income in the context of climate
change across models and to explore the role of uncertainty regarding various parameters in the
results. Interestingly, currently federal policy is to assume risk neutrality.31
VI. Conclusion
This paper summarizes the methodology and process used by a U.S. government interagency
group to develop SCC values for estimating the incremental benefits of CO2 reductions
associated with regulatory actions. It also discusses key limitations to this analysis with the hope
that researchers may help to more adequately address them. Research and modeling
improvements are needed so that the SCC estimates used for regulatory analysis by the Federal
government can continue to evolve and reflect increasing knowledge of the science and
economics of climate impacts. Key areas for future research include improvements in how
integrated assessment models capture catastrophic impacts, more attention to how predicted
physical impacts translate into economic damages, and a more complete treatment of behavioral
assumptions about adaptation and technological changes induced by changing temperatures. The
role of a discount rate in a regulatory analysis context where costs and benefits of a policy are on
different time horizons requires additional attention and debate as well. Finally, most of the
literature focuses on generating a social cost of carbon emissions, but a methodology for valuing
reductions in other greenhouse gases is also needed.

31

Assuming a risk-neutral representative agent is consistent with Circular A-4 (OMB 2003), which advises that the
estimates of benefits and costs used in regulatory analysis are usually based on the average or the expected value and
that “emphasis on these expected values is appropriate as long as society is ‘risk neutral’ with respect to the
regulatory alternatives. While this may not always be the case, [analysts] should in general assume ‘risk neutrality’
in [their] analysis.”

27

References
Anthoff D, C. Hepburn, and R. Tol. 2009a. “Equity Weighting and the Marginal Damage Costs
of Climate Change.” Ecological Economics 68:836-849.
Anthoff, D., R. Tol, and G. Yohe. 2009b. “Risk aversion, time preference, and the social cost of
carbon.” Environmental Research Letters 4: 024002 (7pp).
Arrow, K. 2007. “Global climate change: a challenge to policy.” Economist’s Voice 4(3):Article
2.
Arrow, K.J., et al. 1996. ”Intertemporal equity, discounting and economic efficiency,” in
Climate Change 1995: Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change, Contribution of
Working Group III to the Second Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change.
Becker, Gary S., Kevin M. Murphy, and Robert H. Topel. 2011. "On the Economics of Climate
Policy." Mimeograph.
Campbell, K. et al. 2007. The age of consequences: The foreign policy and national security
implications of global climate change. Center for Strategic & International Studies, 119 pp.
Chetty, R. 2006. “A New Method of Estimating Risk Aversion.” American Economic Review
96(5): 1821–1834.
Dasgupta P. 2006. “Comments on the Stern Review’s economics of climate change.” University
of Cambridge working paper.
Dasgupta P. 2008. “Discounting climate change.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 37:141-169.
Deschenes and Greenstone (forthcoming). “Climate Change, Mortality, and Adaptation:
Evidence from Annual Fluctuations in Weather in the US,” American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics, Forthcoming.
Evans D., and H. Sezer. 2005. “Social discount rates for member countries of the European
Union.” J. Econ. Stud. 32 47–59.
Groom, B., Koundouri, P., Panipoulou, E., Pantelidis, T. 2006. “An econometric approach to
estimating long-run discount rates.” Journal of Applied Econometrics.
Hall R, and C. Jones . 2007. “The value of life and the rise in health spending.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 122(1):39-72.

28

Hansen, J.,M. Sato, P. Kharecha, G. Russell, D. W. Lea and M. Siddall. 2007. “Climate change
and trace gases.” Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. A 365: 1925-1954.
Heal, G. 2009. “Climate Economics: A Meta-Review and Some Suggestions for Future
Research.” Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 3, 1: 4-21.
Hegerl, G., T. Crowley, W. Hyde, and D. Frame. 2006. “Constraints on climate sensitivity from
temperature reconstructions of the past seven centuries.” Nature 440.
Hope C. 2006. “The marginal impact of CO2 from PAGE2002: an integrated assessment model
incorporating the IPCC’s five reasons for concern.” The Integrated Assessment Journal 6(1):1956.
Hope C. 2008. “Optimal carbon emissions and the social cost of carbon under uncertainty.” The
Integrated Assessment Journal 8(1):107-122.
Interagency Working Group on Social Cost of Carbon. 2010. Social Cost of Carbon for
Regulatory Impact Analysis under Executive Order 12866. February. United States Government.
http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/omb/inforeg/for-agencies/Social-Cost-of-Carbonfor-RIA.pdf .
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2007. “Summary for Policymakers.” In Climate
Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis, Contribution of Working Group I to the Fourth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University
Press.
Just, R., D. Hueth, and A. Schmitz. 2004. The Welfare Economics of Public Policy. Glos UK:
Edward Elgar Publishing Limited.
Kriegler, E. et al. 2009. “Imprecise probability assessment of tipping points in the climate
system.” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 106: 5041-5046.
Le Treut H., et al. 2007. “Historical Overview of Climate Change.” in Solomon et al., Climate
Change 2007.
Lenton, T., et al. 2008. “Tipping elements in the Earth’s climate system.” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
105: 1786-1793.
Levy, M., et al. 2005. “Ecosystem conditions and human well-being.” In: Ecosystems and
Human Well-being: Current State and Trends, Volume 1. [R. Hassan, R. Scholes, and N. Ash,
eds.] Washington: Island Press. pp. 123-164.

29

Mastrandrea, M. 2009. “Calculating the benefits of climate policy: Examining the assumptions
of Integrated Assessment Models.” Pew Center on Global Climate Change Working Paper, 60
pp.
Meehl, G, et al. 2007. “Global Climate Projections.” in Solomon et al., Climate Change 2007.
National Research Council (NRC) 2009. Hidden Costs of Energy: Unpriced Consequences of
Energy Production and Use. National Academies Press.
Newbold S, Daigneault A. 2009. “Climate response uncertainty and the benefits of greenhouse
gas emissions reductions.” Environmental and Resource Economics 44:351-377.
Newell, R., and W. Pizer. 2003. Discounting the distant future: how much do uncertain rates
increase valuations? Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 46: 52-71.
Nordhaus W. 2008. A Question of Balance: Weighing the Options on Global Warming Policies.
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Nordhaus, W. 2009. “An Analysis of the Dismal Theorem. Cowles Foundation Discussion
Paper. No. 1686. January.
Nordhaus W., and Boyer J. 2000. Warming the World: Economic Models of Global Warming.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Office of Management and Budget (OMB). 2003. Circular A-4: Regulatory Analysis. September
17.
Pindyck, R. 2009. “Uncertain Outcomes and Climate Change Policy.” NBER Working Paper,
No. 15259. August.
Roe, G. 2008. “Feedbacks, timescales, and seeing red.” Annual Review of Earth and Planetary
Sciences 37:5.1-5.23.
Roe, G., and M. Baker. 2007. “Why is climate sensitivity so unpredictable?” Science 318:629632.
Stern, N., et al. 2006. Stern Review: The Economics of Climate Change, HM Treasury, London.
Stern N. 2008. “The economics of climate change.” American Economic Review 98(2):1-37.
Sterner, T., and U. Persson 2008. “An Even Sterner Review: Introducing Relative Prices into the
Discounting Debate.” Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 2, 1: 61- 76.

30

Szpiro, G. 1986. “Measuring Risk Aversion: An Alternative Approach.” The Review of
Economics and Statistics 68(1): 156-9.
Tol, R. 2002a. “Estimates of the damage costs of climate change. Part I: benchmark estimates.”
Environmental and Resource Economics 21:47-73.
Tol, R. 2002b. “Estimates of the damage costs of climate change. Part II: dynamic estimates.”
Environmental and Resource Economics 21:135-160.
Tol, R. 2009. “An analysis of mitigation as a response to climate change.” Copenhagen
Consensus on Climate. Discussion Paper.
U.S. Department of Defense. 2010. Quadrennial Defense Review Report. February.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2010. Final Rulemaking to Establish Light-Duty Vehicle
Greenhouse Gas Emission Standards and Corporate Average Fuel Economy Standards.
Regulatory Impact Analysis. http://www.epa.gov/oms/climate/regulations/420r10009.pdf .
Weitzman, M. 2009. “On modeling and interpreting the economics of catastrophic climate
change.” Review of Economics and Statistics 91:1-19.
Weitzman, M. 2007. “The Stern Review of the Economics of Climate Change.” Journal of
Economic Literature 45, 3:703-724.
Weitzman, M. 1999. In Portney P.R. and Weyant J.P. (eds.), Discounting and Intergenerational
Equity, Resources for the Future, Washington, D.C.
Weitzman, M. 1998. “Why the Far-Distant Future Should Be Discounted at Its Lowest Possible
Rate.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 36 (3): 201-208.

31

