                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           INNOVATION AND DIFFUSION OF CLEAN/GREEN TECHNOLOGY:
                        CAN PATENT COMMONS HELP?

                                           Bronwyn H. Hall
                                           Christian Helmers

                                         Working Paper 16920
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16920


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2011




Previous versions of this paper have been presented at the SEEK ZEW Conference, March 2011, the
ZEW Workshop on the Economics of Green IT, November 2010, the EPIP Annual Meeting in Maastricht,
The Netherlands, September 2010, IP Scholars Conference 2010, Berkeley Center for Law and Technology,
August 2010, the Workshop on Innovation without Patents, Sciences Po, Paris, June 2010, and seminars
at the University of Oxford and Copenhagen Business School. We thank participants in these conferences
and seminars for useful comments. We also acknowledge helpful comments from Dirk Czarnitzki
and Katrin Cremers. Philipp Schautschick provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Bronwyn H. Hall and Christian Helmers. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Innovation and Diffusion of Clean/Green Technology: Can Patent Commons Help?
Bronwyn H. Hall and Christian Helmers
NBER Working Paper No. 16920
March 2011, Rewised June 2011
JEL No. H23,H42,K11,O33,O34

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper explores the characteristics of 238 patents on 94 “inventions” contributed by major multinational
innovators to the “Eco-Patent Commons”, which provides royalty-free access to third parties to patented
climate change related innovations. By comparing the pledged patents to other patents in the same
technologies or held by the same multinationals, we investigate the motives of the contributing firms
as well as the potential for such commons to encourage innovation and diffusion of climate change
related technologies. This study, therefore, indirectly provides evidence on the role of patents in the
development and diffusion of green technologies. More generally, the paper sheds light on the performance
of hybrid forms of knowledge management that combine open innovation and patenting.


Bronwyn H. Hall
Dept. of Economics
549 Evans Hall
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
bhhall@nber.org

Christian Helmers
Universidad Carlos III de Madrid
c/. Madrid, 126
28903 Getafe, Spain
christian.helmers@uc3m.es
1.      Introduction

Numerous well-known economists have called for policies to encourage both public and
private investment in technologies designed to mitigate climate change (Mowery et al.
2010; David et al. 2009; Krugman 2009; Arrow et al. 2008). As Nordhaus (2009), among
others, points out, policy in this area confronts a double externality problem: the first is
private underinvestment in R&D due to partial lack of appropriability and imperfections in
the financial markets and the second is the fact that climate change mitigation and
reduction in greenhouse gases is a classical public good, and one with a substantial
international component. That is, the benefits of climate change mitigation flow largely to
those who do not bear the costs. Hall and Helmers (2010) argue that the existence of the
second externality can impact the desirability of policies designed to deal with the first
externality, shifting policy makers’ preferences towards subsidies and away from
intellectual property (IP) protection.

To make this argument more explicit, consider the usual policies designed to close the gap
between the private and social returns to an activity.4 These are subsidizing (or issuing tax
credits for) the activity, regulating the activity (mandating its performance or controlling
the price of inputs), and internalizing the externality by granting property rights that allow
some appropriation of the social benefits. In the case of R&D investment, the first approach
has been widely used in the past for research directed towards national needs (Mowery,
2010), for corporate R&D via tax credits, and for small and medium-sized enterprises
(SMEs) that face credit constraints. Although the second approach has been used much less
(and is probably less suitable for R&D activities due to their uncertainty and the difficulty
of such micro-management), examples are the mandate of the State of California for sales of
electric-powered automobiles (Kemp, 2005) and the U.S. federal government stimulus
package, which mandates the diffusion of electronic medical records and their effective use
(Blumenthal, 2009).

The most widely available policy designed to encourage private R&D investment in most
countries is the intellectual property system. However, in the case of climate change
mitigation (as in the case of R&D directed toward other national needs), allowing firms to
appropriate social benefits via their market power and pricing behavior has the drawback
that without further policy design, it will tend to inhibit the diffusion of the technologies
whose creation it encourages. In addition to the welfare cost of limited diffusion, IP
protection also has potential negative consequences for subsequent innovation that builds


4
  We note in passing that in the case of climate change, formidable incomplete information problems and the global
nature of needed policies make the simple “market failure” analysis and corresponding policy predictions not as
useful as they might be in other areas. However, the question of the proper role of IP protection in the case of
climate change-related technologies still remains.



Hall-Helmers                                            3                                               June 2011
on the protected technologies. Given the environmental externality, such diffusion and
follow-on innovation is highly desirable. This has triggered an active debate on the role and
usefulness of IPRs in the generation of climate change related innovation and its diffusion.5
The existing evidence suggests that the IP system, specifically the patent system, may not
be the optimal policy to encourage R&D in this area.

A number of large multinational firms such as Sony, IBM, Nokia, etc., appear to have
recognized the problem with patents in the area of climate change related technologies and
as a response, have created an “Eco-Patent Commons” (henceforth EcoPC) together with
the World Business Council for Sustainable Development (http://www.wbcsd.org). Firms
pledging patents to this commons are required to sign a non-assertion pledge which allows
third parties royalty-free access to the protected technologies. The official purpose of this
private initiative is described on the EcoPC website as the following:

       •   To provide an avenue by which innovations and solutions may be easily shared to
           accelerate and facilitate implementation to protect the environment and perhaps
           lead to further innovation.
       •   To promote and encourage cooperation and collaboration between businesses that
           pledge patents and potential users to foster further joint innovations and the
           advancement and development of solutions that benefit the environment.

Obviously, one can imagine an additional purpose: to improve the reputation and public
relations of the participating firms, possibly by contributing patents on inventions of little
value and the donation, therefore, generating little cost to the firm. Alternatively, the
patents contributed could be those on inventions that need development effort that the
firms in question are not willing to undertake. To date, there are 12 participating firms, and
121 patents have been contributed to the commons.6 Relative to the size of these firms’
patent portfolios, this is a small number; however, it could be large given the small share of
directly climate-change related patents in these firms’ total patenting.7



5
    For a review of the relevant literature see Hall and Helmers (2010).
6 More precisely, the EcoPC website lists 121 patent numbers. These 121 patent numbers correspond to 90
equivalent groups containing 94 unique priorities, and the total number of equivalent patents is 238. Precise
definitions of these are given later in the paper. The firms that have contributed to date are Bosch, Dow,
DuPont, Fuji-Xerox, IBM, Mannesmann, Nokia, Pitney Bowes, Ricoh, Sony, Taisei and Xerox. Note that the
patent owned by Mannesmann was absorbed and pledged by Bosch, but we nevertheless treat Mannesmann
as a separate entity in our analysis. The EcoPC announced on July 1 2010 that Hewlett Packard (HP) has
joined the commons. Yet, we omit HP in our analysis as our core data predates HP’s entry into the commons.
7In fact, the 94 unique priorities accounted for by these patents are 0.02 percent of the priorities claimed by
these firms between 1989 and 2005. The share ranges from 0.12 percent for DuPont to negligible for Ricoh,
Sony, Nokia, and FujiXerox.



Hall-Helmers                                                4                                         June 2011
The question that we ask is whether the EcoPC initiative achieves its ambitious official
objectives. In order to provide an answer to this broad question, we answer a range of
intermediate questions: (a) are the patented technologies indeed climate-change related?
(b) Are the patents that protect these technologies valuable? (c) Will royalty-free access to
the EcoPC patents lead to more diffusion of the protected technologies and the generation
of sequential innovations than otherwise? In particular question (c) is interesting in light of
the broader debate on the role of IP in the diffusion of climate-change related technologies.
The EcoPC initiative provides a unique opportunity to study what happens to technology
diffusion if valid patent protection is effectively removed from the pledged technologies.

The question of whether the EcoPC scheme achieves its objectives is directly linked to
firms’ underlying motivations to pledge their patents to the EcoPC. As will be explained in
detail in Section 2, firms maintain ownership of their pledged patents, which implies that
they have to bear the recurrent costs associated with patent ownership in the form of
renewal fees. It is, therefore, far from obvious which benefits accrue to firms from the
EcoPC scheme that outweigh the direct (e.g., renewal fees) and indirect (e.g., management
time) financial costs associated with keeping pledged patents in force. Therefore,
understanding firms’ motives to pledge and keep patents in force sheds light on the
effectiveness and sustainability of the commons as a hybrid form of appropriation in
addressing both the knowledge and environmental externalities involved in climate change
related innovation.

To answer these questions, the present paper explores the characteristics of the patents
that have been contributed to the EcoPC and compares them to two other sets of patents:
1) patents held by the pledging firms that are not donated to the commons and 2) a
randomly drawn set of patents in the same technology (which also share priority year and
authority with EcoPC patents). The first comparison sheds light on the question of where
these patents fit in the firms’ patent portfolios and hence give some indication on firms’
underlying motivations to pledge these patents. Whereas the second informs us about how
the value of these patents compares with other patents that protect similar technologies
and that have not been donated to the commons. This comparison also provides
information on the impact of the commons on technology diffusion and its potential to
induce follow-on innovation by third parties.

However, given the short amount of time the EcoPC has been in place, some of the answers
will be of tentative nature; we nevertheless believe that a detailed study of the pledged
patents will provide insights into the open innovation-patenting relationship in the climate
change technology area, insights that may also be useful in other areas where open
innovation exists side-by-side with IP protection. In particular, we provide insights into the
ability of such hybrid private initiatives to address the double externality problem present
in climate change related innovation.


Hall-Helmers                                  5                                       June 2011
We begin the paper with a discussion of the history and detailed operation of the eco-
patent commons. Section 3 describes the data used in our analysis. Section 4 reviews
different theoretical motivations for firms to pledge their climate change related patents.
Section 5 provides a descriptive analysis of the characteristics of the EcoPC patents and
Section 6 discusses the corresponding regression results. Section 7 discusses our approach
to investigating the effect of the non-assertion pledge on technology diffusion and
innovation and shows the results of our analysis. Section 8 concludes.


2.      The Eco-Patent Commons

The creation of the not-for-profit initiative EcoPC is quite recent, in January 2008. It was
established by IBM in cooperation with the World Business Council for Sustainable
Development (WBCSD) and it allows companies to pledge patents that protect green
technologies. Companies as well as individuals can join the commons by pledging at least
one patent.8 Any patent is welcome that protects a technology that confers directly or
indirectly some environmental benefit – so-called green patents. “Green” is defined by a
classification listing IPC subclasses that are considered to describe environmentally
friendly technologies. Yet, there appears to exist considerable flexibility as long as a
pledging firm can show some (direct or indirect) environmental benefit of the pledged
patent. In fact, as we show later, many of the patents contributed appear to be directed
towards mitigating environmental damage from manufacturing, but not specifically
towards climate change mitigation.

“Pledge” in this context means making patents available for use by third parties free of
charge,9 although the ownership right remains with the pledging party which distinguishes
the EcoPC from conventional patent commons. This also implies that the non-assertion
pledge cannot be treated as a patent donation and hence the pledged patent is not
deductable from a company’s taxable income. Potential users do not have to specifically
request a license; any pledged patent is automatically licensed royalty-free provided it is
used in a product or process that produces some environmental benefit.

While a pledge is in principle irrevocable,10 there is a built-in mechanism to safeguard a
pledging firm’s business interests which is called “defensive termination”. This means that

8According to the “Ground Rules”
(http://www.wbcsd.org/web/projects/ecopatent/EcoPatentGroundRules.pdf), also “any worldwide
counterparts” to the pledged patent are considered to be subject to the non-assertion pledge, i.e., any
equivalents to the pledged patent.
9
 Third parties comprise anyone interested in the patented technology and not only other firms that are part of the
commons.
10 The “Ground Rules” (http://www.wbcsd.org/web/projects/ecopatent/EcoPatentGroundRules.pdf)
stipulate that “[a] patent approved for inclusion on the Patent List cannot be removed from the Patent List,


Hall-Helmers                                            6                                              June 2011
a pledging firm can “terminate” the non-assertion pledge if a third party that uses a pledged
patent asserts its own patent against the pledging company. The possibility to invoke
“defensive termination” does not apply to other pledging firms in the commons unless the
primary IPC of the asserted patent is on the commons IPC classification list. The fact that
companies retain ownership rights also means that they have to bear the cost of
maintaining the IP right, that is, they must pay any fees required to keep the patent in
force.11

The initial members of the commons when it was launched in January 2008 were IBM,
Nokia, Pitney Bowes, and Sony. In September 2008, Bosch, DuPont, and Xerox joined. Ricoh
and Taisei entered the commons in March 2009 and Dow Chemical and Fuji-Xerox in
October 2009. Its newest member, Hewlett Packard (HP) joined in July 2010, but is
excluded from our analysis because our core data are as of April 2010 and thus predate
HP’s entry into the commons. All patents pledged to the EcoPC are listed in an online data-
base (the data base is reproduced in Appendix A1).

The EcoPC is currently the only initiative of this type, although Creative Commons in
collaboration with Nike and Best Buy is setting up the Green Xchange initiative. In this new
initiative (in contrast to the EcoPC), pledging firms can choose whether to charge a fixed
annual fee for the use of a pledged patent. Contributing firms can also selectively deny
other firms the use of a pledged patent. In addition, registration of users of contributed
patents is mandatory. As a matter for future research, it would be interesting to investigate
whether the difference in institutional design of the Green Xchange has any effect on the
achievement of the objective that both commons share.

To reiterate the official objective of the EcoPC laid out in the Introduction: the EcoPC aims
to promote the sharing of climate-change related technologies and thus to assist in
environmental protection for the common good. The initiative targets green patents that
are neither used nor represent “an essential source of business advantage” to their owners.


except that it may be deleted for so long as the patent is not enforceable.” However, firms obviously can
withdraw from the commons at any point in time, although even in this case “[v]oluntary or involuntary
withdrawal [from the commons] shall not affect the non-assert as to any approved pledged patent(s) the non-
assert survives and remains in force.”
11
   When a patent is applied for at the EPO, renewal fees must be paid to the EPO beginning the third year counted
from the date of filing until the patent is granted. Once the patent has been granted, renewal fees have to be paid to
the national offices separately in which the patent has been validated. Renewal fees at the EPO currently vary
between EUR 420 and EUR 1,420 depending on how long the application has been pending (see Supplement 1 to
OJ EPO 3/2010). Renewal fees in national offices vary substantially, as of August 2010, for example in the UK, fees
increase during the 20 years of patent validity from GBP 70 to GBP 600, whereas in Germany, fees increase from
EUR 70 to EUR 1,940. Maintenance of a patent family can thus be quite costly if annual fees have to be paid at
several patent offices. Contrary to the EPO and European national offices, at the USPTO, renewal fees are not
payable annually. At 3.5 years, the maintenance fees due amount to US$ 980, at 7.5 years to US$ 2,480 and at 11.5
years to US$ 4,110.



Hall-Helmers                                              7                                                June 2011
Hence, the commons does not ask firms to sacrifice patents of particular business value for
the common good. It should, therefore, attract those patents that are neither “worked” nor
confer a strategic value to the company even as a “dormant” property right (see also
Section 4). The initiative endeavors to emphasize potential business benefits for firms from
participating in the commons: it can serve as a way of diffusing a technology and
potentially lead to new collaboration and business opportunities. But most importantly,
participation in the scheme guarantees broad public visibility considering the great deal of
(mostly positive) attention in the press the initiative has received so far (NY Times 31
October 2009; Wall Street Journal 14 January 2008; WIPO Magazine April 2009) and
innumerable postings and discussions in blogs and climate-change/open-innovation online
forums.

However, a number of these press articles and blog postings contest the value of the
initiative. For example, the Wall Street Journal (14 Januray 2008) notes that the
environmental benefit is not obvious for some of the EcoPC patents. As a case in point, the
press article provides the example of a patent pledged by Pitney Bowes “that protects
electronic scales from being damaged when they are overloaded.”12 In a review of the
EcoPC initiative, Srinivas (2008) lists a number of problems with the initiative. He asserts
that the technologies protected so far by patents in the EcoPC “have a very limited
application in the further development of technologies in key sectors.” However, he does
not provide any proof for this assertion. Related to this, he claims that more important
players in the market for climate-change related technologies have to join the commons in
order to make it an effective tool for the dissemination of relevant technologies. He is also
skeptical that simply providing royalty-free access to single green patents will have a
significant impact on the diffusion of green technologies as most technologies are covered
by multiple patents which are not included in the commons. Cronin (2008) argues in her
article in Greenbiz13 that the patents contained in the EcoPC are of little value as they
protect outdated technologies. She also asks the natural question of why private companies
would give something valuable away for free. In order to make the EcoPC more valuable,
Cronin suggests that it should include novel non-patented inventions that have not been
made public before, presumably because they were protected via (trade) secrecy. This
could be done inexpensively in the form of defensive publications, which are currently not
part of the EcoPC.

However, the issue is even more puzzling, because firms actually pay to provide royalty-
free access to their patents. As pointed out by Bucknell (2008) in an article for Think IP

12
  This patent is a bit of an exception. It seems that overload is likely to cause damage to the load cell, a core
component of highly sensitive and accurate electronic scales. The invention, therefore, avoids the need for frequent
replacement of the load cell and hence helps avoiding environmental waste.
13
     www.greenbiz.com



Hall-Helmers                                              8                                               June 2011
Strategy,14 firms could instead allow a patent to lapse by simply not paying renewal fees
and to communicate to the public that the main motivation for doing so is to allow third
parties access to the invention and hence to spur its diffusion. The relevant question,
therefore, is why firms would find it worthwhile to offer non-exclusive royalty-free licenses
to a set of patents while simultaneously incurring the cost of keeping them in force? Why
not simply allow the patents to lapse, effectively publishing the contents defensively? Is the
value of possible defensive termination against future threats that large?

In the academic literature, so far, only Van Hoorebeek and Onzivu (2010) discuss the EcoPC
initiative. They regard it as a private response to calls by mostly developing countries for
increased climate change related technology transfer. As such, the EcoPC initiative may
help deflect increasing pressure exerted by developing countries to apply TRIPS provisions
including compulsory licensing or even denying patent protection to specific climate
change related to technologies. But for this strategy to be viable, patents pledged under the
EcoPC initiative should protect enforceable and “valuable” technologies, an assumption
that Van Hoorebeek and Onzivu (2010) do not investigate in their qualitative discussion.

More generally, there has been some discussion in the strategic management literature on
patent pledges in the context of software. Alexey and Reitzig (2010), for example, argue
that firms may choose to pledge patents to mould the wider appropriability regime that
governs their business activity. Using software patents as an example, the authors argue
that firms which stand to profit from the open source software concept through the
production of complementary assets, such as IBM and Nokia, choose to unilaterally pledge
patents in order to create an appropriability regime conducive to the open source
movement. The establishment of a patent commons would seem consistent with this
reasoning as it would enable firms to address the collective action problem involved in
shifting the appropriability regime. Since the EcoPC firms are not major players in the
market for green technologies, shifting the appropriability regime governing green
technologies might thus even be beneficial as it could harm potential competitors and
induce sales of complementary assets provided by EcoPC firms. Nevertheless, the
assumption underlying this argument is again that firms pledge “valuable” patents.

Biotechnology, a research field in which IP protection of key technologies appears to have
detrimental effects on innovation (Lei et al., 2009), offers another example of a similar
initiative: the BiOS (Biological Open Source) initiative by the not-for-profit institute
CAMBIA. In the case of BiOS, firms may use patented technologies royalty-free but agree to
“share with all BiOS licensees any improvements to the core technologies as defined, for
which they seek any IP protection” and “agree not to assert over other BiOS licensees their
own or third-party rights that might dominate the defined technologies” (Jefferson, 2006:

14
     www.thinkipstrategy.com



Hall-Helmers                                  9                                      June 2011
459). The strength of this initiative appears to rest largely on the value of the IP rights
available under BiOS licenses.

In summary, the EcoPC initiative provides an institutional design that allows easy access to
patented technologies, which may confer some direct or indirect climate change related
benefits. It is, however, far from obvious whether the pledged patents protect any valuable
green technologies as the motives for firms to pledge valuable green patents and keep them
in force are not clear-cut.


3.       Data

The data appendix A describes in detail how we created our EcoPC dataset and control
samples. We started with the list of 121 patents contributed to the EcoPC by the 12
contributing firms which is available on WBCSD’s website.15 We then used the April 2010
edition of EPO’s PATSTAT to draw the following samples of patents:

         1. All of the patents with the same set of priority documents as the EcoPC patents,
            i.e., all EcoPC equivalents.16
         2. Control (1) sample: all patent applications worldwide that were made by the 12
            EcoPC firms.
         3. Control (2) sample: all patent applications worldwide in the same IPC class as
            one of the EcoPC patents (which also share the same priority year and authority
            as an EcoPC patent). In addition, we restrict this sample to patents applied for by
            firms (i.e., not by individuals/public research institutions).

A number of complications arose in performing these tasks. First, PATSTAT is based on
published applications, whether or not the patents have been granted. This is an advantage
because most of our EcoPC patents are of fairly recent date and may not yet have been
granted. However, not all US applications are published at 18 months, especially in the
earlier part of our sample. Even if they are published, it appears that some firms leave the
assignment of ownership off the application until the patent issues, so we will not find all
the patent applications that correspond to a given firm. When we use a matched control
sample later in the paper (Section 7), this is no longer a problem because in that case we
are able to verify the owner(s) manually.


15
   Some of the patent numbers given on WBCSD’s website were incorrect. We retrieved the correct numbers either
by searching for the patents using the patent titles indicated on the website or by obtaining the information directly
from contacting WBCSD. We thank Kana Watanabe at IBM’s Corporate Environmental Affairs for assisting in the
retrieval of the missing information.
16
  The priority years range from 1989 to 2005, so we restricted the matching samples Control (1) and Control (2) to
those years.



Hall-Helmers                                              10                                                June 2011
A second problem is missing priorities. Many of these patents have multiple equivalents,
which are patents applied for in several jurisdictions on the same invention. We prefer to
perform our analysis using only a single observation for each “invention,” preferably the
priority application. However a large number of patents are missing priorities and in this
case we simply allowed the patent to serve as its own priority. This may mean that we
effectively keep the patent as a single patent with no equivalents. We have checked this
assumption using the equivalents data constructed by Dietmar Harhoff and co-workers and
found that it introduces very little error into the data.17

A related problem is that some applications have multiple priorities and some patents
serve as priority patents for multiple applications to the same authority, making the
assignment of a unique priority application to each application problematic. Although these
problems afflict only a minority of applications, they do exist for a subset of our EcoPC
patents. For example, US priority patent application 57503704 from 2004 serves as a
priority patent for 9 US patent applications. Of these 9 applications, 2 have an additional 4
priority patents at the USPTO in 2004, and 7 have one additional priority patent, also at the
USPTO in 2004. Not surprisingly, the assignee for all these patents is DuPont Corporation, a
chemicals firm: the pattern of multiple interlocking priorities is much more common in
chemicals than elsewhere. Our solution to this problem is to define an invention as an
equivalent group of patents and to use the earliest priority application as the priority
patent.18 In the case described above, there are two groups, one consisting of the first 2
applications, which share a common priority set (US 2004 53681904, 54997804,
57503704, 58478504, and 53745304), and one consisting of the second 7, which also share
a common priority set (US 2004 57503704 and 58478504). Thus although there are 94
unique priorities among the eco-patents, there are only 90 unique equivalent groups. Table
1 shows the various counts for both the EcoPC patent and the control samples.

Ideally we would like to study these patents at the level of unique inventions, i.e., priorities.
However, owing to the missing priority problem identified above and the overlapping
priorities which implies that families, i.e., equivalent groups, are the correct unit of analysis
(and introduces a new problem of identifying a unique priority patent for each family), we
are not able to do this. In the analysis that follows, we choose to solve this problem by
occasionally presenting results that use all 238 of the EcoPC patents, but weights the
observations by the inverse of the equivalent group or family size, effectively down-



17All the additional equivalents for our EcoPC patents that were found this way were for unpublished patent
applications, which are not in our sample. See http://www.inno-tec.bwl.uni-
muenchen.de/forschung/forschungsprojekte/patent_cit_project/index.html for the equivalents data.
18
 Note that our definition is essentially the same as the first (equivalents) definition in Martinez (2010). See also
Appendix A2 for more details.



Hall-Helmers                                              11                                                 June 2011
weighting those patents that have many incarnations. We also cluster the standard errors
by equivalence group, to allow for within-group correlation of the errors.

Finally, PATSTAT´s April 2010 version does not provide information on the legal status of a
patent. It can be inferred from a patent’s publication kind code whether it has been
granted; however, if a patent has not been granted, it is difficult to infer whether the patent
application has been rejected, lapsed, or is simply still pending. Moreover, there is no
information on whether renewal fees have been paid. This made it necessary to collect
information on patents’ legal status manually from EPO’s INPADOC, USPTO PAIR, and the
various national patent offices (see data appendix A).


4.      Which patents do firms pledge?

Figure 1 shows schematically the decision tree of a firm contemplating “working” a patent
or abandoning it and its decision to pledge the patent to the EcoPC.

                                Figure 1: Firm’s decision tree




Unfortunately, we only observe some of these decisions. Among the four final outcomes (a -
no patent, b - work the patent, c - pledge the patent, d - neither work nor pledge the patent),
we observe only c and the combination of b and d. This limits our ability to build a
structural model of the decision process. Conditional on patenting, we can, however,
conjecture the following based on our discussion in Section 2:

     1. The firm is more likely to work the patent if it is valuable to the firm, if more
        resources were invested in acquiring it, and if it is related to the firm’s own line of
        business or technology expertise.




Hall-Helmers                                    12                                      June 2011
     2. The firm is more likely to pledge a patent if it is environmentally friendly, if it is less
        related to the firm’s own line of business or technology expertise, and if it is not
        suitable for licensing.

Taken together, this suggests that a firm’s pledged patents will be less valuable to the firm,
more “green”, and less related to the firm’s patent portfolio. We might also expect that
these patents are less likely to be prosecuted aggressively if they have not yet issued, and
that they are less likely to remain in force. If firms (ab)use the commons purely for public
relation motives, we would expect to see pledged patents to lapse, i.e., not to be in force,
shortly after entering the EcoPC because presumably most PR benefits are reaped at the
moment when the pledge is announced.

Hence, while a firm’s decision to `work’ a patent remains unobserved, we can nevertheless
deduce from the characteristics of the pledged patents themselves (notably their legal
status) as well as relative to other patents held by the same firm or patents in the same
technology field what a firm’s underlying motives for pledging patents are and hence what
type of patent from a firm’s patent portfolio is pledged.


5.      Descriptive Statistics

In this section of the paper we present some basic information about the patents
contributed to the commons: their ages, legal status, priority authorities, family sizes, the
technology areas, and the firms contributing. In combination with the regression analysis
in Section 6, this allows us to address the first two questions posed in the introduction: are
the patented technologies indeed climate-change related? Are the patents that protect
these technologies valuable?

Table 1 shows a breakdown of the composition of the different samples. It shows that we
have 238 unique patent applications in the EcoPC, which correspond to 94 unique
inventions/priorities. The table displays also the corresponding figures for the two control
samples. Table 2 shows the number of patents contributed by each of the 12 firms. The first
panel shows all the patents and their equivalents, a total of 238 patent applications, and the
second panel shows the unique 90 equivalence groups that correspond to these patents.
Table 2 shows that the donated patents are a tiny share of the firms’ portfolios (less than
0.1 per cent) and that the majority of the patent families (76 out of 90, or 84 per cent) have
been contributed by just four firms: Bosch, DuPont, IBM, and Xerox. In appendix Table A3
we show that in almost all cases the priority patent was applied for at the USPTO, the
German patent office, or the JPO, and in most cases at the office corresponding to the
headquarters of the applicant. Table 2 also shows the date that each firm entered the
commons; to the best of our knowledge this is also the date that all their patents were



Hall-Helmers                                     13                                       June 2011
contributed. The dates are all quite recent, so we have only two to three years to observe
these patents after donation, with the inevitable consequence that our analysis will be
preliminary, but we believe it is useful to set the stage for subsequent analysis performed
after some more time has passed.

Table 3 gives a rough idea of the technologies that have been contributed. This table is
based on a reading of the abstract and written description of these patents, with a special
focus on the description of the problem to be solved, in order to determine their likely
application. Two related observations about the data in this table suggest themselves: first,
only slightly more than one-third of these patents fall into classes that are designated as a
clean technology class by the OECD-EPO definition (Johnstone et al., 2010).19 Second, many
of them seem to be related to environmental cleanup or clean manufacturing, and only
tangentially to mitigating the effects of global climate change.20

The ages of the contributed patents at the time of their donation vary widely. A few are old
and nearing the end of their life, but many have substantial statutory life remaining (Figure
2). Age is measured as the exact date the owning firm joined the commons less the exact
priority date of the patent. In general, the statutory life of the patents will be twenty years
from the date of application (which often coincides with the priority date), and we find a
range from 3 years to 20 years, with a peak at 4 years of age. This is suggestive, as most
patents are granted by the time the application is four years old, and this age also
corresponds roughly to the time when some uncertainty about potential value of the
invention is likely to have been resolved (Lanjouw et al., 1998).21 In Figure 3, we show the
priority year distribution of the contributions as a share of the 12 firms’ patents (Control 1
sample) and also as a share of patents in the relevant IPC classes (Control 2 sample). Both
are roughly flat but with high variability, and an observable increase in contribution rates
in the years 2004 and 2005.

One of the questions raised in Section 2 was whether and why firms would pay to keep a
patent in force once it was contributed to the commons. Because many of the donations are
quite recent, it is difficult to observe whether firms have chosen to pay renewal fees on
their patents after they have been donated. It is also the case that many of these patents
have not even been granted as of February/March 2011. In Table 4, we look at the legal


19
     The relevant IPC classes are available at
http://www.oecd.org/document/55/0,3343,en_2649_34333_43383927_1_1_1_1,00.html
20
  There is one patent for which we could not ascertain the environmental benefit. The patent is entitled `Image
Forming Device’ and has the objective ` [t]o prevent a user from getting into a dangerous situation caused by fault
and breakage due to use exceeding the working limit of a cartridge.’
21EPO patents typically take longer to grant than four years, but are relatively underrepresented in our
sample, which consists primarily of USPTO, German patent office, and JPO patent applications and grants.



Hall-Helmers                                           14                                               June 2011
status of all the equivalent patents where we have collected the data manually from the
relevant patent offices as described above (as of February/March 2011). It appears that
almost half of these patents have been granted and are still in force, 2.5 per cent are
pending, and 40 per cent are withdrawn, rejected by the relevant office, lapsed or have
expired.22 Looking at the weighted shares, 64 per cent are in force, about 2 per cent are
pending, and 28 per cent are not in force. So in fact it does appear that in some cases the
applicants have chosen to abandon the donated patents before their statutory term has
expired, or have chosen not to prosecute them aggressively. However, the difference in the
weighted results suggests that in many cases, at least one of the equivalents is still in
force.23 Additional information is shown in Table A4 in the Appendix, which provides a
breakdown of the data by pledging company. Table 5 shows that the firms are more likely
to maintain the patents in the US, Germany, or at the EPO, and less likely in other
jurisdictions. Table 5 also shows the legal status of a matched control sample of patents in
the same technology classes as the EcoPC patents which is discussed in more detail in
Section 7. The comparison confirms that USPTO patents are far more likely to be
maintained in force than patents from other jurisdictions. It also shows that the share of
patents in force is considerably larger for the EcoPC sample, 70 per cent of the priorities
pertaining to unique equivalent groups are still in force relative to 38 per cent in the
control sample.

The descriptive statistics provided in this section suggest that a substantial share of EcoPC
patents have been granted and are maintained in force. In any case, most patents that enter
the commons are young and most of their statutory lifetime remains. The technologies
covered by the EcoPC patents appear to be climate change related, although this is a matter
of interpretation as the OECD clean technology definition categorizes only a third of the
EcoPC patents as climate change related. We also showed that the EcoPC patents account
for tiny shares in EcoPC firms’ patent portfolios. Considering the size of the patent
portfolios held by firms such as IBM or Sony, this is hardly a surprising result.


6.      Characteristics of donated patents

In this section of the paper, we take a look at the characteristics of the EcoPC patents and
compare them to our two control samples, first using univariate analysis and then via



22As best we can determine, the NA category corresponds to those patent applications that have not yet been
examined by the relevant office, either because they are newer, or, in some cases, because examination was
not requested by the applicant. The patent offices concerned are Japan, Russia, and Mexico.
23
 In fact, 16 of the 90 equivalence groups have no patent that is still in force, 56 have one such patent, and 18 have
more than one.



Hall-Helmers                                            15                                                June 2011
multivariate probit regressions. The characteristics we look at are the usual bibliometric
statistics available in patent data:

   •   The number of inventors listed on the application, which is related to the amount of
       resources invested in the invention. This variable is occasionally missing from
       PATSTAT, and we add a missing value dummy when that is the case.
   •   The family size as given by DOCDB, which is a proxy for the value of the invention.
   •   The number of citations received worldwide by April 2010, another proxy for value,
       and for diffusion.
   •   The number of references to other patents, which may be related to the extent to
       which this invention is derivative of others.
   •   The number of references to the non-patent literature, a proxy for closeness to
       science.
   •   The number of IPCs in which the patent has been classified, sometimes used as a
       proxy for the scope or breadth of the invention.

We also include a dummy that indicates whether the patent falls in one of the OECD green
technology patent classes (Johnstone et al. 2010). Finally, when comparing our patents to
the others held by the contributing firms, we include a measure of their similarity to the
other patents in the firm’s portfolio. This measure is the sum of the relative frequency of a
patent’s IPC codes in the firm’s portfolio. It ranges from zero to 0.79; higher values
correspond to higher similarity.

Table 6 shows the means, standard deviations, minima, and maxima of these variables for
the EcoPC patents and the two control samples. The table also shows a simple t-test for
differences in the means, and a nonparametric ranksum test for differences in the
distributions of each variable across the samples. Compared to the other patent
applications by these firms (Control 1 sample), EcoPC patents have more inventors, a
larger family size, more backward citations, more non-patent references, are classified in
more IPCs, and are much more likely to fall in the OECD green technology classes (not
surprisingly). However, they have the same pattern of forward citations, suggesting that
the knowledge they contain is not diffusing faster than that of the patents retained by the
firms. They are also clearly more distant from the firm’s portfolio than the other patents.
Compared to patents in the same classes (Control 2 sample), however, the EcoPC patents
have smaller family sizes, but more forward and backward citations. They are also
classified in many fewer IPCs, suggesting that they are narrower than other patents in
these classes.

Table 7 takes a multivariate look at the difference between EcoPC patents and the other
patents applied for by the 12 EcoPC firms. This table shows the results of a probit
regression for the probability that a patent is an EcoPC patent as a function of the patent


Hall-Helmers                                  16                                      June 2011
characteristics, the priority year, dummies for the one-digit IPC, and dummies for the four
leading firms (Bosch, DuPont, IBM, and Xerox). The standard errors for these regressions
are grouped by equivalence group, and we also present the same regressions weighted by
the inverse of the group size for comparison. The results are quite similar. The EcoPC
patents are clearly more likely to be green-tech patents and to be far from the firm’s
portfolio of technologies. They also have a larger family size, suggesting that they were
viewed as more valuable by the firm at the time of application. Finally, they have more
backward citations which suggests either that they are somewhat derivative, or that they
are in a crowded technological field.

Table 8 performs a similar exercise using the second control sample, patents in the same
IPCs as the EcoPC patents, i.e., comparing patents protecting in principle similar
technologies. For this probit regression, weighting by the size of the patent family does
make a difference. The unweighted results are similar to those for the first control sample:
EcoPC patents have more backward citations, fewer IPCs and are more likely to be green.
The weighted regression also suggests that they are more valuable than a random patent
from the class, with more inventors and a larger family size.

The following section investigates whether pledging the property rights has had a
discernible impact on the diffusion of the protected technologies.


7.     Technology Diffusion and Follow-on Innovation

The descriptive statistics and the regression analysis described in Sections 5 and 6 above
suggest that EcoPC patents protect relatively valuable, climate change related technologies.
The ensuing question is whether pledging these patents has had an impact on the diffusion
of the protected technologies and has spurred the development of new innovation which is
based on the pledged patents.

Empirical Approach
There are at least two challenges in assessing the effect of the commons on diffusion and
innovation. First, diffusion in terms of application of the protected technologies in question
cannot be captured. According to the rules of the EcoPC, third parties are allowed to use
pledged patents without signaling this to the patent owners. Hence, if a third party applies
an EcoPC patent in a process or product, we are unable to observe this unless the third
party cites the EcoPC patent in a patent application aimed at protecting the new process or
product. It is important to emphasize that this may substantially undermine our ability to
investigate the impact of the non-assertion pledge on pure diffusion without additional
innovation for which patent protection is sought. Second, we observe patents for at most
three years after they have been pledged, which is a relatively short amount of time that



Hall-Helmers                                  17                                     June 2011
the inventions protected by these patents have been freely accessible. Considering the
possible long lag time in the development of new technologies based on existing patents
and the common 18 month period between application and publication date, this may limit
our ability to find patents that build on the EcoPC patents after they have entered the
commons. To mitigate this problem, we have augmented the PATSTAT April 2010 citation
data with data manually collected from Espacenet as of February 2011.

Mindful of these limitations imposed by data availability, we resort to a difference-in-
difference type research design to investigate the question of diffusion. We observe all
patents before and after they have been pledged and therefore analyze whether there are
statistically significant differences in the pattern of forward citations these patents receive
before and after they entered the commons. If royalty-free access has had an impact on
diffusion of these technologies, we would expect to see a statistically significant increase in
the forward citations that the EcoPC patents have received subsequent to their pledge. As a
control group, we use the set of patents in the same technology classes as the EcoPC
patents. The unit of observation is therefore cites per patent per citation lag, where the lag
is measured by the number of years between the priority dates of the citing patent and the
cited patent. Most of the values of this variable are quite small (about 80 per cent are zero)
so we use Poisson regression with standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity and
clustered on the patent for estimation.

The model that we estimate is specified as follows:
                                                            ௖
                                                         ߣ ೔೟ ݁ ఒ೔೟
                                                    ܿ௜௧ ~ ௜௧
                                                           ܿ௜௧ !

                   ߙ௜௣ + [1 − ૚ሺ‫ܥܲ݋ܿܧ‬௜ ሻ] × ߜሺ‫ݐ‬ሻ × [1 + ߤ × ૚ሺ‫߬ ≥ ݐ‬௜ ሻ]
     ߣ௜௧ = ݁‫ ݌ݔ‬ቆ                                                        ቇ                        ‫ = ݐ‬1, … , 17
                            +૚ሺ‫ܥܲ݋ܿܧ‬௜ ሻ × ߛሺ‫ݐ‬ሻ × [1 + ߩ × ૚ሺ‫߬ ≥ ݐ‬௜ ሻ]

where cit is the number of citations received by patent i at citation lag t, i.e., the difference
between a patent’s priority date and the priority date of the citing patent, and αip are a set
of dummies for the patent priority date (between 1989 and 2005).24 The dummy variable
૚ሺ‫ܥܲ݋ܿܧ‬௜ ሻ is equal to one for EcoPC patents and zero for the control patents. We control
for the citation lag distribution for the two samples separately using quadratics in the lag:

                                      f (t ) = f 0 + f1t + f 2t 2     f = δ ,γ

The δ and γ functions allow the overall shape of the citation lag distribution to differ
between EcoPC patents and the controls. Finally, the dummy variable ૚ሺ‫߬ ≥ ݐ‬௜ ሻ is equal to

24
  These dummies are included to allow for the fact that there is lag truncation, so some lags have fewer cites simply
because there are fewer patents old enough to have cites with that lag.



Hall-Helmers                                              18                                              June 2011
one after the establishment of the commons, i.e., when patents are pledged to the EcoPC.25
The effect of entry into the EcoPC is thus captured by the semi-elasticity ρ, which gives the
average per cent change in forward citations following entry in the commons.

So the ߩ coefficients inform us about the “pledge effect” in terms of forward citations. The
main problem with estimating this model is that the dummy variable ‫ܥܲ݋ܿܧ‬௜௧ is unlikely to
be strictly exogenous. For example, if more forward citations made it less likely for a patent
to be pledged to the EcoPC, the assumption of exogeneity of the right hand side variables
would be violated and our estimate of the “pledge effect” biased. In future, we might be able
to correct for this problem using the results in the previous section on the characteristics of
pledged patents relative to the firms’ overall patent portfolios and a control function
approach to estimating the Poisson regression.

Citation data and regressions
The citation data used for the regressions that follow are constructed by collecting all the
forward citation records for the EcoPC patents and their controls including cites to their
equivalents from Espacenet (as of February 2011). For this part of the analysis, we draw a
subsample from our Control 2 sample to match the sample of EcoPCs as closely as possible
based on patents’ priority year, publication authority and IPC codes. The subsample,
therefore, provides a set of control patents that is closest to the EcoPC patents in terms of
the type of protected technology, the age of a patent, and in which jurisdiction/market it
protects an invention. Moreover, the reduced sample size allows us to rely on the most
recent available citation data from Espacenet, which has to be collected individually for
each patent record from the Espacenet website.

In the analysis below we use two versions of the citation data thus created: the first is by
patent application including the equivalents (238 EcoPC patents and 473 controls) and the
second is by the family or set of equivalents (90 EcoPC and 94 controls). We verified that
we do not double count citations by checking the equivalent sets of citing patents. For
example if patents A and B cite patent C, we verify that A and B are not equivalents. Before
doing analysis on the second dataset we collapse the citations within each equivalence
group, to avoid double counting them. That is, if the equivalence group contains patent A,
cited by patent C, and patent B in the same equivalence group is also cited by patent C, this
yields only one citation, from C to the group (A, B).

Table 9 shows the number of patents and equivalent groups that receive any citations
during the 1989-2010 period as well as the total number of citations received. The table
shows that nearly 35 per cent of EcoPC patents received any forward citation whereas only


25
  Obviously we do not have such a date for the controls, so we have used the date of the establishment of the EcoPC
(2008) for them.



Hall-Helmers                                           19                                               June 2011
25 per cent of the patents in the control sample did. If the unit of analysis is an equivalence
group, the pattern changes: the shares of EcoPC and control equivalent groups that receive
any citations are nearly the same with 70 and 68 per cent respectively. This change reflects
the simple fact that EcoPC patent applications have fewer equivalents and are therefore
more likely to be the cited application. Table 9 also shows average citations for both
groups. The figures reveal that the EcoPC patents have on average more citations when we
look at all patents, but have fewer citations when the unit of analysis is the equivalence
group, for the same reason as above.

Appendix Table A5 shows the distribution of average citations received by citation lag.
Citation lags are defined as the difference between the priority dates of the citing and the
cited patent. This measure can be interpreted as the age of the patented technology at the
point in time it was cited. The first panel of Table A5 shows the distribution of citation lags
using a patent as the unit of analysis as opposed to an equivalence group as shown in the
second panel of Table A5. The distribution of citation lags ranges from 0 to 17 where this
range differs by patent according to its priority date.

In the first panel, Columns (1)-(3) show the number of average citations for each citation
lag for both EcoPC and control patents. As should be expected, the average citation counts
drop considerably as the lag size increases, which means that patents receive on average
less citations the older they are. The citation lag distribution of the EcoPC sample appears
to be skewed to the right relative to the control sample, i.e., average citation counts are
larger for low citation lags with the largest differences for citation lags of 2-4 years. Non-
parametric (ranksum and Kruskal-Wallis) tests also strongly reject the null hypothesis of
equal citation lag distributions. Columns (4) and (5) show the average citations before and
after patents have been pledged to the commons, which makes clear that there are few
forward citations after patents have been pledged.

Table 10 shows the results of the Poisson regressions for citations as a function of the
priority year, citation lag and EcoPC patent status (the first column is by equivalent group
and the second by patent). Both reach similar conclusions. Note that in both cases the
parameter μ, which measures the post-2008 effect for the control sample, was
insignificantly different from zero, suggesting that there is no overall change to the cite lag
distributions after 2008, so we imposed μ=0 in the results shown. Although the controls
and the eco-patents have significantly different citation lag distributions overall, the post-
entry effect for the eco-patents is insignificantly different from zero in both columns. Figure
4 visualizes the different citation distributions for the control and EcoPC samples. The
figure shows that the forward citation distributions are indeed very similar for the EcoPC
and control patents. For both groups, the average number of cites drops considerably over
time with there being very few cites after the establishment of the commons, so we can
conclude that the data are insufficient at the present time to answer the question, although


Hall-Helmers                                  20                                       June 2011
as time passes and more citations are received by both sets of patents it will be interesting
to look at this question again.


8.     Conclusions

Are firms dumping valueless patents without any apparent applicability in mitigating
climate change into the commons only to reap good publicity? Or is royalty-free access to,
in fact, valuable and green patents a promising way to promote the diffusion of climate-
change related technologies?

Our answer to the first question is a qualified `No’. Pledged patents appear to be climate-
change related, albeit more in form of environmental cleanup or clean manufacturing.
Judging by some indicators of a patent’s value, such as family size, the EcoPC patents are
more valuable than the average patent held by pledging firms and comparable patents
protecting similar technologies. However, they tend to be more derivative of previous
technologies and somewhat narrower than other patents in their class, suggesting that they
are not for very radical inventions. Because they are usually distant from the firm’s
technology (patent) portfolio, one reason for donating them maybe that they are not very
valuable to the firm holding them. In spite of this, pledging firms also appear to maintain at
least one patent of a patent family in force after it has been pledged by paying the renewal
fees.

However, our answer to the second question regarding the commons’ potential to enhance
diffusion of the protected technologies is even less conclusive. Our analysis suggests that
pledging these patents, that is making them available to third parties royalty-free, has no
discernible impact on the diffusion of the knowledge embedded in the protected
technologies to other patenting firms. However, given the short period of time after the
patents have been pledged that is available so far, our results are naturally of preliminary
nature but invite further scrutiny in the near future.




Hall-Helmers                                 21                                      June 2011
                                                       Figure 2
                               Age of eco-patents in years at time of donation
                                          (relative to priority date)
         50

         45

         40

         35

         30

         25

         20

         15

         10

          5

          0
                3    4    5     6    7     8     9     10   11     12   13    14    15    16       17   18   19     20

                                          All equivalents        Priority patent only


                                                       Figure 3
                          Share of patents contributed, by earliest priority year
                                       for the equivalence group
         1.2%                                                                                                     0.050%

                                                                                                                  0.045%
         1.0%
                                                                                                                  0.040%

                                                                                                                  0.035%
         0.8%
                                                                                                                  0.030%

         0.6%                                                                                                     0.025%

                                                                                                                  0.020%
         0.4%
                                                                                                                  0.015%

                                                                                                                  0.010%
         0.2%
                                                                                                                  0.005%

         0.0%                                                                                                     0.000%
                1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005

                                 Patents in the same IPCs        Patents held by ecopatent firms




Hall-Helmers                                                22                                                           June 2011
                                                Figure 4


                                      Cites per patent by citing year
    2.50



    2.00



    1.50



    1.00



    0.50



    0.00
       1988               1992           1996         2000      2004           2008            2012
               Controls          Eco-patents    Entry date   Controls fitted     Eco-pats fitted




Hall-Helmers                                         23                                        June 2011
9.      References

Alexy, O., and M. G. Reitzig, (2010). “Gaining it by Giving it Away: Capturing Value in "Mixed"
        Appropriability Regimes”, available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1430328
Arrow, K. J., , L. Cohen, P. A. David et al. (2008). “A statement on the appropriate role for Research
       and Development in climate policy,” The Economists” Voice 6(1).
       http://www.bepress.com/ev/vol6/iss1/art6
Blumenthal, D. (2009). Stimulating the adoption of health information technology. New England
      Journal of Medicine, 360(15), pp. 1477–1479.
David, P. A., C. Huang, L. Soete, and A. van Zorn (2009). “Toward a global science and technology
        policy agenda for sustainable development.” Maastricht, Netherlands: UNU-MERIT Policy
        Brief No. 4.
Hall, B. H., and C. Helmers (2010). “The role of patent protection in (clean) technology transfer,”
         Santa Clara High Technology Law Journal, 26(4), 487-532.
Jefferson, R. (2006). “Science as social enterprise: the Cambia Biosinitiative.” Innovations:
        Technology, Governance, and Globalization, 1(4), 13–44.
Johnstone, N., I. Hascic, and F. Watson (2010). Climate policy and technology innovation and
       transfer: an overview of recent results. Paris: OECD Report ENV/EPOC/GSP(2020)10.
Kemp, R. (2005). Zero Emission Vehicle Mandate in California: misguided policy or example of
       enlightened leadership?, in C. Sartorius and S. Zundel (eds.) Time Strategies, Innovation and
       Environmental Policy, Edward Elgar Publishing.
Krugman, P. (2009). “It’s easy being green,” New York Times, 25 September 2009.
      http://www.nytimes.com/2009/09/25/opinion/25krugman.html?_r=1
Lanjouw, J.O., A. Pakes, and J. Putnam (1998). How to Count Patents and Value Intellectual
      Property:The Uses of Patent Renewal and Application Data. Journal of Industrial Economics,
      Vol. 46(4), 405-432.
Lei, Z., R. Juneja, and B. D. Wright (2009). Patents versus patenting: implications of intellectual
          property protection for biological research. Nature Biotechnology 27 (1), 36-40.
Martinez, C. (2010): `Insight into Different Types of Patent Families,’ OECD Science, Technology and
       Industry Working Papers, 2010/2, OECD Publishing. doi: 10.1787/5kml97dr6ptl-en
Mowery, D. C. (2010). Military R&D and innovation. In Hall, B. H., and N. Rosenberg (eds.),
     Handbook of the Economics of Innovation, Volume II, 1218-1251. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Mowery, D. C., R. R. Nelson, and B. Martin (2009). Technology policy and global warming. London,
     UK: NESTA Provocation 10.
Nordhaus, W. D. (2009). “Economic issues in a designing a global agreement on global warming.”
      Keynote Address at the Climate Change Conference, Copenhagen, Denmark, March 10-12,
      available at http://nordhaus.econ.yale.edu/documents/Copenhagen_052909.pdf
Van Hoorebeek, M., and W. Onzivu (2010). “The Eco-patent Commons and Environmental
      Technology Transfer: Implications for Efforts to Tackle Climate Change,”Carbon and Climate
      Law Review, Vol. 1, 13-29.




Hall-Helmers                                       24                                           June 2011
     10.       Data Appendix

     A 1: List of Patents contained in Eco Patent Commons
#          Description                                    Number              Equivalents     Pub Auth   Company   IPC
1
                                                                              DE19915210,
           Fuel injection valve for internal combustion   EP1084344           JP2002541375,
           engine, with actuator acting via needle                            US6575385,
           carrier on valve needle                                            WO60232         Germany    Bosch     B05B001-08
2                                                                             DE19915210,
           Fuel injection valve for internal combustion                       EP1084344,
                                                          US6575385
           engine, with actuator acting via needle                            JP2002541375,
           carrier on valve needle                                            WO60232         Germany    Bosch     B05B001-08
3                                                                             EP 1084344,
           Fuel injection valve for internal combustion                       JP2002541375,
                                                          DE19915210
           engine, with actuator acting via needle                            US6575385,
           carrier on valve needle                                            WO60232         Germany    Bosch     B05B001-08
4                                                                             DE19915210,
           Fuel injection valve for internal combustion                       EP1084344,
                                                          JP2002541375
           engine, with actuator acting via needle                            WO60232,
           carrier on valve needle                                            US6575385       Germany    Bosch     B05B001-08
5                                                                             DE10123040,
                                                                              WO02093136,
                                                          EP1393041           US2003217589,
                                                                              JP2004519695,
           Piezoelectric fluid viscosity sensor                               US6755073       Germany    Bosch     G01N011-16
6                                                                             DE10123040,
                                                                              WO02093136,
                                                          JP2004519695        EP1393041,
                                                                              US6755073,
           Piezoelectric fluid viscosity sensor                               US2003217589    Germany    Bosch     G01N011-16
7                                                                             WO02093136,
                                                                              US2003217589
                                                          DE10123040          EP1393041,
                                                                              JP2004519695,
           Piezoelectric fluid viscosity sensor                               US6755073       Germany    Bosch     G01N011-16
8                                                                             DE10123040,
                                                                              US2003217589,
                                                          WO02093136          EP1393041,
                                                                              JP2004519695,
           Piezoelectric fluid viscosity sensor                               US6755073       Germany    Bosch     G01N011-16
9                                                                             DE10123040,
                                                                              WO02093136,
                                                          US6755073           US2003217589,
                                                                              EP1393041,
           Piezoelectric fluid viscosity sensor                               JP2004519695    Germany    Bosch     G01N011-16
10                                                                            WO2004024479,
                                                                              DE10240712,
                                                          EP1536961
           Climate control system in vehicle with                             KR2005004862,
           heating and cooling circuits                                       US2006081355    Europe     Bosch     B60H001-00
11                                                                            WO2004024479,
                                                                              EP1536961,
                                                          DE10240712
           Climate control system in vehicle with                             KR2005004862,
           heating and cooling circuits                                       US2006081355    Germany    Bosch     B60H001-00
12                                                                            DE10240712,
                                                                              EP1536961,
                                                          KR20050048623
           Climate control system in vehicle with                             WO2004024479,
           heating and cooling circuits                                       US2006081355    Korea      Bosch     B60H001-00
13                                                                            DE10240712,
                                                                              EP1536961,
                                                          US2006081355
           Climate control system in vehicle with                             KR2005004862,   United
           heating and cooling circuits                                       WO2004024479    States     Bosch     B60H001-00
14         Apparatus for removing contaminants from       EP1070555                           Europe     Xerox     B09C




     Hall-Helmers                                                        25                                              June 2011
         a contaminated area
15       Image Forming Device                            JP3375028                         Japan     Ricoh    G03G
16       Method for recycling optical disks              JP3528898                         Japan     Sony     B01D
17       The purification method and purges of
                                                         JP3561890
         shallow water regions                                                             Japan     Taisei   C02F
18       Metallic reflection film recovering device of
         disklike information recording M medium
                                                         JP3704899
         and its metallic reflection film recording
         method                                                                            Japan     Sony     B01D
19       Method and device for extracting                                   EP498676,
                                                         JP3095851
         groundwater using high vacuum                                      US5172764      Japan     Xerox    E03F
20       Recycling of disk-like information              JP3855377                         Japan     Sony     B08B
21       Flocculating agent and a method for
                                                         JP3876497
         flocculation                                                                      Japan     Sony     B01D
22       Method and apparatus for removing                                  EP707899,
                                                         JP3805414
         contaminant                                                        DE69510746     Japan     Xerox    B09C
23                                                                          EP747142,
         Process for removing contaminants and           JP3884793          DE69629854,
         apparatus therefore                                                DE69612321     Japan     Xerox    B09C
24       Device for extracting contaminated
         material from discharged stream and             JP3971480          US6024868,
         method thereof                                                     EP792700       Japan     Xerox    B09C
25       The constructing method of the artificial
                                                         JP4015958
         green space of the watersides                                                     Japan     Taisei   E02B
26                                                                          BR 9103806,
         Fuel supply system and tank assembly for        DE4027948          JP4234558,
         an internal combustion engine                                      US5197444      Germany   Bosch    F02D033-00
27                                                                          DE4027948,
         Fuel supply system and tank assembly for        BR9103806          JP4234558,
         an internal combustion engine                                      US5197444      Brazil    Bosch    F02D033-00
28                                                                          DE4027948,
         Fuel supply system and tank assembly for        JP3242425          BR9103806,
         an internal combustion engine                                      US5197444      Japan     Bosch    F02D033-00
29                                                                          DE4027948,
         Fuel supply system and tank assembly for        US5197444          BR9103806,     United
         an internal combustion engine                                      JP4234558      States    Bosch    F02D033-00
30       Hydraulic drive for sheet metal forming
                                                         DE4218952
         machine                                                                           Germany   Bosch    B03B015-18
31       Channel-scanning cordless telephone
         appts. with microprocessor- begins                                 WO9414272,
         scanning with particular radio channel                             EP0626118,
                                                         DE4241838
         assigned to mobile and base stations                               JP7503835,
         among number of channels selected by                               KR100274286
         operator.                                                                         Germany   Bosch    H04B007-26
32       Channel-scanning cordless telephone
         appts. with microprocessor- begins                                 DE4241838,
         scanning with particular radio channel                             WO9414272,
                                                         EP0626118
         assigned to mobile and base stations                               JP7503835,
         among number of channels selected by                               KR100274286
         operator.                                                                         Germany   Bosch    H04B007-26
33       Channel-scanning cordless telephone
         appts. with microprocessor- begins
                                                                            DE4241838,
         scanning with particular radio channel
                                                         JP3466190          EP0626118,
         assigned to mobile and base stations
                                                                            KR100274286
         among number of channels selected by
         operator.                                                                         Germany   Bosch    H04B007-26
34       Channel-scanning cordless telephone
         appts. with microprocessor- begins                                 DE4241838,
         scanning with particular radio channel                             EP0626118,
                                                         KR100274286
         assigned to mobile and base stations                               JP7503835,
         among number of channels selected by                               WO9414272
         operator.                                                                         Germany   Bosch    H04B007-26
35                                                                          KR940008369,
         Method of anisotropically etching silicon       US4941941          JP3126227,     United
         wafers and wafer etching solution                                  JP7013956,     States    IBM      H01L



     Hall-Helmers                                                      26                                        June 2011
                                                                        EP421093,
                                                                        DE69022944,
                                                                        CN1052513,
                                                                        CN1024148,
                                                                        AU6314190,
                                                                        AU636388
36                                                                      JP4228289,
                                                       US5011546        JP7075788,       United
         Water soluble solder flux and paste                            EP452009         States   IBM      B23K
37                                                                      EP420656,
         Process for two phase vacuum extraction       US5050676        JP3202586,       United
         of soil contaminants                                           DE69029314       States   Xerox    E21B
38                                                                      EP432878,
                                                                        MX169000,
                                                                        JP3146596,
                                                                        HK71996,
                                                                        ES2081355,
                                                       US5080825
                                                                        DE69024471,
                                                                        CN1051585,
                                                                        CN1095873,
                                                                        CA2024636,       United
         Tape drive cleaning composition                                BR9005251        States   IBM      C11D
39                                                                      EP498676,
                                                                        MX9102041, JP4
                                                                        309626,
                                                                        ES2101804,
                                                       US5172764        DK498676,
                                                                        DE69219492,
                                                                        CA2053446,
         Process and Apparatus For Groundwater                          BR9200046,       United
         Extraction Using a High Vaccum Process                         AT152645         States   Xerox    E21B
40       Apparatus for two phase vacuum                                                  United
                                                       US5197541
         extraction of soil contaminants                                                 States   Xerox    E21B
41                                                                      WO9106366 ,
                                                                        JP5504907,
                                                                        EP495857,
                                                       US5258348        DE69015824,
                                                                        CA2067390,
         Catalyst Method for the Dehydrogenation                        BR9007795,       United
         of Hydrocarbons                                                AT116572         States   Dow      B01J
42       Chemical pre-treatment and biological
         destruction of propylene carbonate waste
                                                       US5275734
         streams effluent streams to reduce the                         JP6106183,       United
         biological oxygen demand thereof                               EP582539         States   IBM      C02F
43       Solvent stabilization process and method                       JP6262003,       United
                                                       US5310428
         of recovering solvent                                          EP605350         States   IBM      B08B
44       Supported Catalyst for Dehydrogenation of
         Hydrocarbons and Method of Preparation        US5354935                         United
         of the Catalyst                                                                 States   Dow      C07C
45                                                                      EP622131,
                                                                        EP5464309,
                                                       US5358357
         Process and apparatus for high vaccum                          DE69428547,      United
         groundwater extraction                                         DE69407333       States   Xerox    E03B
46       Packaging system for a component
         including a compressive and shock-            US5439779                         United
         absorbent packing insert                                                        States   IBM      G03C
47       Apparatus and process for treating                                              United
                                                       US5441365
         contaminated soil gases and liquids                                             States   Xerox    B09B
48                                                                      EP622131,
                                                                        US5358357,
                                                       US5464309
         Dual wall multi-extracion tube recovery                        DE69428547,      United
         well                                                           DE69407333       States   Xerox    E03B
49                                                                      GB2296574,
         Ink-jet printer having variable maintenance   US5521334        DE19548919,      United   Pitney
         algorithm                                                      CA2165758        States   Bowes    G01G




     Hall-Helmers                                                  27                                         June 2011
50                                                                                       United
                                                        US5571417
         Aqueous soldermask                                                              States   IBM      C02F
51       Method for treating photolithographic
         developer and stripper waste streams
                                                        US5637442
         containing resist or solder mask and                                            United
         gamma butyrolactone or benzyl alcohol                                           States   IBM      B01D
52                                                                       EP753866,
                                                                         MX9602129,
                                                                         JP9033129,
                                                        US5641424        ES2162976,
                                                                         DE69616184,
         Magnetic Refrigerant Compositions and                           BR9603037,      United
         Processes for Making and Using                                  AR2429          States   Xerox    G03G
53                                                                       US5709505,
                                                                         JP7290038,
                                                        US5655852
         High vacuum extraction of soil                                  EP679450,
         contaminants along preferential flow paths                      DE69505179      Europe   Xerox    E02D
54                                                                       WO9413831,
                                                                         KR100262681,
                                                        US5683868        JP8504101,
         Highly sensitive method for detecting                           IL107815,       United
         environmental insults                                           ES2102811       States   DuPont   C12Q, C12N
55                                                                       WO9616187,
                                                                         JP10509049,
                                                                         EP793729,
                                                        US5731163
                                                                         DE69527850,
         Lyophilized bioluminescent bacterial                            CA2200702,      United
         reagent for the detection of toxicants                          AT222605        States   DuPont   C12Q, C12N
56       Method for treating photolithographic
         developer and stripper waste streams
                                                        US5824157
         containing resist or solder mask and                                            United
         gamma butyrolactone or benzyl alcohol                                           States   IBM      B05C
57                                                                                       United
                                                        US5863332
         Fluid jet impregnation                                                          States   IBM      B05C
58       Vacuum application method and apparatus                         EP911071,
         for removing liquid contaminants from          US5979554        JP11207101,     United
         groundwater                                                     DE69835928      States   Xerox    E21B
59       Fluid jet impregnating and coating device                                       United
                                                        US5994597
         with thickness control capability                                               States   IBM      C07C
60       Process for recovering high boiling solvents
         from a photolithographic waste stream
                                                        US6021402
         comprising less than 10 percent by weight                                       United
         monomeric units                                                                 States   IBM      G06F
61                                                                       JP9225448,
         Air flow control circuit for sustaining                         EP792700,
                                                        US6024868
         vacuum conditions in a contaminant                              DE69714101,     United
         extraction well                                                 BR9701080       States   Xerox    C02F
62       Multiple overload protection for electronic                     EP934828,       United   Pitney
                                                        US6045206
         scales                                                          CA2261284       States   Bowes    G07B
63                                                                       EP928642,
                                                        US6048134        JP11253785,     United
         Automatic aspirator air control system                          DE69909534      States   Xerox    B09B
64       Risk management system for electric                                             United
                                                        US6127097
         utilities                                                                       States   IBM      G03F
65       Photoresist develop and strip solvent                                           United
                                                        US6178973
         compositions and method for their use                                           States   IBM      B08B
66
         Method and apparatus for ozone                 US6187965                        United
         generation and surface treatment                                KR20000035014   States   IBM      C07C
67
         Process for recovering high boiling solvents
         from a photolithographic waste stream          US6197267
         comprising at least 10 percent by weight of                                     United
         monomeric units                                                                 States   IBM      F01N
68       Catalytic reactor                              US6210862        US2002177072,   United   IBM      G03F




     Hall-Helmers                                                   28                                        June 2011
                                                                          US6576382       States
69                                                                                        United
                                                      US6221269
         Composition for photoimaging                                                     States    IBM      C03C
70       Method of etching molybdenum metal                                               United
                                                      US6294028
         from substrates                                                                  States    IBM      C23G
71       Mercury process gold ballbond removal                                            United
                                                      US6419566
         apparatus                                                                        States    IBM      B24C
72       System for cleaning contamination from                                           United
                                                      US6426007
         magnetic recording media rows                                                    States    IBM      C02F
73       Removal of soluble metals in waste water
         from aqueous cleaning and etching            US6440639                           United
         processes                                                                        States    IBM      G03C
74                                                                        DE10032022,
                                                                          GB2364400,
                                                      US6499464           JP2002070683,
         Method for deterring drive voltage of fuel                       FR2811016,      United
         injection valve piezoelectric actuator                           GB2364400       States    Bosch    F02D041-20
75                                                                        GB2364400,
                                                                          JP2002070683,
                                                      DE10032022          US6499464,
         Method for deterring drive voltage of fuel                       FR2811016,
         injection valve piezoelectric actuator                           US2002046734    Germany   Bosch    F02D041-20
76                                                                        DE10032022,
                                                                          JP2002070683,
                                                      GB2364400           US6499464,
         Method for deterring drive voltage of fuel                       FR2811016,
         injection valve piezoelectric actuator                           US2002046734    UK        Bosch    F02D041-20
77                                                                        DE10032022,
                                                                          GB2364400,
                                                      JP2002070683        US6499464,
         Method for deterring drive voltage of fuel                       FR2811016,
         injection valve piezoelectric actuator                           US2002046734    Japan     Bosch    F02D041-20
78                                                                        DE10032022,
                                                                          GB2364400,
                                                      FR2811016           JP2002070683,
         Method for deterring drive voltage of fuel                       US6499464,
         injection valve piezoelectric actuator                           US2002046734    France    Bosch    F02D041-20
79       High-aspect ratio resist development using                                       United
                                                      US6503874
         safe-solvent mixtures of alcohol and water                                       States    IBM      B08B
80       Cleaning method to remove flux residue in                                        United
                                                      US6576382
         electronic assembly                                              US6210862       States    IBM      G03F
81                                                                                        United
                                                      US6585906
         Composition for photoimaging                                                     States    IBM      B44C
82       Cellular Arrays for the Identificaiton of                        US2004146922,   United
                                                      US6716582
         Altered Gene Expression                                          US2004142373    States    DuPont   C12Q
83       Method for recycling a disk having a                                             United
                                                      US6800141
         layered structure on a glass substrate                                           States    IBM      B08B
84       Semi-aqueous solvent based method of                                             United
                                                      US6891640
         cleaning rosin flux residue                                      JP2003136811    States    IBM      G06K
85       Apparatus and method for reusing printed                                         United
                                                      US6997323
         media for printing information                                                   States    IBM      B65D
86       Method to accelerate biodegration of
         aliphatic-aromatic copolyesters by           US7053130                           United
         enzymatic treatment                                                              States    DuPont   C08G, C08J
87       Systems and methods for recycling of cell                        EP1480419,      United
                                                      US7251458
         phones at the end of life                                        AT402558        States    Nokia    H04B
88       1,1,1,2,2,4,5,5,5- Nonafluoro-4-
         (Trifluoromethyl)-3-Pentanone Refrigerant
                                                      US7314576
         Compositions Comprising a                                        US2005263737,   United
         Hydrofluorocarbon and Uses Thereof                               US7153448       States    DuPont   C09K
89       1,1,1,2,2,4,5,5,5- Nonafluoro-4-
         (Trifluoromethyl)-3-Pentanone Refrigerant
                                                      US7332103
         Compositions Comprising a Hydrocarbon                            US2005263738,   United
         and Uses Thereof                                                 US7094356       States    DuPont   C09K
90       1,1,1,2,2,4,5,5,5- Nonafluoro-4-             US7338616           US2005263735,   United    DuPont   C09K



     Hall-Helmers                                                    29                                         June 2011
         (Trifluoromethyl)-3-Pentanone Refrigerant                            US7074343       States
         Compositions Comprising a
         Hydrofluorocarbon and Uses Thereof
91                                                                            US2005285076,
                                                                              WO2006012096,
                                                                              US2008169446,
                                                                              RU2007103192,
                                                                              NO20070398,
                                                                              MXPA6014218,
                                                          US7351351
                                                                              KR2007003908,
                                                                              JP2008505212,
         1,1,1,2,2,3,3,4,4- Nonafluoro-4-                                     EP1771526,
         Methoxybutane Refrigerant Compositions                               CA2565349,
         Comprising Functionalized Organic                                    BRPI0512456,    United
         Compounds and Uses Thereof                                           AU2005267439    States    DuPont       C09K
92       1,1,1,2,2,3,3,4,4- Nonafluoro-4-
         Methoxybutane Refrigerant Compositions
                                                          US7354529
         Comprising a Hydrofluorocarbon and Uses                                              United
         Thereof                                                              US2005151112    States    DuPont       C09K
93       Protecting exhaust gas conducting parts of
                                                          DE10211152
         IC engine                                                                            Germany   Bosch        F02B005-02
94       Electric current generator for motor vehicle     DE10214614                          Germany   Bosch        H02K007-116
95       Mapping route in navigation system               DE102004022265      EP1593937       Germany   Bosch        G01C02-34
96       Production of a filter element of a particle
                                                          DE102004028887
         filter for an internal engine                                        WO2005123219    Germany   Bosch        B01D039-00
97       Production of region of filter structure for a
                                                          DE102004035310
         particle filter                                                      WO2006008209    Germany   Bosch        B01D039-20
98       Device for fuel-saving through electrical
                                                          DE102004038185
         energy management controls load(s)                                                   Germany   Bosch        H02J001-00
99       Filter for removing particles from a a gas
                                                          DE102004044338
         stream                                                               WO2006027289    Germany   Bosch        B01D046-24
100      Equalizing process for Lambda values of
                                                          DE102005005765
         engine cylinders                                                                     Germany   Bosch        F02D041-14
101      Varnishing unit, especially for valve
                                                          DE102005006457
         housing                                                              WO2006122587    Germany   Bosch        B05B005-08
102      Filter device, for an exhaust system of an
                                                          DE102005006502
         internal combustion engine                                                           Germany   Bosch        F01N003-021
103      Exhaust gas sooty particles filter for diesel
                                                          DE102005035593
         internal combustion engines                                                          Germany   Bosch        B01D046-02
104      Device for energy supply to hybrid motor
                                                          DE102005042654
         vehicle                                                              WO2007028755    Germany   Bosch        B60K006-04
105      Particle filter for e.g. diesel engine           DE102005046051                      Germany   Bosch        F01N003-28
106      Illuminated emergency exit sign, for a
                                                          DE202004012616
         building                                                                             Germany   Bosch        G09F013-18
107      Motor cable with ferromagnetic casing            DE19963301          US2001020542    Germany   Bosch        H01B005-18
108      Motor cable with ferromagnetic casing            US2001020542        DE19963301      Germany   Bosch        H01B005-18
109      Particle filter bag for use in internal
                                                          DE102005042207
         combustion engine                                                                    Germany   Bosch        F01N003-022
110                                                                           US2005285074,
                                                                              WO2006012095,
                                                          US7413675
         Hydrofluorocarbon Refrigerant                                        NO20070399,     United
         Compositions and Uses Thereof                                        RU2007103169    States    DuPont       C09K
111      1,1,1,2,2,4,5,5,5-Nonafluoro-4-
         (Trifluoromethyl)-3-Pentanone Refrigerant
                                                          US7479239
         Compositions Comprising a                                                            United
         Hydrofluorocarbon and Uses Thereof                                   US2008061265    States    DuPont       C09K
112      Wastewater Treatment Process                     JP4140449           JP2004351379    Japan     Fuji-Xerox   C02F
113                                                                           US2006283806,
                                                                              EP1734009,
                                                                              KR2006013244,
                                                          US7468137
                                                                              JP2006346610,
                                                                              CN1880240,      United
         Wastewater Treatment Process                                         CN100484887     States    Fuji-Xerox   C02F
114      Improved process and apparatus for high                              US5464309,
                                                          EP0622131
         vacuum groundwater extraction                                        US5358357,      Europe    Xerox        B09C



     Hall-Helmers                                                        30                                             June 2011
                                                                       DE69428547,
                                                                       DE69407333
115                                                                    US5655852,
          Vertical isolation system for two-phase                      JP7290038,
                                                      US5709505
          vaccum extraction of soil and groundwater                    EP679450,     United
          contaminants                                                 DE69505179    States    Xerox   E21B
116       Vertical isolation system for two-phase                      JP8332476,
          vacuum extraction of soil and groundwater   EP0747142        DE69629854,
          contaminants                                                 DE69612321    Europe    Xerox   B09C
117       Improved apparatus for high vacuum
                                                      EP0775535
          groundwater extraction                                                     Europe    Xerox   B09C
118                                                                    US6024868,
          Apparatus and methods for removing          EP0792700        JP9225448,
          contaminants                                                 DE69714101    Europe    Xerox   B09C
119       Improved process and apparatus for                           US5172764,
          groundwater extraction using a high         EP0498676        MX9102041,
          vacuum process                                               JP4309626     Europe    Xerox   E03F
120                                                                    US5979554,
          Apparatus for removing liquid               EP0911071        JP11207101,
          contaminants                                                 DE69835928    Europe    Xerox   B01D
121       Producing particulates filter               DE102005032842                 Germany   Bosch   B22F003-105
  Notes:
  1) Corrected numbers in italic red.
  2) Underlined numbers in green added by the authors to list available on EcoPC website.
  3) Data on equivalents extracted from Espacenet (http://ep.espacenet.com)




  A 2: Construction of core dataset
  The patent numbers given in Column 3 of Table A 1 are used to extract additional
  information on these Eco-Patent Commons (EcoPC) patents from the European Patent
  Office (EPO) Worldwide Patent Statistical Database (PATSTAT) version April 2010.
  PATSTAT combines patent information from several sources: DocDB (the EPO master
  bibliographic database containing abstracts and citations), PRS (the patent register for
  legal data), EPASYS (the database for EP patent grant procedure data), and the EPO patent
  register as well as the USPTO patent database for names and addresses of applicants and
  inventors.

  In a first step, we extract from Espacenet all equivalents of the patent numbers given in
  Column 3 of Table A 1. In a second step, we retrieve from PATSTAT all patents with the
  same publication number as an EcoPC patent. In a third step, we also match the publication
  authority and keep the record in PATSTAT that is at the most advanced stage of the grant
  process as indicated by its publication kind. For example in the case of the US, if both A1
  (first published patent application) and B1 (granted patent as first publication) documents
  are available,26 we focus on the B1 document.




  26   These definitions apply since 2001.



  Hall-Helmers                                                    31                                      June 2011
We then add a range of information covering the application, publication, IPC codes,
applicant and inventor, priorities, and patent families as defined in DOCDB and INPADOC
(for more information on patent families see Martinez, 2010). We also create a variable
that marks patents that belong to the same set of equivalents. Our algorithm assigns
patents into the same equivalent group if patents share exactly the same priority
documents.27 We also include backward and forward citations as well as citations of non-
patent documents. Since forward citations are truncated by the PATSTAT version that we
use, we collect in addition the most recent forward citations from Espacenet.28 We face the
same issue in determining whether an EcoPC has been granted. Thus, we also collect the
most recent available publication kind from Espacenet in order to create an indicator
variable showing whether a patent has been granted. In addition, we collect manually
information on the legal status (as of February/March 2011) of EcoPC patents from a
various sources, including INPADOC, IPDL, KIPRIS, DPinfo, INPI, and USPTO PAIR.29


27
   We also assign patents to the same equivalent set that display the following patterns:
     1) Application_id Priorityid_1 Priorityid_2
                  A           B
                  B           A
                  C           A          B
     2) Application_id Priorityid_1 Priorityid_2 Priorityid_3
                  A           B         C
                  D           A         B              C
28 http://ep.espacenet.com

29
  The information for the core dataset as well as the matched Control 2 sample was retrieved from the following
websites (with the corresponding country code):
AR: http://www.inpi.gov.ar/conweb/ParametrosPatentes.asp
AU: http://www.ipaustralia.gov.au/auspat/index.htm
BR: http://pesquisa.inpi.gov.br/MarcaPatente/jsp/servimg/servimg.jsp?BasePesquisa=Patentes
CA: http://brevets-patents.ic.gc.ca
CN: http://english.cnipr.com/enpatv/search/tableSearch.do?method=showTable
CZ: http://www.upv.cz/en/provided-services/online-databases/patent-and-utility-model-databases/national-database.html
DE: https://dpinfo.dpma.de
DK: http://onlineweb.dkpto.dk/pvsonline/Patent
EP, EA, AT, IL, TW, WO: http://ep.espacenet.com
ES: http://sitadex.oepm.es/ServCons/SitJurExpGra
FI: http://patent.prh.fi/patinfo/default2.asp
FR: http://regbrvfr.inpi.fr/portal
GB: http://www.ipo.gov.uk/types/patent/p-os/p-find/p-find-number.htm
HK: http://ipsearch.ipd.gov.hk/patent/index.html
ID: http://ipdl.dgip.go.id/ipdl_ext/TopjaxServletH2H
JP: http://www.ipdl.inpit.go.jp
KR: http://patent2.kipris.or.kr/pateng
MX: http://www.pymetec.gob.mx/buscador/avanzada.php
NO: https://dbsearch2.patentstyret.no
NZ: http://www.iponz.govt.nz/cms/banner_template/IPPATENT
PH: http://patents.ipophil.gov.ph/PatSearch2
PL: http://www.uprp.pl/patentwebaccess/index.aspx
PT: http://servicosonline.inpi.pt/pesquisas/main/patentes.jsp?lang=PT
RU: http://ru.espacenet.com/search97cgi/s97_cgi.exe?Action=FormGen&Template=ru/ru/number.hts


Hall-Helmers                                              32                                              June 2011
A 3: Construction of comparison sample 1 (patents from same applicant)
We use a list of standardized firm names of companies that have pledged patents to the
EcoPC to extract all other patents assigned to these firms from PATSTAT. Notably, we first
extracted all assignee names available in PATSTAT and then filtered the nearly 37 million
entries for the names of our EcoPC firms. This approach ensured that we caught all patents
held by our firms regardless of the different ways in which firms names are entered into
PATSTAT – we found that for some of our firms, PATSTAT included several hundred
different ways in which the names are entered. We extract the same range of information
on these control patents as for the core EcoPC patents except for their legal status (see
description in A 2).

A 4: Construction of comparison sample 2 (patents with same (i) priority
authority, (ii) priority year, and (iii) IPC)
The second control group is selected based on a unique list of (i) priority authority, (ii)
priority year, and (iii) IPC of the EcoPC patents. This list is used to extract from PATSTAT
all other patents (and their equivalents) which share features (i)-(iii) with the EcoPC
patents. In a second step, we eliminated manually all individual and non-profit assignees
from the control sample. We extract the same range of information on these control patents
as for the core EcoPC patents including their legal status (see description in A 2).




TR: http://online.tpe.gov.tr/EPATENT/servlet/EPreSearchRequestManager
SG: http://www.surfip.gov.sg/_patent-f.htm
US: http://portal.uspto.gov/external/portal/pair
ZA: http://patentsearch.cipro.gov.za/patents/patentsearch.aspx


Hall-Helmers                                                     33                June 2011
                                             Table 1: Data on priorities
                                                EcoPC patents    Control1   EcoPC share   Control2   EcoPC share

N of unique applications                                 238      684,718       0.035%    114,172         0.21%
N of unique priorities                                     94     398,433       0.024%     40,708         0.23%
N of applications with multiple priors                     36      41,991       0.086%     25,621         0.14%
N of priors with multiple applns                           47     111,173       0.042%     21,316         0.22%
N of unique appln-prior combinations                     280      747,119       0.037%    184,526         0.15%
N of equivalent groups                                     90     394,167       0.023%     34,315         0.26%
Average family size (apps per equiv group)               2.64        1.74                    3.33
  Table 2: Patents contributed to the commons compared to the contributing firms' portfolios
                                                                                            Average family size
                            All applications and equivalents     Unique equivalent groups       in dataset
                 Date
              entered the    EcoPC      Total                   Eco-      Total              EcoPC      Total
               commons      patents    patents       Share     patents   patents    Share   patents    patents

DuPont          Jan-08        43        40,991      0.105%       11       11,949   0.092%    3.91       3.43
IBM             Jan-08        53       100,112      0.053%       29       57,199   0.051%    1.83       1.75
Mannesmann      Jan-08         2        7,068       0.028%        1       2,602    0.038%    2.00       2.72
Nokia           Jan-08         3        52,303      0.006%        1       12,557   0.008%    3.00       4.17
PitneyBowes     Jan-08         7        4,594       0.152%        2        2036    0.098%    3.50       2.26
Sony            Jan-08         4       184,178      0.002%        4      119,207   0.003%    1.00       1.55
Bosch           Sep-08        52        92,121      0.056%       23      30,936    0.074%    2.26       2.98
Xerox           Sep-08        56        28,494      0.197%       13      12,567    0.103%    4.31       2.27
Ricoh           Mar-09         1       110,019      0.001%        1      97,139    0.001%    1.00       1.13
Taisei          Mar-09         2        6,923       0.029%        2      6,770     0.030%    1.00       1.02

Dow             Oct-09         9        14,908      0.060%        1      4,096     0.024%    9.00       3.64
FujiXerox       Oct-09         6        43,007      0.014%        2      37,109    0.005%    3.00       1.16
Total                         238      684,718      0.035%       90      394,167   0.023%    2.64       1.74
                                Table 3
               Rough categorization of EcoPC technologies
                                    Not in OECD
Technology                            sample      In OECD sample   Total

Not clear                                1               0          1
Clean manufacturing                     23               2          25
Clean up soil & groundwater              0              16          16
Electric auto related                    1               1          2
Energy efficiency (mostly autos)        12               2          14
Global warming (fluorocarbons)           5               0          5
Pollution                                7               8          15
Detection of environmental damage        5               0          5
Recycling (mostly disks)                 3               4          7
Total                                   57              33          90
                   Table 4: Average age in years of patent by legal status*
                                  Number        Share        Mean        Median         Q1     Q3
                                                                 Unweighted
In force                             117        49.2%         10.5        10.9           6.2   13.6
Nonpayment of fees                   37         15.5%         12.4        13.9           8.1   17.7
Expired                              19          8.0%         17.7        18.3          17.7   18.3
Withdrawn                            23          9.7%          8.3        10.9           4.3   10.9
Rejected                             16          6.7%          8.4         6.2           4.4    8.5
Unexamined/Pending                    4          1.7%          4.2         4.2           4.1    4.3
Published in National Office          2          0.8%          4.3         4.3           4.3    4.3
NA                                   20          8.4%         14.3        15.7          12.8   18.2
All                                  238                      11.2        11.0          6.1    15.8

                                                     Weighted by inverse of family size
In force                            57.58       64.0%        9.2          9.4            5.8   12.2
Nonpayment of fees                  10.54       11.7%       10.6         10.7            4.3   15.8
Expired                             3.48         3.9%       16.8         18.1           15.8   18.3
Withdrawn                           7.12         7.9%        7.8          6.6            4.7    9.9
Rejected                            4.14         4.6%        7.9          6.3            4.4    8.5
Unexamined/Pending                  1.59         1.8%        4.2          4.2            4.1    4.3
Published in National Office        0.34         0.4%        4.3          4.3            4.3    4.3
NA                                  5.21         5.8%       13.9         13.5           12.4   17.7
All                                  90                      9.6          9.4           5.7    13.2
*Age is measured on April 1, 2010, as years since the application date of the patent.
 Legal status as of February/March 2011.
                       Table 5: Legal status by jurisdiction
                               Uncorrected for equivalents
                                                             Patents in same classes as
                               EcoPC Patents                      EcoPC patents
   Application        Patent not Patent in     Share in   Patent not Patent in   Share in
    authority          in force    force        force      in force    force      force
US   US                   20         55         73.3%         30         83       73.5%
DE   Germany              22         23         51.1%         40         24       37.5%
EP   EPO                  18         16         47.1%         42         19       31.1%
JP   Japan                19         15         44.1%         46         15       24.6%
     Other                40         10         20.0%        107         67       38.5%
     Total               119        119         50.0%        265        208       44.0%

                                Unique equivalent groups
                                                             Patents in same classes as
                               EcoPC Patents                      EcoPC patents
   Application        Patent not Patent in     Share in   Patent not Patent in   Share in
    authority          in force    force        force      in force    force      force
US   US                    9         42         82.4%          9         24       72.7%
DE   Germany              13         11         45.8%         17         4        19.0%
EP   EPO                   0         1         100.0%          7         0         0.0%
JP   Japan                 4         9          69.2%         16         5        23.8%
     Other                 1         0           0.0%          9         3        25.0%
     Total                27         63         70.0%         58         36       38.3%

We treat patents with missing legal status as not granted and not in force/pending
                                                             Table 6: Statistics on regression variables
                               Simple statistics for patents owned by firms contributing EcoPC patents (priority years 1989-2005)
                                           Mean*                        Std. Dev.*                 T-test       z-test         Minimum               Maximum
Variable                          Ecopatents     Other           Ecopatents      Other           Difference    Ranksum   Ecopatents  Other     Ecopatents  Other

Number of inventors                  1.957           1.520          0.599           0.583               4.6      4.7         0          0          8          28
Family size                          3.926           2.509          0.595           0.604               8.2      8.8         1          1          13         69
Forward citations to 2010            0.824           0.721          0.969           0.909               1.5      0.7         0          0          67        642
Backward citations                   1.581           0.827          1.103           0.999               6.4      5.8         0          0          48        157
Non-patent references                0.298           0.200          0.569           0.489               7.6      2.5         0          0          25        116
Number of IPCs                       4.270           3.655          0.511           0.544               3.3      3.6         1          1          15        131
D (OECD greentech class)             0.332           0.011          0.472           0.105               7.4     46.8         0          0          1          1
Similarity measure                   0.051           0.133          0.070           0.115              -12.8    -13.0      0.000      0.000      0.331      0.791
D (inventors missing)                0.139           0.170          0.346           0.375               -1.0     -1.3        0          0          1          1

*Geometric mean for the first 6 variables; standard deviation of the log of the variable.
Based on 238 observations for EcoPC patents and 684,634 for other patents owned by the same firms.

                                   Simple statistics for patents in the same classes as EcoPC patents (priority years 1989-2005)
                                             Mean*                        Std. Dev.*               T-test       z-test          Minimum              Maximum
                                                                                                                                      Same        Eco       Same
Variable                         Ecopatents Same classes         Ecopatents Same classes         Difference    Ranksum   Eco patents classes    patents    classes

Number of inventors                  1.957           1.991          0.599           0.635               -0.3      0.0        0          0         8           37
Family size                          3.926           5.281          0.595           0.786               -5.4     -5.1        1          1         13         101
Forward citations to 2010            0.824           0.502          0.969           0.894               5.6      4.7         0          0         67         589
Backward citations                   1.581           0.719          1.103           1.047               7.8      7.7         0          0         48         152
Non-patent references                0.298           0.342          0.569           0.792               -2.6     -1.4        0          0         25         163
Number of IPCs                       4.270           7.457          0.511           0.727              -11.9    -10.5        1          1         14         217
D (OECD greentech class)             0.332           0.071          0.472           0.257               6.0     15.6         0          0         1           1
D (inventors missing)                0.139           0.148          0.346           0.355               -0.3      0.4        0          0         1           1
*Geometric mean for the first 6 variables; standard deviation of the log of the variable.
Based on 238 observations for EcoPC patents and 114,172 observations for others in the same classes.
                Table 7: Determinants of the probability that a firm contributes a patent to the EcoPC
                                          684,956 observations (238 = 1) , priority year 1989-2005
                                            Coefficient         Std. error        Coefficient         Std. error         Coefficient         Std. error
                                                                         Unweighted

Log number of inventors                       -0.040              0.100             -0.006              0.094              -0.012              0.092
Log family size                                0.189              0.089     **       0.166              0.085       *       0.155              0.085       *
Log forward citations to 2010                 -0.044              0.029             -0.037              0.028              -0.042              0.028
Log backward citations                         0.091              0.032     ***      0.076              0.030      **       0.082              0.030      ***
Log non-patent references                     -0.014              0.039             -0.010              0.038              -0.004              0.039
Log number of IPCs                            -0.162              0.095      *      -0.121              0.092              -0.186              0.092      **
Similarity measure                            -2.189              0.633     ***     -2.702              0.723      ***
Dummy for OECD greentech class                 0.975              0.102     ***
Dummy for missing # inventors                 -0.196              0.186             -0.145              0.175              -0.159              0.172
Priority year dummies                                     yes                                   yes                                    yes
IPC (1) dummies                                           yes                                   yes                                    yes
Firm dummies                                              yes                                   yes                                    yes
Pseudo R-squared                                      0.247                                 0.198                                  0.178
Log likelihood                                      -1606.51                              -1711.33                               -1752.96
                                        Probit, weighted by the inverse of the equivalent group size
Log number of inventors                       -0.002              0.077             0.038               0.072              0.038               0.070
Log family size                               0.193               0.076     **      0.161               0.072      **      0.144               0.072      **
Log forward citations to 2010                 -0.043              0.032             -0.037              0.031              -0.040              0.030
Log backward citations                        0.118               0.032     ***     0.099               0.030      ***     0.105               0.029      ***
Log non-patent references                     0.018               0.051             0.019               0.051              0.016               0.050
Log number of IPCs                            -0.154              0.067      **     -0.118              0.064       *      -0.175              0.064      ***
Similarity measure                            -2.440              0.561     ***     -2.871              0.617      ***
Dummy for OECD greentech class                1.034               0.093     ***
Dummy for missing # inventors                 -0.605              0.173     ***     -0.539              0.169      ***     -0.542              0.165      ***

Priority year dummies                                     yes                                   yes                                    yes
IPC (1) dummies                                           yes                                   yes                                    yes
Firm dummies                                              yes                                   yes                                    yes
Pseudo R-squared                                      0.279                                0.220                                  0.198
Log likelihood                                       -609.29                              -658.82                                -677.93
Heteroskedastic standard errors, clustered by equivalence group.
Significant at the 1% (***), 5% (**) and 10% (*) levels.
  Table 8: Determinants of the probability that a patent in an EcoPC patent class is
                            contributed to the commons
                        114,172 observations (238 = 1) , priority year 1989-2005
                                            Coefficient         Std. error         Coefficient         Std. error
                                                  Unweighted
Log number of inventors                        0.089       0.109                      0.084              0.106
Log family size                                0.024       0.073                      0.006              0.073
Log forward citations to 2008                 -0.045       0.033                     -0.048              0.032
Log backward citations                         0.133       0.028             ***      0.133              0.027      ***
Log non-patent references                     -0.065       0.035              *      -0.071              0.035       **
Log number of IPCs                            -0.485       0.097             ***     -0.495              0.095      ***
Dummy for OECD greentech class                 0.486       0.124             ***
Dummy for missing # inventors                  0.208       0.155                     0.206               0.152
Priority year dummies                                     yes                                    yes
IPC (1) dummies                                           yes                                    yes

Pseudo R-squared                                      0.135                                  0.120
Log likelihood                                      -1476.65                               -1502.33

                      Probit, weighted by the inverse of the equivalent group size
Log number of inventors                       0.186               0.084      **      0.180               0.083      **
Log family size                               0.150               0.060      **      0.115               0.060       *
Log forward citations to 2008                 -0.048              0.035              -0.054              0.033
Log backward citations                        0.144               0.032      ***     0.141               0.031      ***
Log non-patent references                     -0.076              0.046              -0.088              0.046       *
Log number of IPCs                            -0.461              0.069      ***     -0.462              0.067      ***
Dummy for OECD greentech class                0.500               0.114      ***
Dummy for missing # inventors                 0.245               0.140       *      0.249               0.139       *
Priority year dummies                                     yes                                    yes
IPC (1) dummies                                           yes                                    yes

Pseudo R-squared                                      0.097                                   0.081
Log likelihood                                       -564.18                                 -574.87
Heteroskedastic standard errors, clustered by equivalence group.
Significant at the 1% (***), 5% (**) and 10% (*) levels.
                Table 9: Citation counts for EcoPC patents and controls
                                equivalence                   equivalence                 equivalence
                  all patents     group         all patents     group       all patents     group

                       Total patents              Share with citations          Total citations
Eco-patents          238           90             34.5%         67.8%          411            401
Controls             473           94             25.2%         70.2%          520            498
                     Average citations*           Average citations**
Eco-patents          5.01          6.57            1.73          4.46
Controls             4.37          7.55            1.10          5.30
*Average over patents with nonzero citations.
**Average over all patents
Table 10: Poisson estimation of the citation lag model
                                                 Coefficient (s.e.)
                          Cite lag quadratic for eco patents
intercept                  -0.126 (0.083)              0.410           (0.380)
linear term                0.230     (0.069) *** -0.099                (0.125)
quadratic term             -0.028 (0.006) *** -0.008                   (0.007)

                            Cite lag quadratic for controls
intercept                  0.582      (0.259) **       -0.847          (0.267)       ***
linear term                0.069      (0.076)          0.096           (0.076)
quadratic term             -0.022 (0.007) *** -0.020                   (0.006)       ***
Test for cite lag
distribution#                14.55 (.002)        ***         23.19 (0.000)           ***
Commons entry -
ecopatents                 2.066      (1.631)             -5.356       (3.487)

Observations                        2309                              9501

Patents                              184                               711
Priority year dummies                yes                              yes
Log likelihood                 -40,514,268.09                      753,778.13

Standard errors are robust and clustered on patents.
# Robust chi-square (3) test for the equivalence of the cite lag distributions for
ecopatents and controls.
Significant at the 1% (***), 5% (**) and 10% (*) levels.
        Table A1: Patents contributed to the commons as a share of firm portfolios and patent classes
                                    by application year and priority year
             All applications and equivalents by year of application           Equivalence groups by earliest priority year
                      Patents in              All pats held                      Patents in               All pats held
             Eco      the same                 by eco pats               Eco     the same                  by eco pats
Year       patents      class       Share         firms        Share   patents      class      Share          firms         Share

1989          3          671       0.447%       11,110       0.027%       4          884       0.452%        12,226       0.033%
1990          27        2,550      1.059%       27,060       0.100%       2          234       0.855%        15,519       0.013%
1991          9          801       1.124%       32,563       0.028%       1          232       0.431%        19,736       0.005%
1992          12        2,666      0.450%       32,471       0.037%       5         2,095      0.239%        20,346       0.025%
1993          13        7,548      0.172%       32,021       0.041%       1         1,058      0.095%        19,871       0.005%
1994          11        6,565      0.168%       31,550       0.035%       8         1,564      0.512%        19,280       0.041%
1995          22        8,990      0.245%       35,385       0.062%       7         2,702      0.259%        22,039       0.032%
1996          17        4,244      0.401%       38,876       0.044%       4         2,134      0.187%        23,903       0.017%
1997          13       13,093      0.099%       41,746       0.031%       9         3,792      0.237%        25,300       0.036%
1998          9         5,792      0.155%       43,655       0.021%       6         1,969      0.305%        25,552       0.023%
1999          11        7,475      0.147%       44,742       0.025%       5          959       0.521%        26,041       0.019%
2000          7         5,383      0.130%       48,938       0.014%       4         3,514      0.114%        27,078       0.015%
2001          11       19,940      0.055%       53,016       0.021%       5         8,096      0.062%        28,725       0.017%
2002          9        10,527      0.085%       46,109       0.020%       5         1,090      0.459%        25,772       0.019%
2003          6         4,666      0.129%       46,616       0.013%       3         1,454      0.206%        26,890       0.011%
2004          12        4,054      0.296%       46,653       0.026%      12         1,663      0.722%        27,832       0.043%
2005          32        5,378      0.595%       48,805       0.066%       9          875       1.029%        28,057       0.032%
2006          7         2,190      0.320%       18,459       0.038%
2007          6          895       0.670%        2,574       0.233%
2008          1          516       0.194%        1,871       0.053%
2009          0          228       0.000%         498        0.000%

Total        238      114,172     0.208%        684,718      0.035%      90        34,315      0.262%       394,167       0.023%
                              Table A2: Patent family sizes

                  Number of          Average size of   Average family size   Average family size
              equivalence groups    equivalent group       from docdb           from inpadoc
               Eco-       Same       Eco-      Same     Eco-       Same       Eco-       Same
              patents      firms   patents     firms   patents     firms     patents     firms
Bosch           23        30,936     2.26       2.98     2.26       2.85       2.26       3.55
Dow              1         4,096     9.00       3.64     1.00       4.32       9.00      13.28
DuPont          11        11,949     3.91       3.43     5.73       3.71      79.09       6.31
FujiXerox        2        37,109     3.00       1.16     3.00       1.15       3.00       1.28
IBM             29        57,199     1.83       1.75     1.97       2.02       3.28       2.56
Mannesmann       1         2,602     2.00       2.72     2.00       2.56       2.00       3.35
Nokia            1        12,557     3.00       4.17     3.00       4.16       3.00       4.88
PitneyBowes      2         2,036     3.50       2.26     3.50       2.45       3.50       2.98
Ricoh            1        97,139     1.00       1.13     1.00       1.11       1.00       1.49
Sony             4       119,207     1.00       1.55     1.00       1.48       4.50       1.94
Taisei           2         6,770     1.00       1.02     1.00       1.02       1.00       1.04
Xerox           13        12,567     4.31       2.27     4.92       2.49       6.92       3.06
All             90       394,167     2.64       1.74    2.91        1.76      12.83       2.36
                     Table A3: Patents contributed to the commons by application authority
                                                                        Priority appln authority; equivalents and mutliple priorities
                    Application authority; equivalents included                                   removed
                                                      All pats                                                    All pats
                               Patents in             held by                             Patents in              held by
               Eco             the same              eco pats             Eco              the same              eco pats
Authority    patents Share        class     Share      firms    Share   patents Share        class      Share      firms      Share
DE Germany      45     18.9%     12,459    10.9%     76,727    11.2%      24      25.0%      3,547      10.3%      31,897     8.1%
JP Japan        34     14.3%     20,315    17.8%    281,703    41.1%      10      10.4%      8,912      26.0%     260,034     66.0%
US USPTO        75     31.5%     30,746    26.9%    141,319    20.6%      59      61.5%     21,679      63.2%      85,950     21.8%
Other           84     35.3%    50,652     44.4%    184,969    27.0%       3      3.1%        177        0.5%      16,286     4.1%
Total          238              114,172             684,718               96                34,315                394,167
                                   Table A4: Patent legal status by firm contributing
                                  Uncorrected for equivalents                              Priority patents only

                                            Share In force or Share in                            Share In force or Share in
                    Number      Granted    granted pending      force         Number   Granted   granted pending      force
Bosch                  52          34       65.4%      25       48.1%           23        18      78.3%      11       47.8%
Dow                    9           6        66.7%      4        44.4%            1         1     100.0%      1       100.0%
DuPont                 43          23       53.5%      18       41.9%           11         8      72.7%      6        54.5%
FujiXerox              6           5        83.3%      5        83.3%            2         2     100.0%      2       100.0%
IBM                    53          41       77.4%      25       47.2%           29        27      93.1%      24       82.8%
Mannesmann             2           1        50.0%      0        0.0%             1         1     100.0%      0        0.0%
Nokia                  3           2        66.7%      2        66.7%            1         1     100.0%      1       100.0%
PitneyBowes            7           6        85.7%      5        71.4%            2         2     100.0%      2       100.0%
Ricoh                  1           0         0.0%      0        0.0%             1         0       0.0%      0        0.0%
Sony                   4           4       100.0%      4       100.0%            4         4     100.0%      4       100.0%
Taisei                 2           2       100.0%      2       100.0%            2         2     100.0%      2       100.0%
Xerox                  56          49       87.5%      33       58.9%           13        13     100.0%      10       76.9%
All                   238         173       72.7%     123      51.7%            90        79      87.8%      63      70.0%
We treat patents with missing legal status as not granted and not in force/pending
                                Appendix Table 5: Average forward citations by citation lag
                     unit of analysis: patent                          unit of analysis: equivalence group
   Lag        controls       ecopats         before           after        Lag         controls        ecopats        before           after
   (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)         (1)           (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)
     0         0.1501         0.1513          0.151             0            0          0.681           0.400          0.400             0
     1         0.1649         0.1639          0.164             0            1          0.819           0.433          0.433             0
     2         0.1755         0.2647          0.265             0            2          0.862           0.711          0.711             0
     3         0.1459         0.2689          0.269             0            3          0.702           0.689          0.689             0
     4         0.1290         0.2479          0.239          0.0084          4          0.617           0.633          0.611           0.022
     5         0.0888         0.1597          0.160             0            5          0.436           0.378          0.378             0
     6         0.0749         0.1182          0.118             0            6          0.360           0.313          0.313             0
     7         0.0638         0.1075          0.108             0            7          0.321           0.319          0.319             0
     8         0.0539         0.1160          0.110          0.0055          8          0.293           0.258          0.242           0.015
     9         0.0325         0.0930          0.087          0.0058          9          0.149           0.262          0.246           0.016
    10         0.0224         0.0864          0.080          0.0062         10          0.117           0.250          0.232           0.018
    11         0.0103         0.0329          0.020          0.0132         11          0.054           0.096          0.058           0.038
    12         0.0000         0.0352          0.035             0           12          0.000           0.106          0.106             0
    13         0.0100         0.0000          0.000             0           13          0.049           0.000          0.000             0
    14         0.0303         0.0085          0.008             0           14          0.172           0.031          0.031             0
    15         0.0199         0.0180          0.018             0           15          0.115           0.071          0.071             0
    16         0.0072         0.0000          0.000             0           16          0.050             0            0.000             0
    17         0.0000         0.0282          0.028             0           17            0             0.154          0.154             0

  Total        0.085           0.130          0.128          0.0022       Total          0.424          0.363          0.357           0.0063

Kruskal-Wallis chi-squared = 26.30 (0.000) for same distribution      Kruskal-Wallis chi-squared = 1.27 (.260) for same distribution
Ranksum test = 5.13 (0.000) for same distribution                     Ranksum test = 1.13 (0.260) for same distribution
