                                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  THE PSYCHOLOGICAL COSTS OF WAR:
                                MILITARY COMBAT AND MENTAL HEALTH

                                                          Resul Cesur
                                                         Joseph J. Sabia
                                                           Erdal Tekin

                                                  Working Paper 16927
                                          http://www.nber.org/papers/w16927


                             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                                             April 2011




The authors thank Daniel Rees, John Z. Smith, David Lyle, and seminar participants at the University
of Connecticut, and the 2010 Southern Economic Association Meetings for useful comments and suggestions
on an earlier draft of this paper. Thanks also to Whitney Dudley for excellent research assistance.
 The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not reflect the position of the United States
Military Academy, the Department of the Army, the Department of Defense, or the National Bureau
of Economic Research. This research uses data from Add Health, a program project designed by J.
Richard Udry, Peter S. Bearman, and Kathleen Mullan Harris, and funded by a grant P01-HD31921
from the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, with cooperative funding from
17 other agencies. Special acknowledgment is due Ronald R. Rindfuss and Barbara Entwisle for assistance
in the original design. Persons interested in obtaining data files from Add Health should contact Add
Health, Carolina Population Center, 123 W. Franklin Street, Chapel Hill, NC 27516-2524 (http://www.cpc.unc.edu/addhealth/contract.html).

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Resul Cesur, Joseph J. Sabia, and Erdal Tekin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Psychological Costs of War: Military Combat and Mental Health
Resul Cesur, Joseph J. Sabia, and Erdal Tekin
NBER Working Paper No. 16927
April 2011
JEL No. H56,I1

                                             ABSTRACT

While descriptive evidence suggests that deployment in the Global War on Terrorism is associated
with adverse mental health, the causal effect of combat is not well established. Using data drawn from
the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health, we exploit exogenous variation in deployment
assignment and find that soldiers deployed to combat zones where they engage in frequent enemy
firefight or witness allied or civilian deaths are at substantially increased risk for suicidal ideation,
psychological counseling, and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Our estimates imply lower-bound
health care costs of $1.5 to $2.7 billion for combat-induced PTSD.


Resul Cesur                                         Erdal Tekin
Department of Economics                             Department of Economics
Georgia State University                            Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
P.O. Box 3992                                       Georgia State University
Atlanta, GA 30302-3992                              P.O. Box 3992
and University of Connecticut                       Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
prcrcx@langate.gsu.edu                              and NBER
                                                    tekin@gsu.edu
Joseph J. Sabia
United States Military Academy
Office of Economic and Manpower Analysis
Department of Economics
West Point, N.Y. 10996
and San Diego State University
joe_sabia@yahoo.com
"This is the price of war….You can't send young Americans to Iraq and Afghanistan ...
and expect them to come home and just fit right in. They bring that trauma with them."

                          -Max Cleland, Vietnam War Veteran and former U.S. Senator

I. Introduction

         The mental health impairments experienced by U.S. soldiers deployed in the Global War

on Terrorism (GWOT) have received a great deal of attention by both policymakers and the

American news media. A recent article in the Time magazine describes the mental health

problems of servicemen and women returning from Iraq and Afghanistan as “the U.S. Army’s

third front” (Thompson, 2010). Military service has been linked to greater take-up of disability

benefits among some veterans (Autor et al., 2011; Angrist et al., 2010), as well as higher rates of

crime and violence (Rohlfs, 2010).1 The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimates

that veterans comprise nearly 20 percent of the more than 30,000 suicides each year. Public

concern about the mental health problems of soldiers has prompted political action, with

President Barack Obama announcing a plan to increase the ease with which veterans diagnosed

with post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) can receive federal health benefits (Obama, 2010).

         While a number of recent studies have found that PTSD is a growing problem for U.S.

soldiers deployed in Operation Iraqi Freedom and Operation Enduring Freedom (Shen et al.,

2009a, b; Hoge et al., 2006, 2004; Erbes et al., 2007; Rosenheck and Fontana, 2007; Seal et al.,

2007; Tanielian and Jaycox, 2008), much of this work has been descriptive in nature. Those

studies that have used regression strategies (Shen et al., 2009ab, Rona et al., 2007) have been

hampered by data limitations that fail to adequately address the endogeneity of military service

or to disentangle the effects of deployment length from exposure to violent combat events.

1
 Angrist et al. (2010) find greater disability take-up among Vietnam veterans with low earning potential. Autor et
al. (2011) also find evidence of a recent increase in disability uptake among Vietnam veterans but are unable to
distinguish whether this effect is driven by a long-term adverse health effect of combat or a recent liberalization in
benefit rules.

                                                           1
       Using data drawn from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health, we

examine the relationship between military combat and young adults’ mental health while

carefully addressing the role of individual-level unobserved heterogeneity by controlling for

mental health prior to deployment as well as exploiting plausibly exogenous variation in

deployment assignment and exposure to violent combat events. We rely on evidence that

deployment assignments of active-duty units are unrelated to the characteristics of soldiers or

their families (Engel et al, 2010; Lyle, 2006) to identify the causal effects of combat.

       We find that active-duty U.S. soldiers serving in combat zones are at greater risk of

PTSD and are more likely to receive psychological or emotional counseling than their active-

duty counterparts serving outside the United States in non-combat zones. Our preferred

estimates suggest that combat-induced PTSD in the GWOT imposes two-year costs of $1.5 to

$2.7 billion on the U.S. health care system.

       We find that the psychological costs of combat are largest for soldiers exposed to violent

combat events such as frequent enemy firefight. Soldiers who kill someone (or believe they have

killed someone), are injured in combat, or witness the death or wounding of a civilian or

coalition member are at substantially increased risk of suicidal ideation, depressive

symptomatology, and PTSD. Our findings suggest that military policymakers crafting optimal

deployment schedules that account for soldiers’ mental health should focus greater attention on

soldiers’ experiences with frequent enemy firefight as opposed to cumulative deployment length.



II. Background

       A recent comprehensive review of the literature on military service, mental health, and

PTSD concluded that active duty officers, particularly those who have served and are serving in



                                                 2
combat in Iraq and Afghanistan during the Global War on Terrorism (GWOT), suffer substantial

mental health problems (Tanielian and Jaycox, 2008). This review finds that 26 percent of active

duty soldiers returning from serving in the GWOT suffer from depression, drug and alcohol

dependency, homelessness, or suicide. Estimates of PTSD rates among those who served in Iraq

or Afghanistan ranged from 4 to 45 percent (Tanielian and Jaycox, 2008). However, most of the

studies on which these conclusions are based are descriptive in nature (see, for example, Hoge et

al, 2006, 2004), without a counterfactual control group to estimate the effect of military service

on psychological well-being.

        Distinguishing the mental health effects of military service from associations due to hard-

to-measure characteristics of soldiers is a daunting task. This empirical difficulty also presents a

significant obstacle to the efforts of policymakers who wish to estimate the health care costs of

combat-induced mental health problems. For instance, Tanielian and Jaycox (2008) obtain a

two-year cost estimate for PTSD by assuming that the prevalence rate of PTSD for deployed

soldiers is equivalent to the effect of combat service. However, the authors do not construct a

counterfactual comparison group and therefore assume that in the absence of service, no combat

personnel would suffer from adverse mental health.

        The most common comparison group constructed by researchers examining the health

effects of military service has been civilians (Jordan et al., 1991; Iowa Persian Gulf Study Group,

1997; McFall et al., 1992; Price et al., 2004; Card, 1987; McKiney et al., 1997; Kang and

Bullman, 2001).2 But, as Dobkin and Shabani (2009) note, the average individual and family

background characteristics of active duty servicemen are quite different from those of civilians,


2
 A related literature on civilians has examined the mental health consequences of stressful domestic occupations
such as police work (Wang et al., 2010; Liberman et al., 2002) and firefighting (Bryant and Guthrie, 2005; 2007;
Heinrichs et al., 2005).


                                                         3
and many of these characteristics are also related to psychological well-being. If, for example,

socioeconomic status is negatively related to the probability of joining the armed forces (Segal et

al., 1998; Bachman et al., 2000; Kleykamp, 2006) and positively related to mental health (Miech

et al., 1999), then members of military may be prone to mental health problems even in the

absence of military service, leading to overstated estimates of the cost of combat service. On the

other hand, because military personnel go through a rigorous health screening prior to induction

or commissioning (see, for example, Department of Defense Directives 6130.3 and 6130.4),

individuals who serve in the military may not only be in better physical health than their civilian

counterparts, but they may also be in better mental health as well. Moreover, young people with

higher educational aspirations may both enlist in the military to earn educational benefits for

themselves or their families (Kleykamp, 2006) and be better equipped to cope with future mental

health problems.3 Each of these forms of selection would tend to understate the estimated effects

of combat service.

        More convincing studies of the health effects of military service have focused on service

in the Second World War, the Korean War, and the Vietnam War, and have addressed the

endogeneity of military service by using the draft lottery as an instrument (Angrist et al., 2010;

Hearst et al., 1986; Bedard and Deschenes, 2004; Dobkin and Shabani, 2009; Edwards and

MacLean, 2010). Using this approach, Angrist et al. (2010) and Dobkin and Shabani (2009) find

evidence that prior estimates of the health effects of military service were overstated due to

individual heterogeneity. However, the results still suggest that military service may adversely

affect health. Hearst et al. (1986) find that draft exposure was associated with an increased risk

of suicide and automobile accidents and Bedard and Deschenes (2004) find that veterans of


3
 Moreover, recent descriptive work by National Priorities Project (2008) suggests that negative selection on
socioeconomic status may not be as severe today.

                                                         4
World War II and the Korean War were at substantial increased risk of mortality due to military-

induced smoking.

       The absence of a draft in the post-Vietnam era does not allow such an identification

approach to study the effect of randomly drawing a civilian for service in the GWOT. However,

researchers in the post-draft era have identified a potentially new source of exogeneous variation

in combat experiences among soldiers: the U.S. military’s deployment assignment procedures.

Two recent studies (Lyle, 2006 and Engel et al., 2010) have persuasively argued that deployment

assignment is exogenous to soldiers’ preferences, welfare, and family-level characteristics. For

example, Engel et al. (2010) note that the U.S. Army almost never deploys individual soldiers,

but rather deploys companies. An individual soldier has little control over the company to which

he or she is assigned and, as matter of policy, is reassigned every 3 or 4 years by Army Human

Resources Command. The timing and location of companies’ deployment assignments depend

on the circumstances of the military operation and the readiness and availability of the unit

(Engel et al., 2010). Thus, deployment assignments of soldiers are not based on individual

soldiers’ characteristics such as perceived bravery, mental toughness, or family circumstances,

but rather based on the operational needs of the Armed Forces:


       “The ‘needs of the army’…captures the essence of all [military] assignments:
       world events drive army assignments. [T]he timing of the move and assignment
       of a soldier to a subordinate army unit are largely independent of a soldier’s
       preferences… [O]nce a soldier is assigned to a division, the division assigns the
       soldier to one of several brigades, the brigade assigns the soldier to one of several
       battalions, and the battalion assigns the soldier to one of several companies. The
       ‘needs of the army’ also determine the missions that a soldier’s company
       receives.” (Lyle, 2006, p. 323)



                                                 5
        While Lyle (2006) and Engel et al. (2010) use unit deployment assignments to estimate

the causal effect of deployment-induced parental absences on children’s academic achievement,

no study of which we are aware has exploited variation in deployment assignments to identify

the mental health effects of combat experiences.

        Three recent studies have examined the relationship between length of combat service

and mental health during the Global War on Terrorism using military records (Rona et al., 2007;

Shen et al., 2009ab). Their findings suggest that longer deployment lengths are associated with a

greater risk for a positive PTSD screening. While intriguing, these findings do not make clear

whether deployment length itself is the cause of mental health problems or whether it is the

effects of exposure to psycho-traumatic combat events that may be correlated with deployment

length. Disentangling the effects of deployment length from combat events is important for

military policymakers who wish to design deployment schedules that minimize mental health

problems of soldiers.

        Our study contributes to the literature on the effects of military combat in the GWOT in

several important ways. First, our study is the first to use longitudinal data on military service

and mental health, which allows us to condition on mental health prior to deployment. 4 Second,

we exploit plausibly exogenous variation in deployment assignment and exposure to violent

combat events to better isolate the causal effect of GWOT combat experience on psychological

well-being. Finally, our study is the first to explore the mental health effects of specific violent

combat events, including engaging the enemy in firefight, killing or wounding someone, and

observing the death or wounding of civilians, coalition/allied soldiers, and enemy soldiers.




4
 Our models also control for school fixed effects to account for unobserved heterogeneity at the neighborhood level
and family fixed effects to control for fixed family-level heterogeneity.

                                                         6
III. Data and Measures

           The data used in this study come from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent

Health (Add Health), which was conducted by the Carolina Population Center at the University

of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. The Add Health is a nationally representative school-based

longitudinal study that began surveying U.S. adolescents in seventh to twelfth grades in the mid-

1990s. The Wave I in-home baseline survey was administered to 20,745 respondents during the

1994-1995 academic year. Three follow-ups have been conducted since the original Add Health

data collection effort. The first follow-up, the Wave II in-home survey, was conducted in 1996,

approximately one year after the baseline survey; the second follow-up (Wave III) was

administered in 2001, and the third follow-up (Wave IV), was administered in 2007-2008 to

15,701 of the original Add Health participants (see Harris et al., 2008 for more detailed

information on the Add Health data collection strategy).

           The Add Health dataset is useful for our purposes because it (i) contains a relatively large

sample of military servicemen and women (N = 1,110) at the time of the Wave IV survey, and

(ii) provides information on whether active-duty servicemen and women were deployed to a

combat zone (N = 439), a non-combat zone outside of the United States (N = 153), or served on

active-duty in the United States exclusively (N = 343), and includes information on exposure to

specific combat events.5 Moreover, because the survey is longitudinal in nature and spans back

to adolescence, we have information on the respondent’s mental health prior to any military

deployment. We restrict our sample to respondents who provided non-missing information on

mental health and military service at Wave IV when the respondents were young adults ages 24

and 33.



5
    The remaining 175 individuals are in non-active duty service exclusively in the Reserves or National Guard.

                                                           7
           We measure military service in the United States Armed Forces using respondents’

reports of active duty service and deployment assignment at Wave IV.6 In our sample, 6.0

percent (N = 935) reported active duty military service and 1.1 percent reported non-active duty

service exclusively in the Reserves or National Guard (N = 175).7 Approximately 81 percent of

those who reported any military service served during the GWOT, while the remainder served

exclusively during the late 1990s when the U.S. was engaged in military operations in the

Balkans, including the Kosovo War (Operation Allied Force).

           Importantly, the data allow us to distinguish between those who reported active duty

service exclusively in the United States, active duty service outside the United States in non-

combat zones, and active duty service outside the United States in combat zones.8 Among those

who report active-duty service, 36.6 percent (N = 343) report service exclusively in the United

States, 16.4 percent report service overseas in a non-combat zone (N = 153), and 47.0 percent (N

= 439) report deployment in a combat zone. Among those who served in combat, 93.0 percent

reported combat service in the post-9/11 period.

           We are also able to measure self-reports of violent combat events experienced by those

deployed to combat zones, including the number of “times [they] engaged the enemy in a


6
    Service in the Armed Forces was measured using the following Wave IV questionnaire items:

                   Have you ever served in the military (Possible answers: Yes, No)
                   In which components of the military have you served? (Possible answers: Active
                   Duty, Reserves, National Guard, None)
7
  The weighted means for military service in the 2008 Add Health are comparable to weighted means in the 2008
Current Population Survey and the 2008 American Community Survey. For instance, in the 2008 ACS, 5.0 percent
reported active duty service, as compared to 5.87 percent in Add Health. The unweighted means are slightly larger
in the Add Health due to an oversample of racial minorities, who are more likely to serve in the military.
8
  The Wave IV Add Health questionnaire items used to obtain these measures were:

           Was your military service in the US, outside the US, or both?
           What is the total amount of time you (have) served in a combat zone?

The Add Health does not contain information on the country to which the soldier was deployed.

                                                          8
firefight,” whether they “ever kill[ed] or think [they] killed someone,” whether they were

“wounded or injured” during combat deployment, and whether they saw “anyone wounded,

killed, or dead, including ‘coalition or ally,’ ‘enemy,’ or ‘civilian.’” Among those who served in

a combat zone, the average number of enemy firefights was 15.2; 36.2 percent (N = 159) had

killed or believed they had killed someone, 11.9 percent (N = 52) were wounded or injured, and

64.7 percent (N = 284) witnessed the death or wounding of an ally, enemy, or civilian.

       In the empirical analyses below, we examine the relationship between the above

measures of military service and four mental health outcomes measured at Wave IV. The first

measure, Suicide, is an indicator of suicidal ideation created using respondents report of whether

they had “ever seriously thought about committing suicide during the past 12 months.”

Respondents who answered in the affirmative were coded as 1 and those who answered in the

negative were coded as 0.

       Second, we use an abridged version of the Center for Epidemiological Studies-

Depression (CES-D) Scale, originally developed by Radloff (1977) and used widely as a

measure of depressive symptomatology. Respondents were instructed to indicate the frequency

with which they had experienced certain feelings or emotions during the past week, including

being “bothered by things that usually don’t bother you,” being unable to “shake off the blues,

even with help from your family and friends,” having “trouble keeping your mind on what you

were doing,” or feeling “depressed” or “sad.” Possible responses, which included “rarely or

none of the time” (= 0); “some or a little of the time” (= 1); “occasionally or a moderate amount

of the time” (= 2); and “most or all of the time” (= 3) were summed to produce a score of

between 0 and 15. From this score, we defined an individual as Depressed if he or she is ranked

in the top quintile of the distribution of CES-D scale, following a strategy employed by a number



                                                9
of researchers (Tekin, Mocan, and Liang, 2009; Tekin and Markowitz, 2008; Chatterji and

Cuellar, 2006; Hallfors et al., 2004; Goodman and Capitman, 2000). An advantage of

dichotomizing the CES-D score in this manner is that it focuses attention on the right-hand tail of

the CES-D distribution, where medical diagnoses of major depression are made.9

        Our third measure of mental health, Counseling, is generated using the respondent’s

answer to a question about whether he or she had “received psychological or emotional

counseling in the past 12 months.” Those who reported having ever received psychological or

emotional counseling were coded as 1 and those who had not as 0. This measure is valuable to

the extent that receipt of psychological counseling captures the presence of more severe

depressive symptomatology.

        Finally, following much of the PTSD literature (Shen et al., 2009ab), we create an

indicator, PTSD, for whether the respondent had received a medical diagnosis of post-traumatic

stress disorder using responses to the question, “Has a doctor, nurse or other health care provider

ever told you that you have or had post-traumatic stress disorder?” Respondents who answered

in the affirmative were coded as 1 and those who answered in the negative as 0.

        Our final two measures of mental health are useful because they involve doctor treatment

or diagnosis of mental health conditions, which may measure psychological problems that are

not adequately captured by a self-reported suicide measure or abridged CES-D scale. However,

using professional counseling and medical diagnosis measures raises a concern that we may

confound mental health conditions with access to health services or screenings. While we

control for health insurance status in all models, mental health screenings are increasingly

employed among active-duty personnel. For instance, service members are required to complete


9
 Using the cutoff preferred by Sabia and Rees (2008) and Duncan and Rees (2005) as well as a self-reported
medical diagnostic measure produces qualitatively similar results.

                                                       10
a health assessment, which includes an evaluation of mental health, both before and after

deployment (Department of Defense Form 2795). While we do not have a direct measure of

access to screenings, for our primary analysis, our treatment and comparison groups are each

comprised of deployed active duty personnel or, in some cases, combat soldiers. To the extent

that active duty soldiers have comparable access to health care services and screenings, such

comparisons should mitigate concerns that we are picking up a unique “screening effect.” 10

         The means and standard deviations of our dependent variables are presented in Panel A

of Table 1 by various measures of military service experience. A comparison of column (2) with

columns (3)-(8) generally shows that at Wave IV those who served in the military are in poorer

mental health than their civilian counterparts. Moreover, the magnitudes of the differences are

larger for those in more stressful missions, such as combat duty or enemy firefights.

         In Panel B of Table 1, we show the means of mental health at Wave I prior to any future

military service.11 We find that those who serve in combat zones later in life have mental health

outcomes in adolescence that are no worse, and in some cases better, than their counterparts who

remain in civilian life. These findings are consistent with Department of Defense (DOD)

enlistment standards described in DOD Directive 6130.3 and DOD Instruction 6130.4, which

include screening for mental health problems such as depression and anxiety disorders.



IV. Baseline Results

OLS Estimates




10
   As a robustness check, we also created a binary indicator for whether the individual has a check-up in the past 12
months or has utilized health care services. Adding these variables as an additional control did not alter any of the
results presented below.
11
   Diagnosis of PTSD is not measured at Wave I; thus, this outcome is omitted from Table 1B.

                                                         11
         We begin our empirical analyses by estimating an ordinary least squares (OLS) model of

the following form:

                  yi = α + δ1Activei + δ2Non-Active Dutyi+ Xi β + εi                                         (1)

where yi is one of the mental health outcomes for respondent i and Activei is an indicator for

whether the respondent reported active duty military service, Non-Active Dutyi is an indicator for

non-active duty service in the Reserves or National Guard, and the vector Xi includes a set of

individual and family background characteristics including age, race, ethnicity, gender, measured

height, measured weight, years of schooling attained, earnings, physical health, marital status,

religiosity, maternal educational attainment, parental marital status when the respondent was an

adolescent, parental income when the respondent was an adolescent, an abridged version of the

Peabody Picture and Vocabulary Test (PPVT), and health insurance status. The means of each

of these control variables, by military status, appears in Appendix Table 1.

         OLS estimates of δ1 and δ2 from equation (1) are presented in Panel A of Table 2.12 The

omitted category is comprised of civilians who had never served in the military. The estimates

in Panel A show that those who report active duty service have a 2.0 percentage-point higher

probability of suicidal thoughts, a 3.1 percentage-point higher probability of depressive

symptomatology, a 4.8 percentage-point higher probability of psychological or emotional

counseling receipt, and a 7.8 percentage-point higher probability of PTSD than their civilian

counterparts. Those with non-active duty military experience are no more likely to have mental

health problems than those who have never served in military, with the exception that they are

more likely to have been diagnosed with PTSD.


12
 We report standard error estimates that are robust to any form of heteroskedasticity (Angrist and Krueger, 1999),
and also cluster on the school. Estimation of the models via probit yielded qualitatively similar marginal effects.
The estimated coefficients on the variables in Xi are consistent with those found in the relevant literature and are
available from the authors.

                                                         12
         In Panels B to D of Table 2, we present estimates by branch of service. We find the

largest and most consistently significant mental health effects of active duty service for the Army

(Panel B). For the Navy and Air Force, OLS estimates are much smaller in magnitude.

         If, for the moment, we treat the OLS estimate as causal, δ1 can be interpreted as the

mental health effect of randomly drafting a civilian into active duty service. However, given that

active duty service is endogenous, δ1 is likely to be biased. An alternative contrast that may be

more informative is δ1 – δ2, the conditional mean difference in mental health between active duty

soldiers and reservists/national guardsmen. This comparison may assure more similarity on

unobservables by comparing populations that have each volunteered for some form of military

service. Comparing the coefficients on active-duty Army soldiers to national guardsmen and

reservists, we find that those on active duty have a 9.0 (11.6 - 2.6) percentage-point higher

likelihood of counseling and an 8.7 (13.9 - 8.7) percentage-point higher probability of PTSD.13



School and Family Fixed Effects

          One critique of OLS estimates of δ1 (and δ2) is that they may capture unobserved

community-level characteristics associated with both psychological well-being and active duty

service. For instance, youths in economically depressed areas may have worse mental health and

face lower opportunity costs of volunteering for active duty service (Brown, 1985; Morrison and

Myers, 1998). Moreover, respondents from less socially connected schools may be more likely

to join the military and have worse psychological outcomes (Elder et al., 2010). Because of

these concerns, we take advantage of the fact that the Add Health data are school-based, and


13
  In alternate specifications, we experimented with splitting the civilian population by those who worked in
protective services occupations, such as police and firefighting, with those who did not work in such professions.
The regression-adjusted difference in the mental health outcomes of active duty soldiers versus civilians employed
in protective services is qualitatively similar to that obtained when comparing active-duty personnel to all civilians.

                                                          13
augment equation (1) with school fixed effects (measured at Wave I when the respondent was in

junior high or high school) to control for school or community heterogeneity:

        yis = α + δ1Activeis + δ2Non-Active Dutyis + Xis β +   s   + εis,                     (2)

where   s   is a vector of school fixed effects. Panel A of Table 3 presents estimates of δ1 and δ2

from equation (2). Our school fixed effects estimates are remarkably similar to OLS estimates

obtained without fixed effects in Panel A of Table 2, suggesting that while youths’

neighborhoods and schools may be related to the decision to later join the military, these effects

appear to be orthogonal to the relationship between military service and mental health.

        Another critique of OLS estimates is that they may be confounded by family background

characteristics. For instance, there is evidence that individuals with fewer resources and larger

family sizes are more likely to join the military (Kilburn and Asch, 2003; Kilburn and Klerman,

1999), and as noted above, socioeconomic status has also been found to be related to mental

health (Miech et al., 1999). Moreover, the enlistment of a parent is associated with a greater

expectation and probability of service among offspring (Faris, 1984; Kilburn and Klerman, 1999;

Segal and Segal, 2004), suggesting that there may be common familial values associated with

military service and psychological well-being. To address the role of family-level

unobservables, we restrict the sample to full biological siblings (or twins) and add family fixed

effects to equation (1):

        yij = α + δ1Activei + δ2Non-Active Dutyi + Xij β + ζj + εij,                          (3)

where j denotes the respondent’s family, ζj is a vector of family fixed effects, and Xij is a vector

of individual characteristics that may vary between siblings, including physical health, height,

weight, gender, marital status, age, income, education, health insurance status, and PPVT score.




                                                   14
       In Panels B and C of Table 3, we present estimates of equation (3) for full biological

siblings and twins, respectively. Identification comes from 115 discordant pairs of siblings and

42 discordant pairs of twins. Our findings show that controlling for fixed family level

unobservables does not diminish the estimated effect of military service on mental health despite

the reduced sample size and identifying variation. Across each of our mental health outcomes,

we find that active duty military service is positively related to depression, suicide, psychological

counseling, and PTSD. We find that respondents who serve on active duty have a greater risk

for PTSD than their siblings serving in the military in non-active duty roles.



V. Exploiting Variation in Deployment Assignment

       Comparing active duty military personnel with their civilian schoolmates, siblings, and

non-active duty military counterparts is informative in the sense that we can rule out some

important forms of heterogeneity bias. However, these estimates are ultimately unsatisfying in

identifying causal effects because of unobserved individual heterogeneity that may be associated

with selection into active duty service. While the absence of a draft precludes its use a source of

exogenous variation in military service, we instead focus on active duty soldiers and explore

whether those who are assigned to combat duties experience worse mental health outcomes than

their active duty counterparts assigned to non-combat duties. This approach will identify the

effect of exogenous assignments to combat relative to non-combat duties assignments. We begin

by estimating:

       yis = α + δ1Combatis + δ2Non-Active Dutyis+ δ3Active Non-Combat OUSis + δ4Active

                 Non-Combat USis + Xis β +   s   + εis,                                      (4)




                                                   15
where Combat indicates active-duty service outside the U.S. in a combat zone, Active Non-

Combat OUSis indicates active-duty service outside the U.S. in a non-combat zone, and Active

Non-Combat USis indicates active-duty service exclusively in the United States.

         The central focus of our attention in equation (4) is on the contrast δ1 – δ3. As noted

                                                                   ^     ^
above, if deployment assignments are exogenous, then                         can be interpreted as the causal

effect of combat service net of deployment (Lyle 2006; Engel et al., 2010). The descriptive

evidence in our data is consistent with this hypothesis. In column (1) of Appendix Table 2, we

restrict our sample to those for whom Combat OUSis = 1 or Active Non-Combat OUSis = 1, and

regress an indicator of whether the soldier served in combat on our set of observables. Of our 33

main right-hand side variables, which include a wide set of family and individual background

characteristics, 32 had associations that were statistically indistinguishable from zero, consistent

with the hypothesis that deployment assignment was exogenous to mental health.14

         In Table 4, we present estimates of equation (4). We find that combat zone experience is

associated with an 8.6 (9.6 – 1.0) percentage-point higher probability of psychological

counseling and 14.2 (15.0 – 0.8) percentage-point higher probability of PTSD relative to active

duty service outside the United States in non-combat zones. Rates of suicidal thoughts and

depression, however, are statistically equivalent between these groups.

         While our theoretical justification for the exogeneity of deployment assignments and

presentation of evidence on the similarities (on observables) between combat and non-combat

soldiers are informative, the richness of our data provides a further way to guard against the

possibility that deployment assignments are correlated with unmeasured traits of soldiers that are

related to mental health. Specifically, we take advantage of the longitudinal nature of the Add

14
 Only the “other” race category was a significant predictor of combat; we control for this race category in all
models.

                                                         16
Health data to control for mental health of the respondent at Wave I when the respondents were

attending school in grades 7 through 12:

         yis = α + πyist-3 + δ1Combatis + δ2Non-Active Dutyis + δ3Active Non-Combat OUSis +

         δ4Active Non-Combat USis + Xis β +              s   + εis,                           (5)

where t corresponds to Wave IV and t-3 corresponds to Wave I.15

         The findings from equation (5) in Panel A of Table 5 show that active duty service in a

combat zone is associated with an 8.1 percentage-point increase in the probability of emotional

counseling and a 14.5 percentage-point increase in probability of PTSD relative to the change in

these outcomes by active duty counterparts serving in non-combat outside the United States.

These estimates are remarkably similar to those shown in the Panel A of Table 4, which do not

control for lagged mental health, providing further evidence in support of our hypothesis that

deployment assignment is exogenous to traits of soldiers that are fixed over time.16

         An alternative way to remove time-invariant unobserved heterogeneity is through an

individual fixed effects model. In Panel B of Table 5, we show fixed effects models, estimated

via first differences, for the three mental health outcomes we observe in both Waves I and IV

(suicidal thoughts, depressive symptomatology, and emotional counseling), controlling for time-

varying observables. These estimates, identified by those who volunteer for service between

Waves I and IV, are remarkably similar to those presented in earlier tables.

         In a further effort to ensure that our comparisons of combat soldiers with non-combat

soldiers serving outside the United States captures similar types of soldiers, we restrict the


15
   While 84.4 percent of respondents were younger than age 18 at Wave I, 30 respondents (0.2 percent) reported
military service at Wave I. To ensure that yist-3 captures pre-military mental health, we drop these 30 individuals
from our sample. However, the results are qualitatively similar with their inclusion. Because we do not have a
measure of PTSD at Wave I, our estimates from equation (5) include receipt of emotional or psychological
counseling as our pre-deployment dependent variable.
16
   As another descriptive test of the plausible exogeneity of deployment assignment, Appendix Table 3 shows the
strong stability of the estimated contrast δ1 – δ3 to a wide set of controls for individual and family characteristics.

                                                             17
sample to those who had served in the military, and add controls for military rank, timing of

service in the military, branch of service, and occupation (four-digit Standard Occupational

Classification code) to the vector Xi . We also add a control for whether the respondent had a

medical checkup in the last year to control for propensity to use medical services, and continue

to control for pre-deployment mental health. These characteristics, along with those previously

included in Xi capture soldiers’ characteristics that are available to U.S. military personnel at

Human Resources Command when making deployment decisions (Engel et al., 2010).17 Panel A

of Table 6 presents our findings using these additional controls; the omitted category is

comprised of military personnel on non-active duty. The results in Panel A from our preferred

specification show that those serving in combat are 7.3 percentage-points more likely to obtain

psychological or emotional counseling and 12.1 percentage-points more likely to have been

diagnosed with PTSD than their active duty counterparts in non-combat zones outside the U.S.18

         Finally, in Panels B and C of Table 6, we test the robustness of our estimates of δ1 – δ3 in

Panel A to more similar comparison groups. We restrict our sample to those who served in the

Army (Panel B) and to those who served in the Army in the post-9/11 period (Panel C). Our

findings in each of these panels continue to show that assignment to combat is associated with

substantial adverse mental health effects. Individual fixed effects estimates on the Army sample

(Panel D) and the Army post-9/11 sample (Panel E) show a similar pattern of results. 19



17
   Military-specific occupations were measured with respect to the respondent’s job last year at Wave IV. The
categories include Military Officer Special and Tactical Operations Leaders/Managers, Infantry Officers, Special
Forces, Armored Assault Vehicle Officers, Artillery and Missile Officers, Air Crew Officers, Command and Control
Center Officers, and First-Line Enlisted Military Supervisors/Managers, and Radar and Sonar Technicians.
Occupations in engineering and medicine are measured in similar detail.
18
   When we add pre-deployment CES-D and suicidal thoughts to the PTSD equation, the marginal effect remains
stable. Moreover, in unreported results, we find no difference in the mental health effects of combat by gender.
19
   It may also be that the mental health effects of deployment differ by marital status. In results that are available
upon request, we descriptively explore this question. We find that the adverse effects of combat deployment are
slightly larger in magnitude for married as opposed to unmarried soldiers.

                                                         18
The Effect of Combat Events on Mental Health

        The existing literature on the mental health effects of combat service in the GWOT have

focused on the effects of deployment length (Buckman et al., 2010; Shen et al., 2009a,b; Rona et

al., 2007). In Table 7, we replicate their findings using the Add Health. We restrict the sample

to those with combat zone experience20 and control for the augmented vector Xi, which includes

school fixed effects, military rank, branch of service, timing of service, occupation, and pre-

deployment mental health. Consistent with Shen et al. (2009b) and Adler et al. (2005), our

results show that those serving more than 12 months in a combat zone experience an 12.9

percentage-point higher probability of receiving a PTSD diagnosis than those with combat zone

service of 1 to 6 months, and a 14.3 percentage-point higher probability of PTSD than those who

serve for one year or less.

        However, an important question remains: Does deployment length adversely affect

soldiers’ mental health or is it psycho-traumatic violent combat events often associated with

longer deployments? To explore this question, we exploit a unique aspect of the Add Health data,

which include information on enemy firefighting and death-related experiences among those

who had deployed to a combat zone. Such experiences vary by combat deployment assignment,

which we argue above is exogenously assigned. In column (2) of Appendix Table 2, we find that

assignment to a frequent enemy fire combat zone is unrelated to observable family or individual

characteristics of soldiers.21 In Panel A of Table 8, we present estimates of the mental health

effects of experiencing enemy firefight. We find that those who experience enemy firefight have

a 10.4 percentage-point higher probability of suicidal ideation, an 11.2 percentage-point higher

probability of receiving psychological counseling, and an 18.3 percentage-point higher

20
  This approach has the advantage of ensuring common health services/screenings among those assigned to combat.
21
  Only being male is marginally positively related to the probability of enemy firefight. When we replicate Panel A
of Table 8 on a sample of males, our results are qualitatively and quantitatively similar.

                                                        19
probability of PTSD. In Panel B, we examine whether those who engage more frequently in

enemy firefight suffer adverse psychological consequences. Our chosen specification divides the

frequency distribution of those who experienced enemy firefights in thirds. We find that those

who reported 20 or more engagements with enemy firefight had the largest adverse

psychological effects.

        In Panel C of Table 8, we replicate the analysis in Panel A, but add controls for

deployment length. The results show that those who engage in more frequent enemy firefights

are at a greater risk for suicidal thoughts, depression, counseling, and PTSD than their

counterparts who face fewer combat firefights, although the coefficient on counseling is not

precisely estimated. Given that deployment assignments of combat units depend on military

need and readiness of the unit rather than characteristics of individual soldiers, the frequency of

enemy firefight can be thought of as exogenous to mental health and our estimates interpreted

causally. Interestingly, we find that the effect of deployment length is substantially diminished

after conditioning on number of enemy firefights and none of the deployment length effects are

statistically significant at conventional levels. This suggests that frequent enemy firefight drives

the adverse psychological consequences previously attributed to combat deployment length.22

        In Table 9, we examine the effects of deaths and injuries on mental health, conditional on

deployment length. In Panel A, we find that those serving in combat zones who had killed (or

believed they had killed) someone experienced an 12.0 percentage-point increase in the

probability of suicidal thoughts, a 13.0 percentage-point increase in the probability of depressive

symptomatology, and a 22.2 percentage-point higher probability of PTSD than those who did not

believe they had killed another. In Panel B, we find that being wounded or injured in combat is

22
  Cross-tabulations show that there is some independent variation between frequency of enemy firefighting and
mental health. For example, among those who deployed for more than 12 months 62.6 percent experienced fewer
than five firefights. Among those who deployed less than 12 months, 16.7 percent reported five or more firefights.

                                                        20
associated with a 18.4 percentage-point increase in the probability of depressive

symptomatology, a 27.5 percentage-point increase in the probability of psychological

counseling, and a 23.9 percentage-point higher probability of PTSD.

       In Panel C, we explore whether observing someone wounded, killed, or dead affects

soldiers’ mental health. Because respondents were permitted to choose multiple categories

among “coalition or ally,” “enemy,” “civilian,” or “none”, in Panel C, we enter these non-

mutually exclusive categories on the right hand-side of the estimating equation. The results

suggest that seeing a coalition/ally member or civilian killed, dead, or wounded has adverse

psychological consequences for those serving in combat zones. However, we find that observing

the killing, death, or wounding of the enemy has no independent adverse psychological

consequences. Despite limited power in these models, each of the coefficients for those who saw

wounded enemy are very close to zero in magnitude. This finding is consistent with the

hypothesis that strong feelings of guilt may accompany the death of non-combatants or friends.

       Finally, in Table 10, we replicate the estimates in Table 9, conditional on number of

enemy firefights so as to compare those who have served in combat zones for similar lengths of

time and who have experienced a similar number of enemy firefights. The pattern of results in

Panel A suggests that the estimated mental health effect of killing someone in battle can largely

be explained by number of enemy firefights. However, even after conditioning on number of

firefights, we continue to find that being injured or wounded in combat and observing the death

or wounding of a civilian non-combatant are significantly positively associated with PTSD.

Finally, we find no independent effect of combat deployment length after controlling for

frequency of enemy firefight.




                                                21
VI. Conclusion

       The U.S. military has engaged in two wars in Iraq and Afghanistan in the last ten

years, deploying 2.16 million U.S. troops since October 2001 (Department of Defense,

2010a). As of March 10, 2010, 4,658 U.S. soldiers had been killed in action, 42,593 had

been wounded in action, and many more returning home with “invisible wounds,” such

as mental health injuries (Department of Defense, 2010b). In this study, we provide the

first set of credible estimates of the causal effect of combat service on young adults’

psychological well-being. We pay attention to the role of unmeasured heterogeneity by

controlling for mental health prior to deployment and exploiting plausibly exogenous

variation in deployment assignment and exposure to violent combat events.

       The results of this study lend support to the hypothesis that combat service is

associated with mental health problems and that the mechanism is driven by potentially

psycho-traumatic incidences experienced during combat zone missions. In particular, we

find that frequent enemy firefight, wounding or injury, and observing the death or

wounding of a coalition/ally or non-combatant is associated with a substantial increase in

the risk of suicidal thoughts and PTSD.

       The U.S. Army recently announced plans to reduce combat zone deployments to

nine months and to increase the time between deployments to three years by the year

2014 (Tice, 2010). While our findings confirm that deployment length is associated with

declines in mental health, our results also show that this effect is driven by frequent

enemy firefight rather than deployment length alone. Thus, military policymakers

crafting optimal deployment schedules that account for mental health problems of

soldiers should focus greater attention on violent combat events rather than simply



                                                 22
soldiers’ time spent in a combat zone. Moreover, our findings suggest that reducing

soldiers’ exposure to civilian casualties in battle may also avert substantial adverse

mental health consequences for US soldiers.

        To put the magnitudes of our estimates into perspective, we consider a crude

translation of the marginal effects measured in this paper into dollar terms, using

estimates of the costs of PTSD from the literature. Tanielian and Joycox (2008) estimate

the two-year, per-person, health care cost of PTSD to be between $5,904 and $10,298.

Our preferred marginal effect of combat-induced PTSD from Panel A of Table 6 is 0.121.

Then, an estimate of the two-year total costs of PTSD can be calculated by multiplying

our marginal effect by the 2.16 million U.S. troops deployed in combat zones in Iraq and

Afghanistan since 2001, and by the per-person cost estimate provided by Tanielian and

Jaycox (2008) to obtain a total health care cost estimate of $1.54 to $2.69 billion for

combat-induced PTSD. The largest share of these health care costs appears to be

generated by those in combat who experience greatest enemy firefight, are wounded, or

observe the death of non-combatants or coalition/ally soldiers.

        It is important to keep in mind that our cost estimates are lower-bound estimates

of health care costs because they represent costs only for younger soldiers measured in

the short-run. Moreover, our costs do not capture the effects of combat-induced adverse

mental health on future labor market, marriage, and other socioeconomic outcomes23

Future research that follows soldiers as they transition back into civilian life will be able

to provide further information on the longer-run effects of combat service in the GWOT.


23
  In the civilian context, depression and psychological impairment have been found to be associated with crime,
lower socioeconomic status, diminished educational attainment, and a grascheater propensity for marital problems
(Ettner et al., 1997; Kessler et al., 1998, 2000; Fletcher, 2010; Fazel and Grann, 2006; Tekin and Markowitz, 2008;
Fletcher, 2010).

                                                        23
References

Adler AB, Huffman AH, Bliese PD, Castro CA. 2005. “The impact of deployment length and
experience on the well-being of male and female soldiers. J Occup Health Psychol.
Apr;10(2):121-37.

Angrist, Joshua D. & Krueger, Alan B., 1999. "Empirical strategies in labor economics,"
Handbook of Labor Economics, in: O. Ashenfelter & D. Card (ed.), Handbook of Labor
Economics, edition 1, volume 3, chapter 23, pages 1277-1366 Elsevier.

Angrist, Josh and John Johnson. 2000. “Effects of Work-Related Absences on Families:
Evidence from the Gulf War,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 54(1): 41-58.

Angrist, Joshua D., Stacey H. Chen, and Brigham R. Frandsen. 2010. “Did Vietnam
Veterans get Sicker in the 1990s? The Complicated Effects of Military Service on Self-
Reported Health.” Forthcoming in the Journal of Public Economics.

Autor, David, Mark G. Duggan, and David S. Lyle. 2011. “Battle Scars? The Puzzling
Decline in Employment and Rise in Disability Receipt among Vietnam Era Veterans,”
Forthcoming in the American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings.

Bachman, Jerald G., David R. Segal, Peter Freedman-Doan, and Patrick M. O’Malley. 2000.
‘‘Who Chooses Military Service? Correlates of Propensity and Enlistment in the U.S. Armed
Forces.’’ Military Psychology 12(1):1–30.

Bedard, Kelley and Olivier Deschenes. 2004. “The Long-Term Impact of Military Service on
Health: Evidence from World War II and the Korean War,” American Economic Review 96(1):
176-194.

Buckman, Joshua E J, , Josefin Sundin, Talya Greene,, Nicola T Fear,Christopher Dandeker, Neil
Greenberg, Simon Wessely. 2010. “The impact of deployment length on the health and well-
being of military personnel: a systematic review of the literature.” Occup Environ Med,
September.

Brown, Charles. 1985. “Military Enlistments: What Can We Learn from Geographic Variation?”
American Economic Review 75(1): 228-234.

Bryant, R.A. and R.M. Guthrie. 2005. “Maladaptive Appraisals as a Risk Factor for Post-
Traumatic Stress: A Study of Trainee Firefighters,” Psychological Science 16: 749-752.

Bryant, R.A. and R.M. Guthrie. 2007. “Maladaptive Self-Appraisals Before Trauma Exposure
Predict Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder,” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 75:
812-815.

Card, J. 1987. “Epidemiology of PTSD in a National Cohort of Vietnam Veterans,” Journal of
Clinical Psychology 43: 6–17.

                                              24
Chatterji, Pinka, and Alison Cuellar. 2006. “How Do Youth With Mental Disorders Fare in the
Juvenile Justice System.” NBER Working Paper #12437, August.

Department of Defense. 2010a. “Legal Residence/Home Address for Service Members Ever
Deployed as of July 30, 2010,” CTS Deployment File, Available at:
http://dva.state.wi.us/WebForms/Data_Factsheets/ResDistribution_Jul10.pdf

Department of Defense. 2010b. Daily Updated Casualty and Wounding Data. Available at:
http://www.defense.gov/news/casualty.pdf.

Department of Defense Directive 6130.3. “Physical Standards for Appointment, Enlistment and
Induction,” Available at: http://biotech.law.lsu.edu/blaw/dodd/corres/html/61303.htm

Department of Defense Directive 6130.4 “Criteria and Procedure Requirements for Physical
Standards for Appointment, Enlistment, or Induction in the Armed Forces,” Available at:
http://biotech.law.lsu.edu/blaw/dodd/corres/html/61304.htm

Department of Defense Form 2795. “Pre-Deployment Health Assessment, ” Available at:
http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives/infomgt/forms/eforms/dd2795.pdf

Dobkin, Carlos and Reza Shabani. 2009. “The Health Effects of Military Service: Evidence from
the Vietnam Draft,” Economic Inquiry 47(1): 69-80.

Duncan, Brian and Daniel I. Rees. 2005. “The Effect of Smoking on Depressive
Symptomatology: A Reexamination of the Data from the National Longitudinal Study of
Adolescent Health,” American Journal of Epidemiology 162(5): 461-470.

Edwards, Ryan D. and Alair MacLean. 2010. “Military Service, Combat Exposure, and Health in
Retirement,” Working Paper, Queens College.

Elder, Glen Jr., Lin Wang, Naomi Spence, Daniel E. Adkins, and Tyson H. Brown. 2010.
“Pathways to the All-Volunteer Military,” Social Science Quarterly vol. 91, issue 2.

Engel, Rozlyn C., Luke B. Gallagher, and David S. Lyle. 2010. “Military Deployments and
Children’s Academic Achievement: Evidence from Department of Defense Education Activity
Schools,” Economics of Education Review 29(1): 73-82.

Erbes, C.J. Westermeyer, B. Engdahl, and E. Johnsen. 2007. “Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
and Service Utilization in a Sample of Service Members from Iraq and Afghanistan,” Military
Medicine 172(4): 359-363.

Ettner, Susan L, Richard G. Frank and Ronald C. Kessler. 1997. “The Impact of Psychiatric
Disorders on Labor Market Outcomes,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 51(1).




                                              25
Faris, J.H. 1984. ‘‘Economic and Noneconomic Factors of Personnel Recruitment and Retention
in the AVF,’’ Armed Forces & Society 10(2):251–75.

Fazel S, Grann M. 2006. “The population impact of severe mental illness on violent crime,” Am
J Psychiatry, 163(8):1397-1403.

Fletcher, Jason. 2010. “Adolescent Depression and Educational Attainment: Evidence from
Sibling Fixed Effects,” Health Economics 19(7) 855-871.

Goodman, Elizabeth, and John Capitman. 2000. “Depressive Symptoms and Cigarette
Smoking Among Teens.” Pediatrics 106(4): 748-755.

Hallfors, Denise D., Martha W. Waller, Carol A. Ford, Carolyn T. Halpern, Paul Brodish,
and Bonita Iritani. 2004. “Adolescent Depression and Suicide Risk: Association with Sex
and Drug Behavior.” American Journal of Preventative Medicine 27(3): 224-231.

Harris, Kathleen Mullan, Carolyn Tucker Halpern, Pamela Entzel, Joyce Tabor, Peter S.
Bearman, and J. Richard Udry. 2008. The National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health:
Research Design.

Hearst, N., T.B. Newman, and S.B. Hulley. 1986. “Delayed Effects of the Military Draft on
Mortality: A Randomized Natural Experiment,” New England Journal of Medicine 314(10): 620-
624.

Heinrichs, M., D. Wagner, W. Schoch, L.M. Soravia, D.H. Hellhammer, and U. Ehlert.
2005. “Predicting Post-Traumatic Stress Symptoms from Pre-Traumatic Risk Factors: A
Two-Year Prospective Follow-Up Study in Firefighters,” American Journal of Psychiatry
162: 2276-2286.

Hoge, C., J.L. Auchterlonie et al. 2006. “Mental Health Problems, Use of Mental Health
Services, and Attrition from Military Service After Returning from Deployment to Iraq or
Afghanistan,” Journal of the American Medical Association 295(9): 1023-1032.

Hoge, C., C.A. Castro et al. 2004. “Combat Duty in Iraq and Afghanistan: Mental Health
Problems and Barriers to Care,” New England Journal of Medicine 317(26): 1630-1634.

Iowa Persian Gulf Study Group. 1997. “Self-Reported Illness and Health Status Among
Gulf War Veterans. A Population-Based Study. The Iowa Persian Gulf Study Group,”
Journal of the American Medical Association 277(3): 238-245.

Jordan, B. K., W. E. Schlenger, R. Hough, R. A. Kulka, D. Weiss, J. A. Fairbank, and C. R.
Marmar. 1991. “Lifetime and Current Prevalence of Specific Psychiatric Disorders among
Vietnam Veterans and Control,” Archives of General Psychiatry 48: 916–26.

Kang, H. K., and T. A. Bullman. 2001. “Mortality among US Veterans of the Persian Gulf War:
7-Year Follow-up.” American Journal of Epidemiology 154(5): 399–405.

                                              26
Kessler RC, Walters EE, Forthofer MS. 1998. “The social consequences of psychiatric disorders,
III: probability of marital stability. Am J Psychiatry 155(8):1092-6.

Kessler RC. 2000. “Posttraumatic stress disorder: the burden to the individual and to society. J
Clin Psychiatry 61(5):4–12.

Kilburn, M. Rebecca, and Jacob Alex Klerman. 1999. “Enlistment Decisions in the 1990s:
Evidence from Individual-Level Data,” Santa Monica, CA: RAND.

Kilburn, M. Rebecca, and Beth J. Asch. 2003. “Recruiting Youth in the College Market:
Current Practices and Future Policy Options,” Rand Corporation, National Defense
Research Institute (U.S.).

Kleykamp, Meredith A. 2006. “College, Jobs, or the Military? Enlistment During a Time
of War.” Social Science Quarterly 87(2).

Liberman, A.M., S.R. Best, T.J. Meltzer, J.A. Fagan, D.S. Weiss, and C.R. Marmar.
2002. “Routine Occupational Distress in Police,” Policing: An International Journal of
Police Strategies and Management 25: 421-441.

Lyle, David S. 2006. “Using Military Deployments and Job Assignments to Estimate the
Effect of Parental Absences and Household Relocations on Children’s Academic
Achievement,” Journal of Labor Economics 24(2): 319-350.

McFall, M. E., P. W. Mackay, and D. M. Donovan. 1992. ‘‘Combat-Related Posttraumatic Stress
Disorder and Severity of Substance Abuse in Vietnam Veterans,’’ Journal of Studies on Alcohol
53: 357–63.

McKinney, W. P., D. D. Mclntire, T. J. Carmody, and A. Joseph. 1997. “Comparing the
Smoking Behavior of Veterans and Non-Veterans,” Public Health Report 112: 212–17.

Miech, Richard A., Avshalom Caspi, Terrie E. Moffitt, Bradley R. Entner, and Phil A.
Silva. 1999. “Low Socioeconomic Status and Mental Disorders: A Longitudinal Study of
Selection and Causation during Young Adulthood,” The American Journal of Sociology
104(4): 1096-1131.

Morrison, Donna R. and David E. Myers. 1998. “Factors Influencing the Enlistment
Aspirations and Decisions of Hispanic, Black, and White Male Youth,” U.S. Army
Research Institute for the behavioral and Social Sciences.

National Priorities Project. 2008. Military Recruitment 2008: A Look at Age, Race, Income, and
Education of New Soldiers. Available at http://nationalpriorities.org/en/publications/2009/army-
recruitment-in-fy-2008-a-look-at-age-race-inc/




                                                27
Obama, Barack. 2010. “Weekly Address: President Obama Announces Changes to Help
Veterans with PTSD Receive the Benefits They Need”. Office of the Press Secretary.
Retrieved January 14, 2010 from http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/weekly-
address-president-obama-announces-changes-help-veterans-with-ptsd-receive-be

Price, R. K., N. K. Risk, A. H. Haden, C. E. Lewis, and E. L. Spitznagel. 2004. “Post-Traumatic
Stress Disorder, Drug Dependence, and Suicidality among Male Vietnam Veterans with a
History of Heavy Drug Use,” Drug and Alcohol Dependence 76S: 31–43.

Radloff, Lenore S. 1977. “The CES-D Scale: A Self-Report Depression Scale for
Research in the General Population.” Applied Psychological Measurement 1: 385-401

Rohlfs, Christopher. 2010. “Does Combat Exposure Make You a More Violent or
Criminal Person? Evidence from the Vietnam Draft.” Journal of Human Resources 45(2):
271-300.

Rona, Roberto J., Lisa Hull, Mark Earnshaw, Simon Wessely. 2007. “Mental Health
Consequences of Overstretch in the UK Armed Forces: First Phase of a Cohort Study,”
British Medical Journal 335(7620): 603-610.

Rosenheck, R.A. and A.F. Fontana. 2007. “Recent Trends in VA Treatment of Post-
Traumatic Stress Disorder and Other Mental Disorders,” Health Affairs 26(6): 1720-
1727.

Sabia, Joseph J. and Daniel I. Rees. 2008. “The Effect of Adolescent Virginity Status on
Psychological Well-Being,” Journal of Health Economics 27(5): 1368-1381.

Seal, K.H., D. Bertenthal, S. Sen, and C. Marmar. 2007. “Bringing the War Back Home:
Mental Health Disorders Among 103,788 US Veterans Returning from Iraq and
Afghanistan Seen at Department of Veterans Affairs Facilities,” Archives of Internal
Medicine 167(5): 476-482.

Segal, David R., and Mady Weschler Segal. 2004. “America’s Military Population.” Population
Bulletin, vol. 59, no. 4, December.

Segal, David R, Thomas J. Burns, Michael P. Silver, William W. Falk, and Bam Dev Sharda.
1998. “The All-Volunteer Force in the 1970s,” Social Science Quarterly 79: 390-411.

Shen, Yu-Chu, Jeremy Arkes, MAJ John Pilgrim. 2009a. “The Effects of Deployment
Intensity on Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder: 2002-2006.” Military Medicine 174(3): 217-
223.

Shen, Yu-Chu, Jeremy Arkes, Boon Wah Kwan, Lai Yee Tan, and Thomas V. Williams.
2009b. “The Effect of OEF/OIF Deployment Intensity on the Rate of Post-Traumatic
Stress Disorder Among Active Duty Population,” NBER Working Paper 15203,
Cambridge, MA.

                                               28
Tanielian T. and L.H. Jaycox. 2008. “Invisible Wounds of War: Psychological and Cognitive
Injuries, Their Consequences, and Services to Assist Recovery,” Rand Corporation.

Tekin, Erdal, and Sara Markowitz. 2008. ““The Effects of Suicidal Behavior on Productive
Activities of Young Adults,” Southern Economic Journal, 75(2), 300-331, October.

Tekin, Erdal, Naci H. Mocan, and Lan Liang. 2009 “Do Adolescents with Emotional or
Behavioral Problems Respond to Tobacco Control Policies?” Southern Economic Journal, vol.
76(1) pages 67-85, July.

Tice, Jim. 2010. “Army considers shorter deployments.” USA Today.

Thompson, Mark. 2010. “Invisible Wounds: Mental Health and the Military.” Time.

Wang, Zhen, Sabra S. Inslicht, Thomas J. Metzler, Clare Henn-Haase, Shannon E. McCaslin,
Huiqi Tong, Thomas C. Neylan, and Charles R. Marmar. 2010. “A Prospective Study of
Predictors of Depression in Police,” Psychiatry Research 175: 211-216.




                                             29
Table 1: Descriptive Statistics of Mental Health Outcomes by Military Service
Variable                                   Full       Civilian     Any        Non-Active       Active Duty     Active Duty       Active Duty      Combat with
                                          Sample                  Military      Duty            Inside US      Outside US        in Combat         ≥ 1 Enemy
                                                                  Service      Service         (no combat)     Non-combat           Zone           Firefights
Panel A: Wave IV

    Suicide                                 0.067       0.066       0.075         0.069           0.085           0.065             0.073            0.105**
                                           (0.250)     (0.249)     (0.264)       (0.254)         (0.279)         (0.248)           (0.260)           (0.307)

    Depression                              0.191       0.193       0.173         0.154           0.190           0.163             0.171             0.204
                                           (0.393)     (0.395)     (0.378)       (0.362)         (0.393)         (0.371)           (0.377)           (0.404)

    Counseling                              0.098       0.096     0.124***        0.114           0.097           0.085            0.162***          0.205***
                                           (0.297)     (0.294)    (0.329)        (0.319)         (0.296)         (0.280)           (0.369)           (0.405)

    Post Traumatic Stress Disorder          0.029       0.024     0.087***       0.057***         0.038           0.020            0.160***          0.242***
                                           (0.167)     (0.154)    (0.281)        (0.233)         (0.191)         (0.139)           (0.367)           (0.430)

Panel B: Wave I

    Suicide                                 0.138       0.139       0.125         0.122           0.159           0.094             0.110*            0.109
                                           (0.345)     (0.346)     (0.331)       (0.328)         (0.366)         (0.293)           (0.314)           (0.312)

    Depression                              0.208       0.211     0.158***        0.165           0.169*         0.142**           0.152***          0.130***
                                           (0.406)     (0.408)    (0.365)        (0.372)         (0.375)         (0.350)           (0.359)           (0.337)

    Counseling                              0.123       0.124       0.111         0.140           0.133           0.074*            0.096*            0.108
                                           (0.329)     (0.330)     (0.314)       (0.348)         (0.340)         (0.262)           (0.294)           (0.311)

Observations                               15699       14589        1110           175             343             153               439                 191
Note: Standard deviations are in parentheses. Unweighted means are generated using Waves I and IV of the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels of the difference between the mean in the corresponding sample and the civilian
sample.




                                                                              30
Table 2: OLS Estimates of the Relationship between Military Service and Mental Health, by
Branch
                                                            Suicide       Depression      Counseling          PTSD
Panel A: All

Active Duty Military Service                                0.020**         0.031**        0.048***         0.078***
                                                            (0.010)         (0.014)         (0.011)          (0.008)
Non-Active Duty Military Service                             0.012           0.003           0.031          0.040**
                                                            (0.020)         (0.029)         (0.023)          (0.018)

δactive duty - δno active duty = 0? [p-value on F-test]   0.008 [0.72]    0.028 [0.41]   0.017 [0.51]     0.038* [0.05]

Observations                                                 15,593         15,689          15,695           15,696

Panel B: Army

Active Duty Military Service                               0.043***         0.055**        0.116***         0.139***
                                                            (0.016)         (0.024)         (0.019)          (0.018)
Non-Active Duty Military Service                             0.020           0.006           0.026           0.052**
                                                            (0.025)         (0.035)         (0.026)          (0.022)

δactive duty - δno active duty = 0? [p-value on F-test]   0.023 [0.45]    0.049 [0.30]   0.090** [0.01]   0.087*** [0.00]

Observations                                                 14,992         15,087          15,093           15,094

Panel C: Navy

Active Duty Military Service                                -0.007           -0.029         -0.012            0.024*
                                                            (0.013)         (0.020)         (0.017)           (0.013)
Non-Active Duty Military Service                             0.037           -0.050          0.010          -0.023***
                                                            (0.099)         (0.126)         (0.086)           (0.008)

δactive duty - δno active duty = 0? [p-value on F-test]   -0.044 [0.66]   0.039 [0.88]   -0.022 [0.80]    0.047*** [0.03]

Observations                                                 14,734         14,828          14,836           14,836

Panel D: Air Force

Active Duty Military Service                                  0.006          0.048          -0.011           0.034**
                                                            (0.020)         (0.030)         (0.021)           (0.015)
No n-Active Duty Military Service                            -0.003          0.004           0.183          -0.017***
                                                            (0.050)         (0.078)         (0.111)           (0.005)

δactive duty - δno active duty = 0? [p-value on F-test]   0.009 [0.85]    0.044 [0.61]   -0.194* [0.08]   0.051*** [0.00]

Observations                                                 14,659         14,752          14,760           14,760
  Robust standard errors corrected for clustering on the school are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical
  significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. All models use the full set of controls shown in Appendix
  Table 1. Models also include missing dummy categories for each of the control variables.




                                                                   31
Table 3: School and Family Fixed Effects Estimates of the Relationship between Military
Service and Mental Health

                                                            Suicide       Depression     Counseling            PTSD
Panel A: School Fixed Effects

Active Duty Military Service                                0.022**         0.029**       0.053***           0.079***
                                                            (0.010)         (0.014)        (0.011)            (0.009)
Non-Active Duty Military Service                             0.011           0.002          0.034             0.042**
                                                            (0.021)         (0.029)        (0.022)            (0.018)

δactive duty - δno active duty = 0? [p-value on F-test]   0.011 [0.67]    0.027 [0.43]   0.019 [0.48]      0.037* [0.06]

Observations                                                 15,593         15,689          15,695             15,696

Panel B: Family Fixed Effects on Siblings Sample


Active Duty Military Service                                 0.038           0.076          0.058            0.106***
                                                            (0.035)         (0.049)        (0.042)            (0.031)
Non-Active Duty Military Service                             0.052           0.013          0.101             -0.088
                                                            (0.083)         (0.080)        (0.069)            (0.058)

δactive duty - δno active duty = 0? [p-value on F-test]   -0.014 [0.87]   0.063 [0.47]   -0.043 [0.57]    0.194*** [0.00]

Observations                                                 2,649           2,657          2,658              2,658

Panel C: Family Fixed Effects on Twins Sample

Active Duty Military Service                                0.125*          0.138**        0.159**              0.046
                                                            (0.066)         (0.068)        (0.071)             (0.046)
Non-Active Duty Military Service                             0.010           -0.013        0.262**             -0.062
                                                            (0.150)         (0.127)        (0.111)             (0.064)

δactive duty - δno active duty = 0? [p-value on F-test]   0.115 [0.49]    0.151 [0.28]   -0.103 [0.41]      0.108 [0.16]

Observations                                                 1,092           1,096          1,097              1,097
  Robust standard errors are in parentheses. In Panel A, standard errors are corrected for clustering on the school level.
  *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. All models in Panel A
  use the full set of controls shown in Appendix Table 1. Models in Panels B and C include controls for self-reported
  health status, height, weight, gender, marital status, age, income, education, health insurance status, and high school
  PPVT score. All models also include missing dummy categories for each of the control variables.




                                                                  32
Table 4: OLS Estimates of the Relationship between Deployment Assignment and Mental Health

                                                                 Suicide        Depression         Counseling               PTSD

Active Duty Military Service in Combat Zone                       0.025*          0.037**           0.096***              0.150***
                                                                  (0.014)         (0.018)            (0.018)               (0.016)
Active Duty Outside US in Non-Combat Zone                          0.009           0.013              0.010                 0.008
                                                                  (0.021)         (0.033)            (0.020)               (0.012)
Active Duty Military Service Exclusively in the US                 0.023           0.026              0.017               0.021**
                                                                  (0.016)         (0.020)            (0.016)               (0.010)
Non-Active Duty Military Service                                   0.011           0.002              0.035                0.042**
                                                                  (0.021)         (0.029)            (0.022)               (0.018)

δcombat - δno active duty = 0? [p-value on F-test]             0.014 [0.60]    0.035 [0.34]       0.061** [0.03]       0.108*** [0.00]

δcombat - δnon-combat US = 0? [p-value on F-test]              0.002 [0.94]    0.011 [0.62]      0.079*** [0.00]       0.129*** [0.00]

δcombat - δ non-combat outside US = 0? [p-value on F-test]     0.016 [0.50]    0.024 [0.48]      0.086*** [0.00]       0.142*** [0.00]

Observations                                                      15,593          15,689              15,695                15,696
          Robust standard errors corrected for clustering on the school are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical
          significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. All models use the full set of controls shown in Appendix
          Table 1 along with school fixed effects. Models also include missing dummy categories for each of the control
          variables.




                                                                   33
Table 5: Estimates of the Relationship between Deployment Assignment and Mental Health, Adjusting
for Pre-Deployment Mental Health
                                                     Suicide                       Depression          Counseling             PTSD
Panel A: Controlling for Pre-Deployment Mental Health

Active Duty Military Service in Combat Zone                        0.024*            0.036**            0.095***            0.154***
                                                                   (0.014)           (0.017)             (0.019)             (0.016)
Active Duty Outside US in Non-Combat Zone                           0.012              0.021              0.014               0.009
                                                                   (0.021)           (0.034)             (0.020)             (0.012)
Active Duty Military Service Exclusively in the US                  0.023             0.027               0.016             0.020**
                                                                   (0.017)           (0.020)             (0.016)             (0.010)
Non-Active Duty Military Service                                    0.010             -0.008              0.034             0.044**
                                                                   (0.021)           (0.029)             (0.023)             (0.019)

δcombat - δ no active duty = 0? [p-value on F-test]             0.014 [0.58]       0.044 [0.21]      0.061** [0.04]      0.110*** [0.00]

δcombat - δ non-combat US = 0? [p-value on F-test]              0.001 [0.97]       0.009 [0.66]      0.079*** [0.00]     0.134*** [0.00]

δcombat - δ non-combat outside US = 0? [p-value on F-test]      0.012 [0.62]       0.015 [0.65]      0.081*** [0.00]     0.145*** [0.00]

Observations                                                        15,422            15,579             15,639              15,640

Panel B: Individual Fixed Effects

Active Duty Military Service in Combat Zone                        0.031*             0.044*            0.087***                   --
                                                                   (0.017)            (0.024)            (0.021)
Active Duty Outside US in Non-Combat Zone                           0.044              0.061               0.038                   --
                                                                   (0.029)            (0.042)            (0.024)
Active Duty Military Service Exclusively in the US                  0.000              0.039              -0.007                   --
                                                                   (0.026)            (0.026)            (0.023)
Non-Active Duty Military Service                                    0.015             -0.000               0.000                   --
                                                                   (0.023)            (0.033)            (0.031)

δcombat - δ no active duty = 0? [p-value on F-test]             0.016 [0.56]       0.044 [0.29]      0.087** [0.02]                --

δcombat - δ non-combat US = 0? [p-value on F-test]              0.031 [0.30]       0.005 [0.90]      0.094*** [0.00]               ‐‐

δcombat - δ non-combat outside US = 0? [p-value on F-test]      -0.013 [0.67]     -0.017 [0.70]       0.049 [0.14]                 --

Observations                                                       15,422             15,579             15,639                    --
        Robust standard errors corrected for clustering on the school are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical
        significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Models in Panel A use the full set of controls shown in
        Appendix Table 1 along with school fixed effects and pre-deployment dependent variables. Models in Panel B
        control for the time varying individual characteristics: self reported health status indicators, height, weight, marital
        status indicators, age indicators, income, education indicators and an indicator of health insurance status. Models
        also include missing dummy categories for each of the control variables.




                                                                   34
Table 6: Estimates of the Relationship between Deployment Assignment and Mental Health for
Military Population, Adjusting for Pre-Deployment Mental Health
                                                               Suicide       Depression      Counseling           PTSD
Panel A: Military Sample

Active Duty Military Service in Combat Zone                     0.039           0.061          0.088**          0.136***
                                                               (0.032)         (0.044)         (0.037)           (0.031)
Active Duty Outside US in Non-Combat Zone                       0.030           0.012           0.015             0.015
                                                               (0.038)         (0.054)         (0.042)           (0.029)
Active Duty Military Service Exclusively in the US              0.037           0.047           0.006             0.022
                                                               (0.036)         (0.040)         (0.034)           (0.023)

δcombat - δ non-combat US = 0? [p-value on F-test]           0.002 [0.95]    0.014 [0.64]   0.082*** [0.00]   0.114*** [0.00]
δcombat - δ non-combat outside US = 0? [p-value on F-test]   0.009 [0.74]    0.049 [0.19]   0.073** [0.02]    0.121*** [0.00]

Observations                                                    1,069           1,077           1,077             1,078
Panel B: Army Sample

Active Duty Military Service in Combat Zone                     0.049           0.035         0.149***          0.196***
                                                               (0.057)         (0.085)         (0.054)           (0.067)
Active Duty Outside US in Non-Combat Zone                       -0.034          -0.076          -0.004            0.006
                                                               (0.077)         (0.132)         (0.075)           (0.071)
Active Duty Military Service Exclusively in the US              0.062           0.025           0.041             0.006
                                                               (0.062)         (0.080)         (0.063)           (0.050)

δcombat - δ non-combat US = 0? [p-value on F-test]           -0.013 [0.83]   0.010 [0.89]   0.108 [0.14]      0.190*** [0.01]
δcombat - δ non-combat outside US = 0? [p-value on F-test]    0.083 [0.14]   0.060 [0.23]   0.153* [0.04]     0.190*** [0.01]

Observations                                                     480             481             482               482
Panel C: Army Post-9/11 Sample

Active Duty Military Service in Combat Zone                     0.074           0.054          0.120*            0.167**
                                                               (0.065)         (0.089)         (0.067)           (0.081)
Active Duty Outside US in Non-Combat Zone                       -0.003          -0.052          0.050             -0.013
                                                               (0.077)         (0.142)         (0.104)           (0.091)
Active Duty Military Service Exclusively in the US              0.014           0.002           0.013             -0.024
                                                               (0.076)         (0.069)         (0.080)           (0.074)

δcombat - δ non-combat US = 0? [p-value on F-test]           0.060 [0.33]    0.052 [0.55]    0.107 [0.15]     0.191** [0.02]
δcombat - δ non-combat outside US = 0? [p-value on F-test]   0.077 [0.198]   0.106 [0.35]    0.070 [0.46]     0.180* [0.06]

Observations                                                     413             413             414               414
Panel D: Individual Fixed Effects, Army Sample

Active Duty Military Service in Combat Zone                     0.027          -0.003          0.149**              --
                                                               (0.052)         (0.065)         (0.059)
Active Duty Outside US in Non-Combat Zone                       0.029           0.019           0.048               --
                                                               (0.069)         (0.117)         (0.062)
Active Duty Military Service Exclusively in the US              0.032           0.050           0.044               --

                                                               35
                                                                      (0.063)           (0.068)            (0.057)

   δcombat - δ non-combat US = 0? [p-value on F-test]              -0.005 [0.94]     -0.053 [0.39]      0.105* [0.09]                 --
   δcombat - δ non-combat outside US = 0? [p-value on F-test]      -0.002 [0.98]     -0.022 [0.82]      0.101 [0.13]                  --

   Observations                                            480                            481                482                      --
   Panel E: Individual Fixed Effects, Army Post-9/11 Sample

   Active Duty Military Service in Combat Zone                         0.053            -0.011             0.120*                     --
                                                                      (0.057)           (0.067)            (0.067)
   Active Duty Outside US in Non-Combat Zone                           0.043             0.044              0.050                     --
                                                                      (0.074)           (0.122)            (0.104)
   Active Duty Military Service Exclusively in the US                 -0.002            -0.016              0.013                  --
                                                                      (0.069)           (0.066)            (0.080)

   δcombat - δ non-combat US = 0? [p-value on F-test]              0.055 [0.40]       0.005 [0.94]      0.107** [0.02]                --
   δcombat - δ non-combat outside US = 0? [p-value on F-test]      0.010 [0.89]      -0.055 [0.60]      0.070** [0.04]                --

   Observations                                                         413               413                414                      --
           Robust standard errors corrected for clustering on the school are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical
           significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Models in Panels A, B, and C use the full set of controls
           shown in Appendix Table 1 along with school fixed effects as well as military rank, timing of military service,
           branch of service, occupation indicators, and an indicator for having a check-up in the past year. Models in Panels
           D and E also control for all the time varying characteristics controlled in Panels A, B, and C: self reported health
           status indicators, height, weight, marital status indicators, age indicators, income, education indicators, an indicator
           of health insurance status, military rank, timing of military service, branch of service, occupation indicators, and an
           indicator for having a check-up in the past year. Models also include missing dummy categories for each of the
           control variables.


Table 7: Estimated Effect of Combat Zone Deployment Length on Mental Health for those who Deployed
to Combat Zone
                                                                         Suicide          Depression        Counseling                PTSD

Combat Zone Service Length: 7 to 12 Months                                  0.017            0.034              0.025               -0.014
                                                                           (0.049)          (0.072)            (0.062)             (0.057)

Combat Zone Service Length: More than 12 Months                             -0.000           0.033              0.098              0.129*
                                                                           (0.057)          (0.078)            (0.073)             (0.074)

δmore than 12 months - δ 7 to 12 months = 0? [p-value on F-test]      -0.017[0.74]       -0.001[0.99]       0.073[0.32]      0.143** [0.041]

Observations                                                                425               427                427                   427
           Robust standard errors corrected for clustering on the school are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical
           significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. All models use the time varying set of controls shown in
           Appendix Table 1 along with school fixed effects as well as additional controls for pre-deployment mental health,
           military rank, timing of military service, branch of service, occupation indicators, and an indicator for having a
           check-up in the past year. Models also include missing dummy categories for each of the control variables.




                                                                      36
Table 8: Estimated Effect of Frequency of Enemy Firefight Engagement on Mental Health of those who
Deployed to Combat Zone
                                                                            Suicide     Depression        Counseling               PTSD
Panel A: Any Enemy Firefights

Any Enemy Firefights                                                    0.104***            0.091            0.112**              0.183***
                                                                         (0.038)           (0.063)           (0.049)               (0.053)

Observations                                                                 412            414                414                  414
Panel B: Categorical Enemy Firefights

1 to 3 Enemy Firefights                                                  0.069             0.042             0.101                  0.078
                                                                        (0.049)           (0.091)           (0.092)                (0.082)
4 to 19 Enemy Firefights                                                 0.057             0.125             0.058                 0.153*
                                                                        (0.064)           (0.102)           (0.071)                (0.087)
20 or More Enemy Firefights                                             0.183**            0.120            0.172**               0.331***
                                                                        (0.076)           (0.080)           (0.078)                (0.089)

δ20 or More Firefight - δ 1 to 3 Firefight = 0? [p-value on F-test]    0.114[0.20]     0.078[0.47]        0.071[0.59]       0.253** [0.02]
δ20 or More Firefight - δ 4 to 19 Firefight = 0? [p-value on F-test]   0.126[0.23]     -0.005[0.96]       0.114[0.30]        0.178[0.16]

Observations                                                                 412            414                414                  414
Panel C: Conditional on Combat Deployment Length

1 to 3 Enemy Firefights                                                   0.073             0.043             0.099                  0.075
                                                                         (0.049)           (0.091)           (0.092)               (0.081)
4 to 19 Enemy Firefights                                                  0.070             0.125             0.048                0.148*
                                                                         (0.067)           (0.106)           (0.071)               (0.085)
20 or More Enemy Firefights                                             0.209***            0.123            0.151*               0.306***
                                                                         (0.079)           (0.093)           (0.088)               (0.095)
Combat Zone Service Length: 7 to 12 Months (%)                           -0.009             0.010             0.007                 -0.044
                                                                         (0.054)           (0.077)           (0.062)               (0.056)
Combat Zone Service Length: More than 12 Months (%)                      -0.069            -0.004             0.056                 0.041
                                                                         (0.057)           (0.091)           (0.080)               (0.076)

δ20 or More Firefight - δ 1 to 3 Firefight = 0? [p-value on F-test]    0.136[0.13]       0.08[0.50]        0.052[0.71]       0.231** [0.03]
δ20 or More Firefight - δ 4 to 19 Firefight = 0? [p-value on F-test]   0.139[0.20]      -0.002[0.99]       0.103[0.36]        0.158[0.21]

Observations                                                              412                414                414                 414
          Robust standard errors corrected for clustering on the school are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical
          significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. All models use the time varying set of controls shown in
          Appendix Table 1 along with school fixed effects as well as additional controls for pre-deployment mental health,
          military rank, timing of military service, branch of service, occupation indicators, and an indicator for having a
          check-up in the past year. Models also include missing dummy categories for each of the control variables.




                                                                       37
Table 9: Estimated Effect of Battlefield Deaths or Injuries on Mental Health of those who Deployed to
Combat Zone, Conditional on Deployment Length
                                                                         Suicide        Depression        Counseling              PTSD
Panel A: Killed or Believed Killed Another

Killed or Believed Killed Another                                      0.120***           0.130**            0.032           0.222***
                                                                        (0.042)           (0.061)           (0.053)           (0.059)
Combat Zone Service Length: 7 to 12 Months                                0.014            0.069             0.038             -0.020
                                                                        (0.051)           (0.073)           (0.061)           (0.061)
Combat Zone Service Length: More than 12 Months                          -0.045            0.050            0.132*              0.070
                                                                        (0.058)           (0.076)           (0.076)           (0.069)

Observations                                                              414               416               417                 417
Panel B: Injury

Wounded or Injured in Combat                                              0.105           0.184*            0.275**           0.239**
                                                                         (0.084)          (0.107)           (0.106)           (0.107)
Combat Zone Service Length: 7 to 12 Months                                 0.021           0.062              0.052            -0.015
                                                                         (0.047)          (0.073)           (0.063)           (0.056)
Combat Zone Service Length: More than 12 Months                           -0.018           0.053             0.122*             0.103
                                                                         (0.052)          (0.066)           (0.069)           (0.066)

Observations                                                              424               426               426                 426
Panel C: Observe Death or Wounding

Saw Coalition or Ally Killed, Dead, or Wounded                           0.094**           0.087             0.022             0.082
                                                                         (0.040)          (0.053)           (0.062)           (0.066)
Saw Civilian Killed, Dead, or Wounded                                     0.101*           0.024             0.090            0.157**
                                                                         (0.060)          (0.083)           (0.066)           (0.076)
Saw Enemy Killed, Dead, or Wounded                                        -0.028           0.018             0.014             0.022
                                                                         (0.064)          (0.081)           (0.069)           (0.081)
Combat Zone Service Length: 7 to 12 Months                                 0.017           0.051             0.043             -0.017
                                                                         (0.044)          (0.074)           (0.057)           (0.056)
Combat Zone Service Length: More than 12 Months                           -0.057           0.031             0.111              0.062
                                                                         (0.054)          (0.072)           (0.073)           (0.065)

δcoalition - δenemy = 0? [p-value on F-test]                         0.122 [0.11]      0.069 [0.50]      0.008 [0.93]       0.060 [0.62]

δcivilian - δenemy = 0? [p-value on F-test]                          0.129 [0.26]      0.006 [0.97]      0.076 [0.52]       0.135 [0.34]

Observations                                                              422               424               424                 424
          Robust standard errors corrected for clustering on the school are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical
          significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. All models use the set of controls shown in Appendix
          Table 1 along with school fixed effects as well as additional controls for pre-deployment mental health, military
          rank, timing of military service, branch of service, occupation indicators, and an indicator for having a check-up in
          the past year. Models also include missing dummy categories for each of the control variables.




                                                                    38
Table 10: Estimated Effect of Battlefield Deaths or Injuries on Mental Health of those who Deployed to
Combat Zone, Conditional on Deployment Length and Frequency of Enemy Firefight Engagement
                                                           Suicide    Depression   Counseling    PTSD
Panel A: Killed or Believed Killed Another

Killed or Believed Killed Another                           0.042      -0.050       -0.079       0.137
                                                           (0.074)     (0.104)      (0.110)     (0.120)
1 to 3 Enemy Firefights                                     0.053       0.074        0.123       0.025
                                                           (0.063)     (0.105)      (0.116)     (0.088)
4 to 19 Enemy Firefights                                      0.05       0.226       0.094       0.069
                                                           (0.085)     (0.139)      (0.132)     (0.127)
20 or More Enemy Firefights                                0.178*        0.161      0.215*       0.181
                                                           (0.102)     (0.129)      (0.128)     (0.145)
Combat Zone Service Length: 7 to 12 Months (%)               -0.01       0.023       0.016      -0.029
                                                           (0.059)     (0.080)      (0.067)     (0.061)
Combat Zone Service Length: More than 12 Months (%)         -0.076      -0.009       0.075       0.051
                                                           (0.059)     (0.091)      (0.083)     (0.077)

Observations                                                 404         406          407         407
Panel B: Injury

Wounded or Injured in Combat                                 0.029      0.154       0.250**       0.117
                                                            (0.089)    (0.121)      (0.098)      (0.099)
1 to 3 Enemy Firefights                                      0.072      0.036        0.088         0.07
                                                            (0.049)    (0.088)      (0.088)      (0.081)
4 to 19 Enemy Firefights                                      0.067     0.108        0.019         0.135
                                                            (0.067)    (0.107)      (0.068)      (0.087)
20 or More Enemy Firefights                                0.204***     0.096        0.106      0.286***
                                                            (0.077)    (0.092)      (0.089)      (0.095)
Combat Zone Service Length: 7 to 12 Months (%)               -0.006     0.024         0.03        -0.033
                                                            (0.054)    (0.080)      (0.066)      (0.057)
Combat Zone Service Length: More than 12 Months (%)          -0.069     0.001        0.064         0.045
                                                            (0.058)    (0.094)      (0.087)      (0.077)

Observations                                                 412         414          414         414
Panel C: Observe Death or Wounding on Battlefield

Saw Coalition or Ally Killed, Dead, or Wounded              0.072       0.066        0.006       0.010
                                                           (0.048)     (0.065)      (0.084)     (0.064)
Saw Civilian Killed, Dead, or Wounded                       0.105       0.054        0.104      0.148*
                                                           (0.077)     (0.097)      (0.084)     (0.082)
Saw Enemy Killed, Dead, or Wounded                          -0.049     -0.041       -0.023       -0.014
                                                           (0.070)     (0.083)      (0.074)     (0.096)
1 to 3 Enemy Firefights                                      0.053      0.028        0.096        0.054
                                                           (0.053)     (0.093)      (0.105)     (0.082)
4 to 19 Enemy Firefights                                     0.025       0.11        0.017        0.112
                                                           (0.066)     (0.126)      (0.106)     (0.098)
20 or More Enemy Firefights                                0.157*       0.093        0.113      0.245**
                                                           (0.083)     (0.114)      (0.108)     (0.106)

                                                      39
Combat Zone Service Length: 7 to 12 Months (%)                           -0.004            0.008            0.014             -0.034
                                                                        (0.050)          (0.082)           (0.060)           (0.058)
Combat Zone Service Length: More than 12 Months (%)                      -0.086           -0.016            0.051             0.039
                                                                        (0.055)          (0.092)           (0.080)           (0.077)

δcoalition - δenemy = 0? [p-value on F-test]                         0.121[0.14]       0.107[0.33]       0.029[0.78]       0.024[0.84]
δcivilian - δenemy = 0? [p-value on F-test]                          0.154[0.26]       0.095[0.53]       0.127[0.30]       0.162[0.30]

Observations                                                             410               412               412                 412
         Robust standard errors corrected for clustering on the school are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical
         significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. All models use the time varying set of controls shown in
         Appendix Table 1 along with school fixed effects as well as additional controls for pre-deployment mental health,
         military rank, timing of military service, and branch of service, branch of service, occupation indicators, and an
         indicator for having a check-up in the past year. Models also include missing dummy categories for each of the
         control variables.




                                                                   40
Appendix Table 1: Summary Statistics by Military Service
Variable                                            Full        Civilian            Any         Non-Active    Active Duty   Active Duty   Active Duty     Combat
                                                   Sample                          Military       Duty         Inside US    Outside US    in Combat       with ≥ 1
                                                                                   Service       Service      (no combat)   Non-Combat       Zone         Enemy
                                                                                                                                                         Firefights

Race: White , omitted                                0.697         0.699              0.672         0.663         0.697         0.667         0.658         0.717
                                                    (0.460)       (0.459)            (0.470)       (0.474)       (0.460)       (0.473)       (0.475)       (0.452)
Race: Black                                          0.231         0.229              0.256         0.291         0.236         0.275         0.251         0.215
                                                    (0.421)       (0.420)            (0.437)       (0.456)       (0.425)       (0.448)       (0.434)       (0.412)
Race: Other                                          0.071         0.071              0.070         0.040         0.067         0.059         0.089         0.063
                                                    (0.256)       (0.256)            (0.256)       (0.197)       (0.251)       (0.236)       (0.285)       (0.243)
Race: Hispanic                                       0.159         0.160              0.145         0.120         0.143         0.157         0.153         0.115
                                                    (0.366)       (0.367)            (0.352)       (0.326)       (0.350)       (0.365)       (0.360)       (0.320)
Missing Data: Race                                   0.002         0.002              0.002         0.006         0.000         0.000         0.002         0.005
                                                    (0.042)       (0.042)            (0.042)       (0.076)        0.000         0.000        (0.048)       (0.072)
Missing Data: Race - Hispanic                        0.003         0.003              0.002         0.006         0.000         0.000         0.002         0.000
                                                    (0.054)       (0.055)            (0.042)       (0.076)        0.000         0.000        (0.048)        0.000
Male                                                 0.468         0.443              0.792         0.726         0.714         0.797         0.877         0.953
                                                    (0.499)       (0.497)            (0.406)       (0.447)       (0.452)       (0.403)       (0.329)       (0.213)
Height in Inches                                    67.314        67.174             69.142        68.749        68.735        69.144        69.617        70.178
                                                    (4.140)       (4.134)            (3.771)       (3.854)       (3.737)       (3.829)       (3.701)       (3.550)
Missing Data: Height in Inches                       0.002         0.002              0.000         0.000         0.000         0.000         0.000         0.000
                                                    (0.047)       (0.048)             0.000         0.000         0.000         0.000         0.000         0.000
Weight in Pounds                                   183.314       182.915            188.498       188.949       187.450       190.388       188.481       190.232
                                                   (49.329)      (50.083)           (37.835)      (39.410)      (40.953)      (38.818)      (34.239)      (31.973)
Missing Data: Weight in Pounds                       0.014         0.015              0.004         0.000         0.003         0.007         0.005         0.005
                                                    (0.117)       (0.120)            (0.060)        0.000        (0.054)       (0.081)       (0.067)       (0.072)
Education: Less than High School, Omitted            0.080         0.085              0.011         0.023         0.012         0.020         0.002         0.005
                                                    (0.271)       (0.279)            (0.104)       (0.150)       (0.108)       (0.139)       (0.048)       (0.072)
Education: High School                               0.163         0.164              0.159         0.126         0.192         0.150         0.148         0.162
                                                    (0.370)       (0.370)            (0.365)       (0.333)       (0.395)       (0.359)       (0.356)       (0.370)
Education: Some College or Vocational Training       0.441         0.425              0.653         0.629         0.633         0.680         0.670         0.675
                                                    (0.497)       (0.494)            (0.476)       (0.485)       (0.483)       (0.468)       (0.471)       (0.470)
Education: College Degree                            0.238         0.245              0.147         0.154         0.137         0.111         0.164         0.136
                                                    (0.426)       (0.430)            (0.354)       (0.362)       (0.344)       (0.315)       (0.371)       (0.344)
Education: Graduate or Professional Degree           0.078         0.081              0.031         0.069         0.026         0.039         0.016         0.021
                                                    (0.268)       (0.273)            (0.172)       (0.253)       (0.160)       (0.195)       (0.125)       (0.144)
Missing Data: Education                              0.000         0.000              0.000         0.000         0.000         0.000         0.000         0.000
                                                    (0.016)       (0.017)             0.000         0.000         0.000         0.000         0.000         0.000
Personal Earnings                                 35215.910     34859.690          39794.850     35057.910     36605.010     37840.030     44783.870     43576.800
                                                 (45020.320)   (45524.200)        (37671.330)   (24703.470)   (31696.050)   (24342.040)   (47999.020)   (24319.940)
Missing Data: Personal Earnings                      0.050         0.051              0.030         0.029         0.038         0.039         0.021         0.011
                                                    (0.217)       (0.220)            (0.170)       (0.167)       (0.191)       (0.195)       (0.142)       (0.102)
General Physical Health is Excellent                 0.192         0.189              0.234         0.211         0.207         0.255         0.257         0.257

                                                                             41
                                                (0.394)   (0.391)        (0.424)   (0.410)   (0.406)   (0.437)   (0.438)   (0.438)
General Physical Health is Fair or Poor          0.097     0.099          0.065     0.063     0.079     0.059     0.057     0.047
                                                (0.296)   (0.299)        (0.246)   (0.243)   (0.270)   (0.236)   (0.232)   (0.213)
=1 if 24 years old, =0 otherwise                 0.002     0.002          0.000     0.000     0.000     0.000     0.000     0.000
                                                (0.045)   (0.047)         0.000     0.000     0.000     0.000     0.000     0.000
=1 if 25 years old, =0 otherwise                 0.044     0.045          0.038     0.051     0.032     0.033     0.039     0.063
                                                (0.205)   (0.207)        (0.191)   (0.222)   (0.176)   (0.178)   (0.193)   (0.243)
=1 if 26 years old, =0 otherwise                 0.116     0.117          0.103     0.103     0.120     0.046     0.109     0.079
                                                (0.320)   (0.321)        (0.304)   (0.305)   (0.325)   (0.210)   (0.312)   (0.270)
=1 if 27 years old, =0 otherwise                 0.145     0.146          0.127     0.137     0.140     0.098     0.123     0.120
                                                (0.352)   (0.353)        (0.333)   (0.345)   (0.347)   (0.298)   (0.329)   (0.326)
=1 if 28 years old, =0 otherwise                 0.180     0.179          0.192     0.211     0.190     0.183     0.189     0.199
                                                (0.384)   (0.384)        (0.394)   (0.410)   (0.393)   (0.388)   (0.392)   (0.400)
=1 if 29 years old, =0 otherwise, omitted        0.189     0.188          0.198     0.149     0.204     0.229     0.203     0.204
                                                (0.392)   (0.391)        (0.399)   (0.357)   (0.404)   (0.421)   (0.403)   (0.404)
=1 if 30 years old, =0 otherwise                 0.183     0.184          0.178     0.206     0.160     0.183     0.178     0.168
                                                (0.387)   (0.387)        (0.382)   (0.405)   (0.368)   (0.388)   (0.383)   (0.374)
=1 if 31 years old, =0 otherwise                 0.116     0.114          0.142     0.114     0.131     0.216     0.137     0.136
                                                (0.320)   (0.318)        (0.350)   (0.319)   (0.338)   (0.413)   (0.344)   (0.344)
=1 if 32 years old, =0 otherwise                 0.021     0.021          0.022     0.029     0.023     0.013     0.021     0.026
                                                (0.144)   (0.144)        (0.146)   (0.167)   (0.151)   (0.114)   (0.142)   (0.160)
=1 if 33 years old, =0 otherwise                 0.003     0.003          0.001     0.000     0.000     0.000     0.002     0.005
                                                (0.055)   (0.056)        (0.030)    0.000     0.000     0.000    (0.048)   (0.072)
=1 if 34 years old, =0 otherwise                 0.000     0.000          0.000     0.000     0.000     0.000     0.000     0.000
                                                (0.018)   (0.019)         0.000     0.000     0.000     0.000     0.000     0.000
Religion: None, Atheist, or Agnostic, Omitted    0.181     0.181          0.187     0.166     0.187     0.211     0.188     0.194
                                                (0.385)   (0.385)        (0.390)   (0.373)   (0.390)   (0.409)   (0.391)   (0.396)
Religion: Protestant                             0.292     0.289          0.332     0.411     0.306     0.270     0.341     0.382
                                                (0.455)   (0.453)        (0.471)   (0.494)   (0.462)   (0.445)   (0.475)   (0.487)
Religion: Catholic                               0.219     0.220          0.208     0.177     0.201     0.204     0.227     0.220
                                                (0.414)   (0.414)        (0.406)   (0.383)   (0.402)   (0.404)   (0.419)   (0.415)
Religion: Other Christian                        0.224     0.226          0.207     0.206     0.230     0.197     0.192     0.157
                                                (0.417)   (0.418)        (0.405)   (0.405)   (0.422)   (0.399)   (0.395)   (0.365)
Religion: Other                                  0.083     0.085          0.067     0.040     0.076     0.118     0.053     0.047
                                                (0.277)   (0.278)        (0.250)   (0.197)   (0.265)   (0.324)   (0.224)   (0.213)
Missing Data: Religion                           0.003     0.003          0.003     0.000     0.000     0.007     0.005     0.000
                                                (0.058)   (0.058)        (0.052)    0.000     0.000    (0.081)   (0.067)    0.000
Never Married                                    0.503     0.514          0.355     0.451     0.385     0.307     0.310     0.288
                                                (0.500)   (0.500)        (0.479)   (0.499)   (0.487)   (0.463)   (0.463)   (0.454)
Currently Married                                0.433     0.427          0.522     0.463     0.496     0.556     0.554     0.576
                                                (0.496)   (0.495)        (0.500)   (0.500)   (0.501)   (0.499)   (0.498)   (0.496)
Divorced                                         0.064     0.059          0.123     0.086     0.120     0.137     0.137     0.136
                                                (0.245)   (0.236)        (0.329)   (0.281)   (0.325)   (0.345)   (0.344)   (0.344)
No Health Insurance                              0.211     0.215          0.160     0.157     0.237     0.159     0.102     0.117
                                                (0.408)   (0.411)        (0.367)   (0.365)   (0.426)   (0.367)   (0.303)   (0.322)

                                                                    42
Missing Data: Health Insurance Status                              0.009          0.008           0.014       0.017          0.015            0.013            0.014      0.016
                                                                  (0.093)        (0.091)         (0.119)     (0.130)        (0.120)          (0.114)          (0.116)    (0.125)
Wave 1 Picture Vocabulary Test Score                             100.589        100.352         103.733     105.562        103.606          103.177          103.272    103.326
                                                                 (14.542)       (14.646)        (12.679)    (11.415)       (12.607)         (12.163)         (13.381)   (14.744)
Missing Data: Wave 1 Picture Vocabulary Test Score                 0.048          0.047           0.057       0.034          0.047            0.039            0.080      0.052
                                                                  (0.214)        (0.212)         (0.232)     (0.183)        (0.211)          (0.195)          (0.271)    (0.223)
Parental Income Wave 1                                            46.391         46.606          43.640      41.279         45.014           38.691           45.200     44.531
                                                                 (50.474)       (50.859)        (45.190)    (33.533)       (61.055)         (22.936)         (38.965)   (29.135)
Missing Data: Parental Income Wave 1                               0.241          0.242           0.223       0.160          0.184            0.281            0.260      0.241
                                                                  (0.428)        (0.429)         (0.417)     (0.368)        (0.388)          (0.451)          (0.439)    (0.429)
Parent is Never Married in Wave 1                                  0.056          0.057           0.050       0.064          0.048            0.039            0.050      0.054
                                                                  (0.230)        (0.231)         (0.219)     (0.245)        (0.215)          (0.193)          (0.219)    (0.227)
Parent is Married in Wave 1                                        0.711          0.711           0.703       0.688          0.694            0.723            0.709      0.699
                                                                  (0.454)        (0.453)         (0.457)     (0.465)        (0.462)          (0.449)          (0.455)    (0.460)
Parent is Divorced, Separated or Widowed in Wave 1                 0.233          0.232           0.247       0.248          0.258            0.239            0.241      0.247
                                                                  (0.423)        (0.422)         (0.432)     (0.434)        (0.438)          (0.428)          (0.428)    (0.433)
Missing Data: Parents' Marital Status                              0.136          0.137           0.122       0.103          0.096            0.150            0.139      0.131
                                                                  (0.343)        (0.344)         (0.327)     (0.305)        (0.295)          (0.359)          (0.346)    (0.338)
Biological Mother's Education: Less than High School               0.167          0.169           0.138       0.128          0.153            0.151            0.125      0.126
                                                                  (0.373)        (0.375)         (0.345)     (0.335)        (0.361)          (0.360)          (0.331)    (0.333)
Biological Mother's Education: High School Degree                  0.337          0.337           0.341       0.343          0.332            0.355            0.342      0.305
                                                                  (0.473)        (0.473)         (0.474)     (0.476)        (0.472)          (0.480)          (0.475)    (0.462)
Biological Mother's Education: Some College                        0.194          0.192           0.224       0.256          0.197            0.230            0.231      0.247
                                                                  (0.396)        (0.394)         (0.417)     (0.438)        (0.398)          (0.422)          (0.422)    (0.433)
Biological Mother's Education: College Degree or More              0.259          0.259           0.259       0.244          0.259            0.257            0.266      0.300
                                                                  (0.438)        (0.438)         (0.438)     (0.431)        (0.439)          (0.438)          (0.442)    (0.460)
Biological Mother's Education: Not Known                           0.043          0.043           0.038       0.029          0.059            0.007            0.037      0.021
                                                                  (0.202)        (0.202)         (0.192)     (0.169)        (0.236)          (0.081)          (0.189)    (0.144)

Observations                                                      15699          14589           1110         175            343              153                 439     191
             Unweighted means are obtained from Waves I and IV of the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health. Standard deviations are in parentheses.




                                                                                           43
Appendix Table 2. Evidence on the Exogeneity of Deployment Assignment
                                                        (1)            (2)                                        (1)            (2)
                                                      Combat        Firefight                                   Combat        Firefight

 Some College or Training                              -0.021          -0.134      Excellent Health               -0.076        -0.020
                                                      (0.062)         (0.089)                                    (0.059)       (0.090)
 College Degree                                         0.040          -0.195      Fair or Poor Health             0.049        -0.121
                                                      (0.094)         (0.139)                                    (0.079)       (0.186)
 Graduate/Professional Degree                          -0.321          -0.015      Height in Inches               0.005         0.000
                                                      (0.213)         (0.257)                                    (0.009)       (0.018)
 Pre-Deployment Depression                              0.076          -0.052      Weight in Pounds               -0.001         0.000
                                                      (0.098)         (0.111)                                    (0.001)       (0.002)
 Pre-Deployment Suicide                                -0.069           0.025      Protestant                      0.091         0.100
                                                      (0.083)         (0.179)                                    (0.084)       (0.119)
 Pre-Deployment Counseling                              0.026           0.147      Catholic                        0.059         0.003
                                                      (0.083)         (0.148)                                    (0.104)       (0.134)
 No Health Insurance                                   -0.003           0.113      Other Christian                 0.052        -0.041
                                                      (0.080)         (0.109)                                    (0.076)       (0.128)
 Picture Vocabulary Test Score                          0.001          -0.003      Other Religion                 -0.123        -0.097
                                                      (0.002)         (0.003)                                    (0.118)       (0.183)
 Log of Parental Income                                 0.045           0.031      Male                            0.126       0.284*
                                                      (0.055)         (0.088)                                    (0.077)       (0.159)
 Parent Married                                        -0.089          -0.067      Currently Married               0.003         0.032
                                                      (0.144)         (0.215)                                    (0.082)       (0.083)
 Parent Divorced/Separated/Widowed                     -0.044          -0.022      Divorced                       -0.026        -0.015
                                                      (0.140)         (0.207)                                    (0.068)       (0.125)
 Bio Mother has Some College                           -0.003          -0.077      Age                            -0.170        -0.826
                                                      (0.055)         (0.093)                                    (0.458)       (0.896)
 Bio Mother ≥ College Degree                           -0.081           0.071      Age Squared                     0.002        0.015
                                                      (0.065)         (0.110)                                    (0.008)       (0.016)
 Black                                                 -0.025          -0.120
                                                      (0.080)         (0.129)      F-stat for family
 Other Race                                          0.235***          -0.160      characteristics                0.52           0.32
                                                      (0.082)         (0.142)      F-stat for individual
 Hispanic                                              -0.035          -0.096      characteristics                2.62           3.53
                                                      (0.079)         (0.147)
 Log of Earnings                                       0.017           0.012       Observations                    573           411
                                                      (0.011)         (0.024)
Robust standard errors corrected for clustering on the school are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at
the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. All models use school fixed. Firefight specification controls for military variables
which are rank, branch of service, timing of service, and occupation dummies.




                                                                 44
Appendix Table 3. Stability of Estimates of the Mental Health Effects of Deployment Assignment to
Added Controls, Military Population
                                                                      (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)               (5)
                                                                   Individual        (1) +           (2) +           (3) +         (4) + Wave I
                                                                    Controls        Family           Health         Military          Mental
                                                                                    Controls        Controls        Controls          Health
Panel A: Suicide

Active Duty Military Service in Combat Zone                           0.028          0.031            0.036           0.051             0.048
                                                                     (0.031)        (0.031)          (0.030)         (0.034)           (0.033)
Active Duty Outside US in Non-Combat Zone                             0.015          0.019            0.022           0.028             0.027
                                                                     (0.038)        (0.037)          (0.037)         (0.040)           (0.039)
Active Duty Military Service Exclusively in the US                    0.021          0.023            0.026           0.044             0.041
                                                                     (0.033)        (0.033)          (0.033)         (0.037)           (0.037)

Observations                                                          1,063          1,063            1,063           1,063             1,063
Panel B: Depression

Active Duty Military Service in Combat Zone                           0.039          0.044            0.047           0.053             0.049
                                                                     (0.044)        (0.044)          (0.044)         (0.047)           (0.045)
Active Duty Outside US in Non-Combat Zone                             -0.011         -0.008           -0.007          -0.010            -0.004
                                                                     (0.054)        (0.055)          (0.055)         (0.058)           (0.056)
Active Duty Military Service Exclusively in the US                    0.016          0.023            0.025           0.034             0.036
                                                                     (0.039)        (0.039)          (0.039)         (0.042)           (0.042)

Observations                                                          1,071          1,071            1,071           1,071             1,071
Panel C: Counseling

Active Duty Military Service in Combat Zone                          0.055*         0.063*             0.054        0.079**           0.079**
                                                                     (0.033)        (0.034)          (0.034)        (0.037)           (0.037)
Active Duty Outside US in Non-Combat Zone                             -0.029         -0.022           -0.028          0.006             0.006
                                                                     (0.039)        (0.040)          (0.040)        (0.042)           (0.042)
Active Duty Military Service Exclusively in the US                   -0.030          -0.028           -0.032         -0.001            -0.001
                                                                     (0.031)        (0.032)          (0.032)        (0.034)           (0.034)

Observations                                                          1,072          1,072            1,072           1,072             1,072
Panel D: PTSD

Active Duty Military Service in Combat Zone                        0.118***        0.121***        0.113***         0.139***         0.139***
                                                                    (0.029)         (0.030)         (0.030)          (0.033)          (0.033)
Active Duty Outside US in Non-Combat Zone                            -0.021          -0.017          -0.023           0.010            0.010
                                                                    (0.029)         (0.030)         (0.030)          (0.030)          (0.030)
Active Duty Military Service Exclusively in the US                  -0.014           -0.014          -0.017           0.028            0.030
                                                                    (0.026)         (0.027)         (0.027)          (0.025)          (0.025)

Observations                                                          1,072          1,072            1,072           1,072             1,072
      Robust standard errors corrected for clustering on the school are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at
      the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. All models include school fixed effects. Individual controls are health, age, height,
      weight, religion, gender, race-ethnicity, income and PPVT score. Family controls are parental income, parental marital status and
      parental education during high school. Health controls are check-up in the past year and an indicator for health insurance status.
      Military controls are rank, branch of service, timing of service, and occupation dummies.

                                                                       45
