                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         TRADE, EXCHANGE RATE REGIMES AND OUTPUT CO-MOVEMENT:
                   EVIDENCE FROM THE GREAT DEPRESSION

                                        Gabriel P. Mathy
                                     Christopher M. Meissner

                                       Working Paper 16925
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w16925


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2011




Our thanks to Paul Bergin, Chris Hanes, Oscar Jordà, John Landon-Lane, Kris James Mitchener, Suresh
Naidu, Gary Richardson, Alan M. Taylor, and other seminar and conference participants at the All
UC Group in Economic History conference and UC Davis for helpful comments and suggestions.
 Jan Tore Klovland, David Jacks, Jakob Madsen, and Dennis Novy shared data with us. Errors remain
the sole responsibility of the authors. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Gabriel P. Mathy and Christopher M. Meissner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Trade, Exchange Rate Regimes and Output Co-Movement: Evidence from the Great Depression
Gabriel P. Mathy and Christopher M. Meissner
NBER Working Paper No. 16925
April 2011
JEL No. E32,E42,F42,N1,N12,N14

                                           ABSTRACT

A large body of cross-country empirical evidence identifies monetary policy and trade integration
as key determinants of business cycle co-movement. Partially consistent with this, many argue that
the re-emergence of the gold standard allowed for the global transmission of a deflationary shock in
1929 that culminated in the Great Depression. It is puzzling then to see decreased co-movement between
1920 and 1927 when international integration increased and nations returned to the gold standard.
Fixed exchange rates and global trade were also on the rise after 1932, but co-movement declined
again. Our empirical results shows that exchange rate regimes and trade were associated with higher
co-movement at the bilateral level while common shocks and exchange control policies also mattered.
Much of the fall after 1932 was driven by the rise of smaller blocs of monetary and trade cooperation
and an inter-bloc fall in co-movement.


Gabriel P. Mathy
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
gpmathy@ucdavis.edu

Christopher M. Meissner
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
cmmeissner@ucdavis.edu
   I.      Introduction

        It is now widely agreed that monetary and exchange rate policies were central to

economic outcomes during the Great Depression. The gold standard, a global system of

fixed exchange rates has also been implicated in the transmission of a deflationary shock

that deepened the Great Depression (Choudhri and Kochin 1980, Eichengreen, 1992a,

Temin, 1993). Nations that broke free from the gold standard in the 1930s recovered

more quickly and experienced divergent economic outcomes from those clinging to the

increasingly anachronistic metallic regime (Eichengreen and Sachs, 1985 and 1986 and

Eichengreen, 1992a).

        The new consensus that the gold standard mattered for the international spread of

the Great Depression does not, however, preclude further study into the international

transmission of economic shocks during the entirety of the volatile interwar period. The

role of trade flows and autarkic monetary policies in shaping co-movement during the

Depression years has not been systematically studied. Nor have researchers

simultaneously tested for both trade and monetary factors in transmission of the

Depression. It seems natural to allow for this however since a large body of empirical

research on “output co-movement” focuses on trade flows (e.g., Frankel and Rose, 1998)

as well as monetary regimes (e.g., Artis and Zheng, 1997 Clark and van Wincoop, 2001).

We expand on this theme and include the years before and after the Great Depression --

two decades of great economic change and high volatility.

        Specifically, we study bilateral co-movement of industrial production

conditioning on multiple key determinants including fixed exchange rate regimes, trade




                                            2
integration and other interventionist policies. To date, no systematic cross-country study

of this period that tests for multiple channels of transmission has been undertaken. Of

course, one limitation of our empirical approach is that it does not shed too much light on

transmission of shocks versus co-movement of underlying shocks. Still, our study has

significant potential to explain the paradoxical behavior of co-movement in the inter-war

period.

          By this we mean that trade and monetary regimes, factors which seem to be

strongly associated with co-movement in recent decades, do not obviously provide a

complete explanation of the data during the interwar period. Global trade integration did

not shrink and international capital flows resumed for many countries between 1920 and

1927. Nations re-adopted the gold standard from the mid-1920s. And yet, as integration

surged in the early 1920s, the average degree of co-movement did not trend upwards.

Instead, the data in Figure 1 show a U-shaped pattern with a trough coinciding with 1926

and 1927. An empirical challenge arises again after 1932 when synchronization

decreased but monetary and trade integration made a comeback. This could be

rationalized as the consequence of the myriad autarkic policies put in place after 1931

and the rise of exchange rate instability (e.g., Basu and Taylor, 1999). However, a more

accurate description of events is that, rather than going completely autarkic, there was a

re-configuration of monetary coordination, and an active effort to revive trade. Crucially,

both of these changes occurred within smaller blocs including the Reichsmark bloc, the

British Commonwealth and the Sterling Bloc. Our evidence is consistent with the idea

that the decline in average co-movement arose in the context of strong within-bloc co-

movement and weak inter-bloc co-movement.




                                             3
II. Monetary Policy, Integration and Business Cycles in the Interwar Period


       After the Treaty of Versailles was signed in 1919, nations travelled a treacherous

road to recovery with their ultimate destiny being the Great Depression. We provide a

stylized view of the path of monetary policy and international trade during the interwar

period by breaking the years 1920 to 1938 into four phases. Our goal is to briefly survey

the issues relevant to the transmission of the international business cycle between 1920

and 1938. For reference, Figure 1 shows the average value of the correlation of the de-

trended industrial output indexes for our sample within each two-year period, the average

across all country pairs in the sample of the percentage of time the pair had a fixed

exchange rate (e.g., the gold standard) and the average across all country pairs of the ratio

of total trade to total pair GDP. We discuss the construction of these variables below.



II.A Period I: Reconstruction of the International System

       World War I drastically changed the international supply chain, national balance

sheets and price levels. Between 1914 and 1919 prices rose just under twofold in the

United States, slightly more than twofold in Britain, and ten-fold in France. Between

1920 and 1928, most nations attempted to return to the gold standard with various levels

of alacrity to their pre-war parity. The United States and Great Britain drove prices down

to levels consistent with their pre-war gold parities. By 1925 Britain had re-anchored

itself to the gold standard. Elsewhere in Europe, political disputes over the burden of

adjustment led to intense monetary shocks and high- or hyper-inflation. France settled for

a return to the gold standard at a depreciated parity (de facto in 1926 and de jure in 1928)



                                             4
as did Germany but with a new currency in place after a bout of hyperinflation. On the

periphery, for instance in Scandinavia, nations used a mix of deflationary policies and

devaluation to attain monetary stability (Klovland, 1998).

           The incipient reconstruction of the international economy with rising or stable

trade flows and resurgent capital movements may have also increased the unconditional,

raw cross-country co-movement of de-trended industrial output but this is only evident

after 1927 as seen in Figure 1. In 1925 Winston Churchill, chancellor of the exchequer,

exclaimed that “all the countries related to the gold standard will move together like

ships in a harbour whose gangways are joined and who rise and fall together with the

tide.” (Foreman-Peck, 1995 p. 226). Such Churchillian co-movement did not appear until

the monetary shock of higher US interest rates which occurred in 1928.



II.B Period II The Gold Exchange Standard and the Initial Shock

           By 1928 the international gold exchange standard operated to connect many

disparate financial systems. For those that argue that the gold standard mattered, the

impulse for the Great Depression occurred in 1928 when US Federal Reserve policy

became tighter.1 American monetary policy pinched less-developed commodity export-

based economies by dampening American demand for their products. Elsewhere, fragile

commitments and weak credibility in adherence to the gold standard forced nations to

follow the rise in American interest rates with even larger hikes, spreading deflation

worldwide via the gold standard and severely damaging aggregate demand (Eichengreen,

1992a). Throughout 1930, nations attempted to maintain the gold standard, but by the

time that Britain had left gold in September 1931 it was clear to most (but not all) that the
1
    The German economy headed into its downturn in 1927 with its own stock market crash.


                                                    5
gold standard was a constraint in terms of recovery and a channel for transmission.

Churchill’s joyous prediction was rendered a ghastly reality.

       It has long been argued that countries not following the gold standard avoided this

massive deflationary shock. Irving Fisher (1935) and later Friedman and Schwartz (1963,

p. 489) noted that China and other non-gold countries were immune from the global

deflation. Lai and Jr-Shiang (2003) contribute econometric evidence consistent with this

view. Choudhri and Kochin (1980) made the point that Spain was not tied to the gold

standard and their data purported to show that industrial production did not follow US or

other gold bloc industrial production. None of these studies controlled for trade flows

between countries or contemplated other financial channels of transmission as in

Hamilton (1988), Temin (1993) or Richardson and van Horn (2007).




II.C The Global Great Depression Deepens: 1929-1933

       In the third phase of the interwar monetary experience, nations faced the

avalanche of the global depression. The international banking crisis in 1931 that began in

Austria and spread to Germany and the United Kingdom eventually led to speculative

attacks on those countries remaining on gold. Foreign demand weakened and investment

softened besetting consumers with uncertainty and setting the economy on a vicious

downward cycle. Many nations eventually devalued their exchange rates to gain

competitive advantage which often sparked retaliatory foreign devaluation. Those nations

that clung to the gold standard tended to raise trade barriers more than other nations in

order to offset overvalued exchange rates (Eichengreen and Irwin, 2010). Other nations




                                             6
eliminated the free convertibility of their currencies and imposed a variety of exchange

controls. Germany and several central European nations were the major practitioners of

these policies in what would later be classified as the Reichsmark Bloc. Denmark and

Japan also applied such controls to staunch gold outflows and to maintain greater control

over internal balance.

II.D. Stabilization and Recovery, 1933-1938

           The recovery period from late 1933 to 1938 represents a fourth phase. Many

countries viewed their departures from gold as temporary. Policy makers, and ostensibly

their constituents, yearned for exchange rate stability in the 1930s. To a certain degree,

their interests were served. Instead of coordinated international devaluation and a return

to gold, nations formed smaller blocs with smaller countries actively pegging the nominal

exchange rate to larger members. The “Sterling Bloc” consisted of many nations in the

British Commonwealth but also included Norway, Sweden and Finland all with close ties

to the United Kingdom.2 Straumann and Woitek (2009) discuss how in Sweden there

was an over-riding policy of exchange rate stability against sterling from 1933. Canada

re-oriented its policy to the US after 1933 the result was a very stable exchange rate from

1934. France, Belgium, the Netherlands, Poland and Switzerland carried the mantle of

the gold bloc and consequently suffered together through a much lengthier depression

than other nations. By 1936 this policy had ended. France devalued in 1936 and Belgium

devalued in 1935 setting off recoveries based on monetary expansion and re-armament.




2
    Since Denmark implemented exchange controls in 1931 we do not classify it as being in the Sterling Bloc.


                                                     7
III. Recent Empirical Research in Co-Movement and Its Importance for the

Interwar Period

       The international business cycle co-movement literature has generally focused on

two separate threads. One views co-movement as the realization of shocks that have an

underlying correlation structure. This is the common shock view. The other view focuses

on transmission of shocks via underlying fundamentals such as economic structure, trade,

financial connections or monetary regimes. The list of observables used in recent

empirical studies that transmit shocks or can account for common shocks is long.

       Baxter and Koupiritsas (2005) study a comprehensive set of potential

determinants and find three of them to be “robust” in an analysis of dyadic business cycle

co-movement. These robust determinants are bilateral trade, similarity in level of

development (but not necessarily similarity of industrial structure), and distance between

countries. Other studies that focus on trade include Frankel and Rose (1998), Canova and

Dellas (1993) and Kose, Prasad and Terrones (2003).

       Trade’s impact on co-movement is actually theoretically ambiguous. Output

would be more highly correlated when foreign goods are complementary to domestic

production as argued in di Giovanni and Levchenko (2009). Oppositely, in the canonical

international business cycle model of Backus, Kehoe and Kydland (1992), hit trade could

be correlated with low co-movement due to the strong substitutability of goods.

       Debate as to whether monetary coordination is empirically associated with greater

co-movement also still rages. Artis and Zhang (1997) find evidence that lower exchange

rate volatility is associated with lower co-movement. Clark and van Wincoop (2001) fail

to find evidence for the idea that monetary regimes matter for co-movement.




                                            8
       For the interwar period, a large literature exists, some of which have already been

cited above. However, no study that we are aware of has yet looked at the many possible

determinants of co-movement in the interwar period jointly and systematically. Bordo

and Helbling (2003) use factor analysis to demonstrate that the years 1930-1932

witnessed large global shocks mostly emanating from the US. They also argue that the

gold standard raised co-movement. The explanation is likely along the lines of Choudhri

and Kochin (1980) and Temin (1993) who wrote that the gold standard required a

deflationary response to negative foreign monetary shocks. Temin (1993) also provides

anecdotal evidence that financial linkages were a pathway for transmission of the

Depression. Perri and Quadrini (2002) find that trade restrictions and real wage rigidities

can explain three-fourths of the 1930s depression in Italy. Trade in this case was a

channel for business cycle transmission since foreign inputs were important for the

productivity of the local economy. We now turn to evidence at the bilateral level based

on a multivariate regression analysis.



IV Methodology and Data

IV.A Regression models for bilateral co-movement

To analyze co-movement of industrial output between two countries, we estimate a panel

regression of the following form:



                                ijt  X ijt    it   jt   t   ijt     (1)




                                                  9
where i and j indexes the two countries in the pair, t indexes a set of non-overlapping

two-year periods 1920-1921, 1922-1923,…,1936-1937, ρ is the within-period correlation

at the pair-level of the non-trend component of the logarithm of the monthly index of

industrial production, X is a set of determinants defined at the bilateral level, β a set of

coefficients to be estimated, γ and μ represent interactions between country i and j and

the vector of period indicator variables collected in δ, and ε is a pair-specific error term.

         The logic of equation (1) is to relate co-movement of the cyclical component in

industrial production between any two countries to bilateral observables, domestic

unobservables that might affect co-movement with all partners equally, global shocks,

and shocks or transmission mechanisms idiosyncratic to the pair.3 Naturally, at this level

of aggregation, and without further structure on the model, we are unable to identify

whether estimated coefficients on included covariates represent transmission mechanisms

or represent co-variation in the underlying shocks.

         Bilateral observables include two key factors. First, information on bilateral

(nominal) exchange rates yields a measure of similarity in monetary outcomes or

policies. Next, trade flows measure the potential for transmission of shocks in the real

economy. Domestic unobservables control for a host of policies such as exchange

controls, tariff rises, non-tariff barriers, industrial structure, and so forth. Country-pair

fixed effects can also be included to control for pair-specific shifts in correlation and

similarity in policy or economic structure. Finally period indicators control for common

shocks throughout the set of countries. Spatial correlation in the error terms, and hence



3    See Baxter and Koupiritsas (2005), Clark and van Wincoop (2001), Imbs (2004), Frankel and Rose
    (1998), Flood and Rose (2009) for examples of a dyadic approach similar to ours. Other papers like the
    long-run comparative paper of Bordo and Helbling (2003) use factor analysis and concordance indices
    to study co-movement.


                                                    10
bias in the estimated standard errors is built into the standard dyadic approach. This is

due to the fact that country i appears in multiple observations at any time t. We include

country level dummies which alleviates this problem as discussed in Case (1991).

         For our baseline sample, we have data on industrial production and other co-

variates for ten countries. Due to some missing trade data for certain country pairs we use

a balanced panel with 342 usable observations or 39 dyads in our regressions. We also

have data for another 6 countries beginning with the late 1920s, and are able to use these

data in a highly unbalanced sample to illustrate robustness. We estimate equation (1) by

OLS or two stage least squares to control for the potential endogeneity of trade and we

use heteroscedasticity/autocorrelation robust standard errors clustered on the country pair.

IV.B Data

IV.B.1 Measuring and Filtering of Production Indicators

We use data on indexes of industrial production or proxies for industrial production when

these are not available. The proxies are all based on information from leading sectors.4

These data are all available at monthly frequencies and were compiled by the League of

Nations in various issues of the monthly Bulletin of Economic Statistics and the

International Abstract of Economic Statistics (Tinbergen, 1934). The countries included

in our sample are listed in Table 1. Data for Denmark, Norway, and Sweden were used

in Klovland (1998).5 We de-trend the logarithm of the monthly indexes using the HP




4
 For Austria, pig iron and steel is used from 1919-1936, and an industrial production index is used for the
    remaining years. For Belgium and the United Kingdom, pig iron plus steel is used for the entire period.
    For Canada, the United States, Japan, and France an index of industrial production is used for the entire
    period
5 Jan Tore Klovland graciously shared these data with us. Klovland uses production indices for the
    manufacturing and mining sectors to estimate industrial production at a monthly frequency. Sweden
    has industrial production data from 1925, but Klovland adds data going back to 1919.


                                                     11
filter with a smoothing parameter of 129600 as suggested by Ravn and Uhlig (2002).6

The de-trending procedure we employ eliminates most large shocks to these series caused

by general strikes. In particular, the UK’s index falls dramatically in 1921 and 1926.



IV.B.2 Determinants of Co-Movement

            We use total bilateral trade flows divided by the sum of the two countries’

GDPs in the first year of the two year period as a measure of bilateral trade integration.7

This variable is highly correlated with geographic variables such as distance and whether

nations share a border. In light of the fact that GDP is part of the trade integration

measure, these two variables are plausible, excluded instrumental variables (cf. Frankel

and Rose, 1998).8

         To examine whether the data are consistent with the possibility that the gold

standard transmitted shocks, we constructed a gold standard variable that measures how

many months out of the 24 months in each period both countries were on gold de facto

and de jure. Sources for these dates include Brown (1940), Wandschneider (2005) and

Eichengreen and Sachs (1985).

         To determine whether countries are de facto pegged or not, we use an approach

similar to that in Shambaugh (2004). In Shambaugh’s classification, countries that stay

within a 2% band in 11 of 12 months (for a given year) are considered as pegged, while

countries that are outside of the band for at least 2 months in a year are considered to be

6
  Our results are robust to using the Baxter King filter (Baxter and King, 1995), the Christiano-Fitzgerald
   filter (2003) and a simple log-linear trend.
7
  Data on trade underlie Jacks, Meissner, Novy (forthcoming). Sources are described thoroughly therein.
   Missing data were available from Barbieri (1996).
8
  Other theoretically consistent measures of bilateral integration, first developed by Head and Ries (2001),
   are available and are used for instance by Jacks, Meissner and Novy (forthcoming). Regression results
   are robust and even more precisely estimated when using this measure, but they involve more
   explanation for their derivation. For the sake of brevity we rely on trade shares.


                                                     12
de-facto floats. We have modified that approach slightly, as we are using two-year

periods. We construct the variable “peg” equal to 1 in each month if the absolute value

of the difference between the log of the current and the log of the initial nominal

exchange rate exchange rate is less than .02, and no country in the pair had exchange

controls.9 The variable we use in the regressions is then the percentage of the 24 months

within the two-year period that this indicator equals one.

           We also include a set of indicator variables for each country in the dyad each of

which is interacted the period indicators. These “time-varying country fixed effects”

control for unobservable shocks and transmission mechanisms at the country level within

each period affecting co-movement with all other countries. It is not hard to think of

policies and forces that acted “multilaterally” instead of bilaterally but which are

extremely hard to measure directly. These include trade policy and tariffs, exchange

controls, the effective multilateral exchange rate regime, fiscal policies, financial crises

and so forth. Naturally we include the constituent terms of these interactions such as

time-invariant country fixed effects and a set of period dummies. The latter also control

for global shocks that affect all countries equally including a scramble for gold reserves,

an international liquidity crisis in the world’s financial system, commodity price shocks,

etc. In some specifications, we add country-pair fixed effects so as to control for

(unobservable) similar policies and structures at the country pair level.



V. Results

           Table 2 presents baseline results for our balanced sample based on a regression

like that of equation (1). The key explanatory variables are the bilateral level of trade
9
    Table 1 shows the dates for exchange controls and adherence to the gold standard.


                                                      13
integration and the percentage of the time period a dyad has a de-facto fixed exchange

rate. Fixed exchange rates have a large, positive and significant association with bilateral

co-movement. The impact of a one standard deviation rise in the “average fixed” variable

(equal to 0.38 or an extra nine months of low movement in the exchange rate) is

associated with a rise in the correlation of 0.09 or 21% of one standard deviation of the

dependent variable. Column 3 reports a specification with country-pair fixed effects.

Given the strong persistence of bilateral trade relationships, the coefficient on trade is no

longer significant. Still, the coefficient on fixed exchange rates is of the same magnitude

as in column (1) and (2), and it remains significant. In columns (4) and (5) we see similar

evidence that the gold standard was associated with co-movement.10 The data are indeed

supportive of the idea that the gold standard acted as a channel for the international

transmission of the Great Depression.

         Trade also appears as a statistically significant determinant of business cycle co-

movement. The instrumental variable estimation in column (2) uses the gravity-inspired

variables - border and the logarithm of distance between capitals in kilometers - as

excluded instruments. 11 The instrumental variables regression shows that trade has a

larger positive association with co-movement than using OLS. In the OLS regression, a

one percentage point rise in the trade ratio is associated with a 6% rise in the dependent

variable. The economic significance of trade is much smaller than that of the pegged

exchange rate variable. Here a one standard deviation rise in the trade ratio is associated



10
   We also used the standard deviation of the monthly change of the log of the nominal exchange rate as a
    proxy for exchange rate stability. This variable was negatively correlated with co-movement and also
    statistically significant.
11
   Instrumental variable results are robust to using the logarithm of the trade share instead of the level. As
    well as the logarithm of the trade cost measure discussed in Jacks, Meissner and Novy (forthcoming).


                                                      14
with rise in the correlation equivalent to 1/20 of a standard deviation of the dependent

variable.

       In Figure 3 we show another way to gauge the importance of trade flows versus

exchange rate regimes in explaining co-movement using counterfactual predictions. First

we show the predicted values of the dependent variable from the model estimated in

Table 2 column 2. Next the line labeled “1928-29” peg uses the same model but predicts

correlations using the bilateral value of the fixed exchange rate variable in 1928-29. Since

1928-29 is a period when the average time spent on a peg is 0.866, this counterfactual

assess what co-movement might have been like had most nations clung to fixed exchange

rate regimes in other years. The 1928-29 trade values line predicts using the trade values

from 1928-29 and the actual values for other variables.

       It is quite clear that co-movement would have been significantly higher in the

early 1920s and in the early 1930s had nations been bound together by a system of fixed

exchange rates. The average predicted correlation would have been 0.16 points higher in

1932-33 in a counterfactual world where nations maintained their fixed exchange rates

instead of abandoning them during the initial years of the depression. However, the gap

between the predicted values using the actual data and the counterfactual world where

most nations are fixed and free of exchange controls narrows to half this size by 1936-37.

The latter finding is attributable to the resurgence of fixed exchange rates among certain

blocs of nations.

       Still, the overall unconditional fall in correlations after 1933, when trade was

recovering and exchange rates were less volatile is surprising. The explanation is that

inter-bloc exchange rate volatility fell more slowly or rose while intra bloc exchange rate




                                            15
volatility fell more quickly. This induced an overall lower average correlation via inter-

bloc correlations that were falling more quickly than intra-bloc correlations. The

unconditional simple average bilateral correlation of industrial production for pairs that

were floating, or where one nation had adopted exchange controls, fell from 0.3 in 1932-

33 to 0.11. On the other hand, for pairs that were fixed more than 75 percent of each two

year period, this correlation only fell from 0.36 to 0.33.



VI. Further Findings and Robustness Checks

       All regressions in Table 2 include time effects that bluntly control for common

shocks as well as country fixed effects that vary by period. Based on the levels of the

period indicators in regressions without time-varying country fixed effects, we find

strong evidence for common shocks between 1928 and 1931. Here 1928-29 and 1930-31

have the largest and most significant intercepts. Also, the fact that the coefficient on trade

flows is highly significant and larger than in Table 2 column (1) with the exclusion of the

time-varying country-dummies (this is left unreported) also suggests to us that trade

policy at the multilateral level changed correlations significantly.

       Table 3 examines the relationships between co-movement, trade and exchange

rate regimes for three periods. This is one way to better understand the evolution of co-

movement in the 1930s versus the 1920s. The first period includes four two-year sub-

periods: 1920-21, 1922-23, 1924-25 and 1926-27 covering reconstruction of the gold

standard and a relatively benign international environment. The next period marks the

Great Depression between 1928 and 1931. The last period of recovery, exchange controls




                                             16
and reformulation of currency and trade blocs includes observations from the two-year

periods of 1932-33, 1934-35, and 1936-37.

       Trade is only significant in the first period covered in Table 3. In the second

period, the trade coefficient is small and insignificant. By the third period, it regains a

magnitude comparable to that in the first period, but it is no longer significant. In the first

period, the exchange rate pegs indicator is positive and significant. In the second period,

the size of the coefficient on the exchange rate peg is much smaller (0.12 vs. 0.44) and is

significantly different from zero only at the 17 percent level. There is also a similar

change to the gold standard indicator although this is variable is much less precisely

estimated than either the peg variable or the gold standard variable in the pooled sample

from Table 2. The “common shock” of the Great Depression must explain a lot of the

variance in co-movement between 1928 and 1931 and hence one of the reasons that these

variables drop in significance. A second possibility is that temporal aggregation is too

coarse to pick up on differences in the timing of the shock and changes in policy. A final

possibility is that there are other channels such as financial connections or other

unobservables that mattered more. The relative role of each of these is beyond the scope

of this paper.

       For the last period, we present two specifications -- one with time-varying country

fixed effects in column (4) and one without them in column (5). In column (4), the

pegged exchange rate variable is negative, small and not statistically significant. Next, in

column (5), we omit the time-varying country fixed effects substituting them with an

indicator for whether one nation in the pair had exchange controls. In this regression, the




                                              17
fixed exchange rate variable is positive, significant and displays the magnitude it had in

column (1) for the sample prior to 1928.

        Why is there such a difference in the outcomes? The time-varying country fixed

effects are likely to be highly correlated with exchange control policies, trade

interference, financial conditions and the re-orientation of economic relations that many

nations undertook in the 1930s. They are designed to proxy for policies which countries

adopt and which affect their relations with all countries but which are difficult to observe.

One interpretation of this result is that these forces were more important than bilateral

policies in the 1930s. However, there could also be problems in identification due to

collinearity. Trade, exchange rates and exchange controls were often part of a

comprehensive package in the 1930s to restore external and/or internal imbalance and so

the data are too hard-pressed to find any relationship with so many controls. One

possibility, as we have shown, is to exclude these time varying fixed effects. If we

exclude them, there is a risk of omitted variable bias. Column (5) might seem to confirm

this possibility, since when the time-varying country fixed effects are omitted, the pegged

exchange rate variable retains its magnitude from the 1920-1927 period. Another

interpretation is a standard multicollinearity argument since the sign on the exchange rate

peg flips and its standard error rises so much with the inclusion of time-varying country

fixed effects.

        Also, if we exclude the exchange rate peg and the exchange control indicator but

do include trade relations the trade variable is estimated at 0.17 and has a p-value of

0.168. Furthermore, a scatter plot (unreported) of the bilateral correlations versus the

exchange rate peg shows a clear positive relationship. Again, all of this points in the




                                             18
direction of the possibility of a correlation between the many policies implemented as a

means of recovery in the 1930s and exchange rate policy. Given the findings in column

(1), those from the previous literature on the interwar period, and the overall literature on

monetary regimes and co-movement, it is not unreasonable to think that there was still an

association between exchange rate pegs and co-movement in the late 1930s but that it is

difficult to tease out of the limited amount of data with our demanding baseline

specification.

       Finally, we present results from a larger sample in column (6). This extended

sample includes six new countries that have data available largely from the 1930s

onwards. Again, we remove the time-varying country fixed effects. In this sub-sample,

trade is no longer significant while fixed exchange rate regimes are positive and

significant. Additionally, exchange controls seem to promote co-movement. The nations

included in this new subsample include many in the Reichsmark bloc so this is not totally

surprising. Again, monetary regimes are not significant in this subsample when we

include time-varying country fixed effects. There is also evidence of significant

collinearity between the instruments used for trade and monetary regimes as argued by

Eichengreen and Irwin (1995) and Ritschl and Wolf (forthcoming). When exchange rate

regimes are excluded, the trade coefficient is estimated at 0.08 but it is not significant.




   VII.    Some Tentative Conclusions

   The interwar period brought extremely volatile conditions to most countries. A long-

standing literature has suggested that the gold standard transmitted a monetary shock




                                              19
across borders and can help explain why the Great Depression was a global phenomenon.

Our results are consistent with the idea that both trade and exchange rate regimes played

an important role in transmitting shocks in the interwar period. These results conform

with previous results from the literature that explore co-movement in the post-World War

II period.

    Still, these patterns are not obvious in the aggregate data nor given the historical

record. In fact, a puzzling aspect of the aggregate data exists. As exchange rate regimes

made a comeback and trade recovered in the 1930s, the average level of co-movement

actually fell to a within period low. Much of the reduction in correlation seems to be due

to low inter-bloc correlation with higher intra-bloc correlation. The group of nations that

once adhered en masse to a gold standard splintered into several constituent blocs that

amongst them were highly asynchronous.

    While the breakdown of the gold standard and the consequent devaluations that the

1930s produced were probably necessary to achieve recovery from the Great Depression,

this was not the final nail in the coffin of integration. Nations revealed a preference for

recovering coordinated monetary policies and trade persisted. This kept them exposed to

shocks from abroad. However, by the 1930s, policies of coordination and integration

formed amongst smaller units. Between these blocs and units, co-movement appears to

have fallen. Whether policy makers acted in a conscious attempt to avoid co-movement

with some nations by forming “optimal” blocs, what the costs and benefits of such

tradeoffs might have been, and how deep the contemporary understanding of these

processes was remain interesting avenues for further research even 80 years after




                                             20
Winston Churchill and Irving Fisher first noted the role of monetary regimes as a source

for interdependence.




                                           21
References:

Artis, M.J., Zhang, W., 1997 “International business cycles and the ERM: is there a
       European business cycle?” International Journal of Finance and Economics 2, 1–
       16.

Backus , David K., and Patrick J. Kehoe, and Finn E. Kydland. 1992. “International Real
      Business Cycles.“ The Journal of Political Economy, 100(4): 745-775.

Barbieri, Katherine, 1996. “Economic Interdependence and Militarized Interstate
       Conflict, 1870-1985.” PhD dissertation, Binghampton University.

Basu , Susanto and Alan M. Taylor. 1999. “Business Cycles in International Historical
       Perspective.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 13(2): 45-68.

Baxter, Marianne and R. G. King. 1999. "Measuring Business Cycles: Approximate
       Band-Pass Filters for Economic Time Series." Review of Economics and
       Statistics, 81: 575-93.

Baxter, Marianne and Michael A. Koupiritsas. 2005. “Determinants of business cycle co-
       movement: a robust analysis.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 52(1) 113-157

Bordo, Michael D. and Thomas Helbling. 2003. “Have Business Cycles Become More
      Synchronized.” NBER Working Papers 10130, National Bureau of Economic
      Research, Inc.

Brown, William Adams Jr. 1940. The International Gold Standard Reinterpreted: 1914-
     1934. New York: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Canova, Fabio and Harris Dellas. 1993. "Trade interdependence and the international
      business cycle," Journal of International Economics, 34(1-2):23-47.

Case, Anne. 1991. “Spatial Patterns in Household Demand,” Econometrica, 59,
       953–965.

Choudhri, Ehsan U. and Levis A. Kochin. 1980. “The Exchange Rate and the
     International Transmission of Business Cycle Disturbances: Some Evidence from
     the Great Depression “ Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 12(4):565-574.

Christiano, Lawrence J. and Terry J. Fitzgerald. 2003. “The Band Pass Filter.”
       International Economic Review, 44(2): 435-465.

Clark, Todd E. and Eric van Wincoop. 2001. “Borders and Business Cycles.” Journal of
       International Economics, 55(1): 59-85.




                                          22
di Giovanni, Julian and Andrei Levchenko. 2009. “Putting the Parts Together: Trade,
       Vertical Linkages, and Business Cycle Comovement,” American Economic
       Journal: Macroeconomics, 2:2 (Apr. 2010), 95-124.


Eichengreen, Barry. 1992a. Golden Fetters, The Gold Standard and the Great
      Depression, 1919-1939. New York: Oxford University Press.


Eichengreen, Barry and Douglas A. Irwin. 1995. “Trade Blocs, Currency Blocs, and the
       Reorientation of World Trade in the 1930s.” Journal of International Economics,
       38(1): 1-24.

Eichengreen, Barry and Jeffrey Sachs. 1985. “Exchange Rates and Economic Recovery
      in the 1930s” The Journal of Economic History, 45(4):925-946.

Eichengreen, Barry, and Jeffrey Sachs. 1986. “Competitive Devaluation and the Great
      Depression,” Economics Letters, 22:67-71.

Foreman-Peck, James 1995. A History of the World Economy: International Economic
      Relations since 1850. Harvester Wheatsheaf, Hemel Hempstead, United
      Kingdom.

Fisher, I. 1935. “Are Booms and Depressions Transmitted Internationally through
       Monetary Standards?” Bulletin de l’Institut International de Statistique 28, pp. 1-
       29.

Flood, R. and Rose, A. 2009. “Inflation Targeting and Business Cycle Synchronization.”
       CEPR Discussion Paper no. 7377. London, Centre for Economic Policy Research.

Frankel , Jeffrey A., and Andrew K. Rose. 1998. “The Endogeneity of the Optimum
      Currency Area Criteria,” The Economic Journal, 108(449): 1009-1025.


Friedman, Milton and Anna J. Schwartz 1963. A Monetary History of the United States,
      1867-1960. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.


Hamilton, James D. 1988. “Role of the International Gold Standard in Propagating the
      Great Depression” Contemporary Policy Issues. vol. 6, pp. 67-89.

Head, Keith and John Ries. 2001. “Increasing Returns Versus National Product
      Differentiation as an Explanation for the Pattern of US-Canada Trade.” American
      Economic Review 91(4): 858-876.

Imbs, Jean. 2004. “Trade, Finance, Specialization, and Synchronization.” Review of
       Economics and Statistics, 86(3): 723-734.


                                            23
Jacks, David, Christopher Meissner, and Dennis Novy. forthcoming. “Trade Booms,
       Trade Busts and Trade Costs, 1870-2000.” Journal of International Economics.


Klovland, Jan T. 1998. “Monetary Policy and business cycles in the interwar years: The
      Scandinavian experience.” European Review of Economic History, 2:309-344.

Kose, M. Ayhan, and Eswar S. Prasad, and Marco E. Terrones. 2003. “How Does
      Globalization Affect the Synchronization of Business Cycles?” The American
      Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 93(2):57-62.

Lai, Cheng-Chung and Joshua Jr-Shiang Gau. (2003). “The Chinese Silver Standard
       Economy and the 1929 Great Depression.” Australian Economic History Review
       vol. 43, no. 2. Pp. 155-168.

League of Nations. 1920-1940. Monthly Bulletin of Economic Statistics. Geneva:
      League of Nations


Perri, Fabrizio and Vincenzo Quadrini. 2002. "The Great Depression in Italy: Trade
        Restrictions and Real Wage Rigidities," Review of Economic Dynamics, 5(1):
        128-151.

Ravn, Morten O. and Harald Uhlig. 2002. “On Adjusting the Hodrick-Prescott Filter for
      the Frequency of Observations,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 84 (2)
      pp. 371-376

Richardson, Gary and Patrick van Horn. 2007. “Fetters of Debt, Deposit, or Gold during
      the Great Depression? The International Propagation of the Banking Crisis of
      1931” NBER working paper 12983.

Ritschl, Albrecht and Nikolaus Wolf. forthcoming. “Endogeneity of currency areas and
       trade blocs: evidence from the inter-war period.“ Kyklos.


Rose, Andrew K. and Charles Engel. 2002. “Currency Unions and International
      Integration.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 34(4):1067-1089

Shambaugh , Jay C., 2004. "The Effect of Fixed Exchange Rates on Monetary Policy,"
     The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1):300-351.

Straumann, Tobias and Ulrich Woitek. 2009. “A pioneer of a new monetary policy?
      Sweden’s price-level targeting of the 1930s revisited” European Review of
      Economic History vol. 13 pp. 251-282.




                                          24
Temin, Peter. 1993. “Transmission of the Great Depression” Journal of Economic
      Perspectives, 7 (2) pp. 87-102.

Tinbergen, Jan. 1934. International Abstract of Economic Statistics. International
      Conference of Economic Services.

Wandschneider, Kirsten. 2005. "The stability of the Inter-war Gold Exchange Standard.
     Did Politics Matter?" The Journal of Economic History, 68(1): 151-181.




                                           25
Tablee 1 Sample countries
                c         and
                            d available data.
                                        d




Notess: Table givees informatioon on the daates for which we have pparticular serries and for
which h countries appear
                  a       in ourr data set. We
                                            W present reesults that include a largeer sample off
nationns in columnn (6) of Tablle 3. These results
                                            r      includde six nationns that are noot included iin
the reesults from Table
                  T     2.




                                                26
Tablee 2 Co-moveement, exchaange rate reg
                                        gimes and traade for 38 coountry pairs, 1920-1938




Tablee 3 Co-moveement, the gold standard
                                       d and trade fo
                                                   for 38 countrry pairs, 1920-1938




                                            27
Figure 1 Monthly Industrial Production Indexes for 10 Countries, January, 1920- December, 1938

                                       5.5



                                        5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Canada
 ln (Index of indsutrial Production)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   USA
                                       4.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Japan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Austria
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Belgium
                                        4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   France
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   UK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Norway
                                       3.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Denmark
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Sweden


                                        3



                                       2.5
                                             Jan-20
                                                      Jul-20
                                                               Jan-21
                                                                        Jul-21
                                                                                 Jan-22
                                                                                          Jul-22
                                                                                                   Jan-23
                                                                                                            Jul-23
                                                                                                                     Jan-24
                                                                                                                              Jul-24
                                                                                                                                       Jan-25
                                                                                                                                                Jul-25
                                                                                                                                                         Jan-26
                                                                                                                                                                  Jul-26
                                                                                                                                                                           Jan-27
                                                                                                                                                                                    Jul-27
                                                                                                                                                                                             Jan-28
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Jul-28
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Jan-29
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Jul-29
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Jan-30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Jul-30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Jan-31
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Jul-31
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Jan-32
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Jul-32
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Jan-33
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Jul-33
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Jan-34
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Jul-34
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Jan-35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Jul-35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Jan-36
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Jul-36
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Jan-37
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Jul-37
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Jan-38
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Jul-38
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Date




Notes: Data sources are described in the text. Data are monthly observations on the logarithm of industrial production indexes.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          28
Figurre 2 Averagees of Bilateral Industrial Output Corrrelations, Fiixed Exchange Rates andd
        Trade Inteegration by two
                              t year perriods, 1920- 1938.




Notes: Sample arithmmetic averages of three variab    bles are presennted. Industrial output indexes were
     nded using a Ho
detren               odrick Prescottt filter as descrribed in the texxt. The bilaterall correlation iss measured oveer
two yeear periods. Billateral trade is defined as bilaateral exports pplus imports diivided by total pair GDP. Thee
fixed exchange
      e         rate variable
                     v          is defiined as the perccentage of a tw
                                                                     wo year period in which a couuntry pair has a
fixed exchange
      e         rate as
                     a defined in th  he text. 38 coun ntry pairs are iincluded in theese calculationss.




                                                         29
Figure 3 Predicted values of bilateral correlation of de-trended industrial production
       under two counterfactual scenarios and with the actual data.
   .8
   .6
   .4
   .2
   0




        1920                1925                   1930                   1935
                                            Year

                       Predicted values                1928-29 trade values
                       1928-29 peg values




Notes: The line showing predicted bilateral correlation values gives the un-weighted
arithmetic average of the actual predicted values from the regression model of Table 2
column 2. The line for 1928-29 peg values uses the same model but predicts bilateral
correlations using the bilateral value of the fixed exchange rate variable in 1928-29
throughout. The 1928-29 trade values line predicts using the trade values from 1928-29.




                                             30
