NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BROADENING FOCUS:
SPILLOVERS, COMPLEMENTARITIES AND SPECIALIZATION IN THE HOSPITAL INDUSTRY
Jonathan R. Clark
Robert Huckman
Working Paper 16937
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16937

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2011

We appreciate helpful comments from two anonymous editors, three referees, Carliss Baldwin, David
Chan, Rebecca Henderson, Andrew King, Gary Pisano, and seminar participants at the Academy of
Management, the American Society of Health Economists, Emory University, Harvard Business School,
MIT, the National Bureau of Economic Research, the University of Michigan, the University of Minnesota,
and the University of Pennsylvania. We acknowledge support for this research from the Division of
Research and Faculty Development at Harvard Business School. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Jonathan R. Clark and Robert Huckman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Broadening Focus: Spillovers, Complementarities and Specialization in the Hospital Industry
Jonathan R. Clark and Robert Huckman
NBER Working Paper No. 16937
April 2011
JEL No. I1,L15,M11
ABSTRACT
The long-standing argument that focused operations outperform others stands in contrast to claims
about the benefits of broader operational scope. The performance benefits of focus are typically attributed
to reduced complexity, lower uncertainty, and the development of specialized expertise, while the
benefits of greater breadth are linked to the economies of scope achieved by sharing common resources,
such as advertising or production capacity, across activities. Within the literature on corporate strategy,
this tension between focus and breadth is reconciled by the concept of related diversification (i.e.,
a firm with multiple operating units, each specializing in distinct but related activities). We consider
whether there are similar benefits to related diversification within an operating unit and examine the
mechanism that generates these benefits. Using the empirical context of cardiovascular care within
hospitals, we first examine the relationship between a hospital’s level of specialization in cardiovascular
care and the quality of its clinical performance on cardiovascular patients. We find that, on average,
focus has a positive effect on quality performance. We then distinguish between positive spillovers
and complementarities to examine: (1) the extent to which a hospital’s specialization in areas related
to cardiovascular care directly impacts performance on cardiovascular patients (positive spillovers)
and (2) whether the marginal benefit of a hospital’s focus in cardiovascular care depends on the degree
to which the hospital “co-specializes” in related areas (complementarities). In our setting, we find
evidence of such complementarities in specialization.

Jonathan R. Clark
601A Donald H. Ford Building
The Pennsylvania State University
University Park PA 16802
jrc24@psu.edu
Robert Huckman
435 Morgan Hall
Harvard Business School
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
rhuckman@hbs.edu

A key tension facing many firms concerns the optimal scope of their operations. The benefits of
operational specialization, or focus, in terms of lower cost or higher quality are widely discussed in both
manufacturing (Skinner, 1974) and service (Heskett, 1986) settings. Leveraging operational focus has
been offered as a rationale for decisions ranging from the use of contract manufacturers by consumer
electronics companies to the use of a single type of aircraft by low-cost airlines or the dedication of an
entire hospital to patients undergoing a single surgical procedure. In fact, the “law of factory focus” has
been cited as a key component of received wisdom in the field of operations management (Schmenner
and Swink, 1998). Despite this broad support for operational focus, some observers have noted that
seemingly unfocused operations perform at a high level (Ketokivi and Jokinen, 2006) and that a broader
range of activities may, in fact, increase firm value (Teece, 1980; Panzar and Willig, 1981; Teece et al.,
1994; Villalonga, 2004).
Some reconciliation of these views may be found in the concept of related diversification, which
argues that expanding scope into related businesses increases firm value while broader diversification
into unrelated businesses may reduce it (Rumelt, 1974). The implicit assumption in this literature is that
related diversification yields a firm with multiple operating units—each specializing in a distinct set of
activities—and that the specialties of these units are related to each other. In this paper, we consider
whether the benefits of related diversification also exist within operating units themselves.1 Specifically,
we ask whether a focused operating unit can be “too focused”. To the extent that there are benefits to
related diversification within an operating unit, we offer an empirical approach for identifying the source
of those benefits.
Studies of related diversification at the corporate level tend to attribute the benefits of
diversification to economies of scope, which Panzar and Willig (1981) define as occurring when “…it is
less costly to combine two or more product lines in one firm than to produce them separately.”
Economies of scope, however, may emerge from two sources that we aim to isolate in this study: positive
Schilling et al. (2003), Boh et al. (2007), and Narayanan et al. (2009) consider whether there are benefits to
engaging in related activities at the level of small groups and individuals. We discuss this work in greater detail
below.

1

2

spillovers and complementarities. Roberts (2004) defines these concepts by noting, “…complementarity
is conceptually different from a positive spillover. A positive spillover occurs when the overall benefit
from some activity (rather than the returns to increasing the activity) is increasing in the level of the other
activity.” (p. 73) Because of our interest in the effects of focus, our study tests for the presence of positive
spillovers and complementarities based not on an operating unit’s absolute level of specific activities but
on its level of specialization in those activities. Despite this difference, the conceptual definitions and
intuition provided by Roberts carry through to our setting.
A common type of positive spillover is what Markides and Williamson (1994) refer to
synonymously as the “asset amortization” or “static economies of scope” benefit of related
diversification. That is, positive spillovers may simply be economies of scale that exist across different
activities rather than within a single activity. Such economies may appear as either reductions in average
cost (due to the amortization of fixed investments) or improvements in average quality (due to leveraging
intangible assets, such as know-how). In either case, a positive spillover occurs when increased
specialization in a related business segment has a direct benefit on operational performance in a focal
business segment that is independent of the operating unit’s level of specialization in the focal segment.
Complementarities, on the other hand, exist if increased specialization in a related business
segment has an indirect benefit on operational performance in a focal business segment by increasing the
marginal benefit of specializing more in the focal activity (Milgrom and Roberts 1990, 1994, and 1995).
Complementarity thus implies that the benefits of related diversification may not be simply due to sharing
fixed assets but also to the fact that a related activity improves performance of the focal activity at the
margin. In other words, complementarity suggests a positive interdependence between levels of
specialization in focal and related activities.
To clarify further the distinction between these two sources of scope economies, we turn to an
example from the setting we examine in this study—hospitals. Consider a hospital that only treats
cardiovascular patients but faces declining demand for cardiovascular services. In the interest of
amortizing fixed investments that it has made in assets such as hospital beds, operating rooms, and

3

diagnostic services (e.g., radiology), the hospital may decide to add other clinical service lines outside of
cardiovascular care (e.g., endocrinology or respiratory medicine). To the extent that these other service
lines directly improve the quality—or reduce the cost—of treating cardiovascular patients regardless of
the hospital’s level of specialization in cardiovascular care, they exert a positive spillover on
cardiovascular care. For example, adding these new clinical services to a cardiovascular hospital may
bring clinicians with general knowledge that can directly benefit the hospital’s performance on
cardiovascular patients (e.g., a new approach to reducing the rate of hospital-acquired infections that
benefits many types of patients, including those with cardiovascular disease).
On the other hand, the addition of clinical specialists in these new service lines would exert a
complementarity with respect to cardiovascular care to the extent that they give cardiovascular specialists
access to new sources of knowledge and insight about related conditions (e.g., many patients with
cardiovascular illness suffer from diabetes, a key area of focus for endocrinologists). This knowledge
may help cardiovascular specialists interpret and encode their own specialized experiences with
cardiovascular patients (Levitt and March, 1988). The increased individual and organizational attention
(Ocasio, 1997) on these new service lines is likely to provide the context for greater formal and informal
interaction among clinicians in related specialties (e.g., the “curbside consultations” described extensively
in the medical literature (Manian and Janssen, 1996; Kuo, et al., 1998; Bergus, et al., 2000)). To the
extent that the presence of new service lines increases the performance associated with any given level of
cardiovascular specialization, those services exert a complementarity with respect to cardiovascular care.
In such cases, there are benefits to “co-specialization” in cardiovascular care and the new service lines.
The empirical literature on the impact of focus on performance has considered a range of
performance measures including cost, productivity, customer satisfaction, and quality. In our context, a
critical measure of performance—and that for which we have reliable information—is quality
performance. Consistent with prior work examining focus in health care settings, we begin our inquiry by
asking whether an operating unit that is more focused on a given activity achieves higher quality
performance (i.e., higher output quality) with respect to that activity than a less-focused unit engaged in

4

the same activity (e.g., Cram et al., 2005; Young et al., 2005; Greenwald et al., 2006; Kc and Terwiesch,
2009). We continue by testing for the benefits of related diversification; that is, whether the composition
of a unit's other activities (i.e., outside of the focal area) impacts quality performance in the focal area. In
so doing, we contribute to the literature on specialization and related diversification by separately
measuring the extent of positive spillovers and complementarities. This latter line of inquiry allows us to
examine whether and how the benefits of focusing on a particular activity depend on the degree to which
an organization is also relatively specialized (i.e., “co-specialized”) in related activities.
We consider these issues by examining the delivery of cardiovascular care within hospitals. We
recognize that a hospital can be characterized as either an operating unit or a multi-unit firm.
Nevertheless, as circumscribed facilities, most hospitals can be viewed as operating units, akin to plants in
the manufacturing context. We have chosen our empirical setting for several reasons. First, hospitals
tend to provide services across a range of clinical areas (i.e., business segments) such as cardiovascular
care, cancer, orthopedics, and obstetrics. These segments appear in different proportions and
combinations across facilities. For example, a given hospital may devote a substantial share of resources
to cardiovascular care while allocating comparatively less attention or fewer resources to obstetrics.
Conversely, another hospital may be characterized by a significant focus in obstetrics with relatively little
cardiovascular care.
Second, hospital discharge data includes information on every patient in a particular hospital.
This characteristic of the data allows us to measure the degree to which a given hospital focuses on a
clinical area (e.g., cardiovascular services) as a continuous variable based on the percentage of its total
operational activity dedicated to that clinical area.2 This continuity is particularly useful in testing for
complementarities based on the degree to which the marginal benefit of a given level of focus in one
business segment increases as the share of activity devoted to related segments increases. Third, there are

2

Measuring focus as a continuous, rather than discrete, variable implies that an operating unit need not be dedicated
solely to one activity (or set of activities) to be considered “focused”. For example, a unit that is 40% dedicated to a
particular activity—with no other activity accounting for a similarly large portion of the unit’s effort—is relatively
focused on the first activity.

5

clear and objective measures of quality performance, specifically a hospital’s risk-adjusted mortality rate
for cardiovascular patients.
Finally, specialization is particularly relevant in the hospital industry, where many observers have
noted the value of delivering health care through organizations focused around the needs of patients with
specific diseases (Herzlinger, 1997; Porter and Teisberg, 2006, 2007; Christensen et al., 2009). In fact, the
rise of single-specialty hospitals—a large portion of which focus on cardiovascular care—has led to
significant debate over the value of such facilities. This debate centers on whether such facilities
outperform traditional “general” hospitals (Herzlinger, 1997, 2000; Dwyer, 2000; Ginsburg, 2000).
Consistent with the spirited nature of this debate, the empirical studies on this topic offer mixed findings
(Cram et al., 2005; Schneider et al., 2005; Young et al., 2005; Greenwald et al., 2006; Barro et al., 2006;
Hwang et al., 2007; Nallamothu et al., 2007; Carey et al., 2008; Hyer et al., 2009; Kc and Terwiesch,
2009). Overall, this stream of literature highlights the importance of determining how hospitals should
balance specializing in a single clinical area with building expertise in other areas.

Theory and Hypotheses
The idea that specialization, or focus, improves performance by reducing complexity and
leveraging task repetition dates back to Smith’s (1776) example of the pin factory and is later captured in
the work of Fayol (1916) and Taylor (1911). Though containing implications for operating units or entire
organizations, these early arguments largely center on the performance of the individual worker. March
and Simon (1958) note that lessons learned about individual specialization may not simply translate to a
higher level of organization. Nevertheless, subsequent thinking about focus at the level of the operating
unit (e.g., Skinner’s (1974) concept of the focused factory) is consistent with earlier work on specialized
labor.
Several studies provide empirical support for the benefits of focus in the context of manufacturing
(Hayes and Wheelwright, 1984; Brush and Karnani, 1996; Bozarth and Edwards, 1997; Fisher and Ittner,
1999; Vokurka and Davis, 2000; Anderson, 2001). Studies in service settings likewise support the

6

benefits of focus at some level (Heskett, 1986; Johnston, 1996; Lapre and Tsikriktsis, 2006; Tsikriktsis,
2007; Huckman and Zinner, 2008). Specific to the hospital context, Herzlinger (1997) identifies the
benefits of applying Skinner’s focused factory to health care delivery. Subsequent studies in the hospital
industry find benefits of focus in terms of clinical outcomes (e.g., Greenwald et al., 2006) and financial
performance (e.g., Hyer et al., 2009).
Nevertheless, support for the benefits of focus at the level of the operating unit is not unanimous.3
Mukherjee et al. (2000) suggest that the impact of reducing focus depends on a manufacturing line’s
degree of absorptive capacity (Cohen and Levinthal, 1990) with respect to changes in manufacturing
tasks. In their study of automobile assembly plants, MacDuffie et al. (1996) find that a more complex mix
of parts negatively affects productivity while a more complex mix of models has no such effect. Further,
the negative impact of parts complexity can be offset by the adoption of lean management principles.
Other studies in manufacturing contexts suggest that more-focused operations perform no better than their
less-focused counterparts (Kekre and Srinivasan, 1990; Suarez et al., 1996; Ketokivi and Jokinen, 2006).
In the financial services industry, Siggelkow (2003) finds that mutual fund providers with a broader range
of funds (i.e., less-focused providers) have higher cash inflows than more-focused providers despite the
fact that the specific funds managed by the latter outperform similar funds managed by the former.
Finally, a few studies in the hospital industry find that hospitals that devote a majority of their activity and
resources to cardiovascular patients perform at best no better in terms of patient outcomes on
cardiovascular procedures (Young et al., 2005; Cram et al., 2005; Kc and Terwiesch, 2009).
Despite the mixed results highlighted above, the bulk of the empirical literature suggests a
positive-to-neutral effect of focus on performance. We thus offer the following baseline hypothesis
related to an operating unit’s level of focus (i.e., specialization in a focal business segment):

3

Even at the level of the individual, support for the benefits of specialization is not unanimous. Recent work by Boh
et al. (2007) and Narayanan et al. (2009) both highlight benefits to some degree of variety in individual work within
software development contexts.

7

Hypothesis 1: Increasing an operating unit’s level of specialization in a focal business segment improves
quality performance in that segment.

As noted earlier, several studies at the firm level have argued that increased scope, or
diversification, may represent an efficient approach to corporate organization (Teece, 1980; Panzar and
Willig, 1981). Nevertheless, like the previously noted literature on focus at the plant or operating-unit
level, this firm-level literature offers mixed evidence regarding the impact of diversification on firm value
(Rhoades, 1974; Lang and Stulz, 1994; Berger and Ofek, 1995; Servaes, 1996; Campa and Kedia, 2002;
Villalonga, 2004). The literature on related diversification provides insight into these conflicting results
by striking a balance between claims about the benefits of focus on one hand and those of diversification
on the other. Rumelt (1974) finds the highest levels of profitability among firms that diversify into areas
that draw on some “common core skill or resource.” Subsequent work is consistent with this finding and
suggests that some level of related diversification is beneficial but that evolving into an unfocused
enterprise by diversifying into unrelated businesses may destroy value (Christensen and Montgomery,
1981; Rumelt, 1982; Paelpu, 1985).
As suggested by Markides and Williamson (1994), the assumption—either explicit or implicit—
of the above stream of literature is “…to equate the benefits of relatedness with the static exploitation of
economies of scope.” (p. 150). That is, the literature tends to attribute the benefits of related
diversification to the simple amortization of investments in fixed assets—a positive spillover—rather than
to complementarities. We note that positive spillovers have been observed at the level of small groups in
knowledge intensive settings. Boh et al.’s (2007) analysis of productivity in software teams established
that a group’s average experience with related activities has a greater positive impact on productivity than
its average experience with a focal activity. This set-up differs from ours in two ways beyond the obvious
difference in empirical context. First, it measures the returns to absolute experience rather than to focus.
Second, it tests for positive spillovers but not for the complementarities that we measure in our study.
In this study, we present an approach for unpacking the benefits of related diversification by
determining the extent to which they emerge from either or both of these sources. To achieve this, we first

8

define the “relatedness” of an activity based on the potential for positive spillovers or complementarities
with a focal activity. Among hospital patients, disease categories that frequently co-occur in patients with
cardiovascular disease represent areas with the highest such potential. In our setting, positive spillovers
exist when the level of specialization in related segments (i.e. the share of an operating unit’s activity in
related segments) impacts performance in the focal segment independent of the unit’s level of
specialization in the latter. For example, we would predict that a hospital that is more specialized in
endocrinology would provide better outcomes for cardiovascular patients—regardless of its level of
specialization in cardiovascular care—as diabetes tends to be a common co-occurring condition for
cardiovascular patients. Our expectation here is that, in a knowledge-intensive setting such as a hospital
and because “…repetition, experience and homogeneity of tasks breed competence” (Skinner, 1974),
greater hospital specialization in endocrinology would produce deeper organizational know-how with
respect to diabetes. This know-how could be directly applied to patients hospitalized for cardiovascular
disease but who also have diabetes. As a result, the benefits of this know-how would accrue to
cardiovascular patients regardless of how specialized the hospital is in cardiovascular care. This suggests
the following hypothesis:
Hypothesis 2: Increasing an operating unit’s degree of specialization in related business segments
improves quality performance in its focal business segment (i.e., specialization in related segments has a
positive spillover on quality performance in the focal segment).

In comparison to positive spillovers, complementarities suggest the presence of
interdependencies between focal and related activities (Tanriverdi and Venkatraman, 2005). Schilling et
al. (2003) provide experimental evidence of complementarities by demonstrating that groups learn a focal
task at a faster rate when group members are exposed to related (i.e., moderate) variety—as opposed to
no variety or unrelated (i.e., broad) variety—in tasks over time. They note that, in their experimental
setting of problem-solving games, groups exposed to variety did not exhibit sub-specialization. That is,
they did not have one member play all games of one type and another member play all games of another
type. In our setting, related diversification typically occurs by having related specialists within the same

9

organization (e.g., cardiologists working in proximity to endocrinologists), not by exposing individuals or
groups to a range of related activities over time (e.g., individual physicians acting as cardiologistendocrinologist combinations). Our study, therefore, examines whether the complementary benefits of
relatedness identified by Schilling et al. (2003) within individuals or small groups can be extended to
interactions that tend to occur across specialized individuals or groups. To the extent that
complementarities exist in our setting, they suggest that some degree of interpersonal or intergroup
coordination is taking place.
We test for complementarities across activities by considering whether the benefit of a given level
of focus depends upon how an operating unit’s non-focal activities are distributed in terms of their
relatedness to the focal area. As noted earlier, Milgrom and Roberts’ (1994) general definition states that
two variables are complementary if “the marginal returns to one variable are increasing in the level of the
other variable” (Milgrom and Roberts, 1994, p. 5). In our setting, the variables are the degree of
specialization in focal and related non-focal activities, respectively. We expect that if non-focal activities
are disproportionately allocated to related (rather than unrelated) categories, the marginal benefit of a
given level of specialization in the focal activity will be greater. In short, we expect that there are returns
to co-specialization in related activities.
In the context of our earlier hospital example, complementarities in specialization would imply
that the benefits of a hospital being relatively specialized in cardiovascular care would be greater if the
hospital were also specialized in the related area of endocrinology. These complementarities could be due
to one or more of several factors. For example, cardiovascular physicians may develop better solutions to
clinical problems to the extent that they are able to draw on the knowledge of stronger diabetes specialists
through direct consultation on specific patients. That is, “co-specialized” hospitals might facilitate formal
interactions among specialists (e.g., traditional consultations or “grand rounds” (Parrino and White,

10

1990)) or what the medical literature commonly refers to as informal “curbside consultations” (Manian
and Janssen, 1996; Kuo, et al., 1998; Bergus, et al., 2000).4
Beyond direct consultation, hospitals that co-specialize in cardiovascular disease and
endocrinology may also be more likely to develop clinical centers that focus on the intersection of these
two clinical areas. That is, such hospitals may direct more cognitive attention (Simon, 1947; Ocasio,
1997) to this intersection. This point is reflected in the concepts of focused attention (Kahneman, 1973)
and situated attention (Ross and Nisbett, 1991), which collectively argue that individual behavior and
social cognition are influenced by an organization’s structures for allocating time, effort, and other
resources (Ocasio, 1997). In our setting, one might see a hospital develop a specialized program in
cardiovascular endocrinology, which would be staffed by physicians and other clinicians (e.g., nurses,
nutritionists) dedicated to this subspecialty. As this subspecialty expertise develops, one would expect
cardiovascular specialists in the hospital—either physicians or other clinical staff—to interpret and
encode more effectively the learning from their own specialized experience (Levitt and March, 1988). In
line with this logic, we propose the following hypothesis:
Hypothesis 3: Increasing an operating unit’s degree of specialization in related business segments
increases the marginal benefit (in terms of quality performance) of specialization in the focal business
segment (i.e., specialization in related segments complements specialization in the focal segment to
improve quality performance).

To illustrate the predictions of our three hypotheses, we present a simple formalization. Assume
that a hospital is composed of three types of service lines: a focal service line f (in our case,
cardiovascular care), related service lines r, and unrelated service lines u. The quality of output in a focal
service line, qf, can be expressed as:
,

,

(1)

4

An example of the content of such a consultation would be the post-operative management of patient glucose
levels following CABG surgery on a diabetic patient. This is an area where both cardiovascular specialists and
endocrinology specialists provide input into decisions and where there are nuances related to the intersection of
these two specialties that are not clearly the domain of either. This example highlights the more general coordination
challenges resulting from subspecialization in medicine (Gawande, 2009).

11

where xf and xr are the shares of a hospital’s activity dedicated to focal and related services, respectively.
We note that the remaining portion of a hospital’s activity (i.e., 1-xf-xr) is assumed to be dedicated to
unrelated services. The matrix Z includes other variables that might affect the quality of output in the
focal service. Each of our predictions can be expressed as a partial derivative of (1). Hypothesis 1 predicts
that the quality of output in the focal service is increasing in that service’s share of a hospital’s activity
(i.e.,

0). Similarly, Hypothesis 2 predicts the same relationship between focal service quality and

the share of a hospital’s activity attributed to related services (i.e.,

0). Finally, Hypothesis 3

predicts a positive cross-partial derivative of focal-service quality with respect to the shares of both the
focal service and related services (i.e.,

0).

The predictions from Hypotheses 2 and 3 offer an important implication. Given our share-based
measure of specialization, if 100% of a unit’s activity is dedicated to a focal segment, there would, by
definition, be no room for related activities. Thus, to the extent that either positive spillovers or
complementarities exist, they provide a potential explanation for why one might observe decreasing
benefits to focus within an operating unit. In short, dedicating resources to a focal activity may be helpful
to a point but not if doing so prevents an adequate level of investment in related segments that generate
benefits from either positive spillovers or complementarities.

Setting and Data
Our analysis considers patients receiving coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery as their
primary procedure. CABG treats blockages of the coronary arteries and is an open-heart procedure in
which the patient is placed on a heart-lung machine while the heart is stopped. Access to the heart is
gained through an incision in the chest, while a blood vessel taken from either the leg or chest is used to
bypass the arterial blockage. Following surgery, patients typically spend one or two days in the intensive
care unit and five or six days in total receiving post-operative care in the hospital.

12

We focus on CABG patients for several reasons. First, CABG patients are more homogeneous
than the entire population of cardiovascular patients. Second, one of the more reliably tracked quality
measures in hospital discharge data is in-hospital mortality—an outcome that occurs relatively frequently
in patients receiving CABG surgery compared to other clinical areas. Third, CABG patients account for a
significant portion of cardiovascular patients and, as a whole, cardiovascular patients are numerous and
tend to have several “secondary” diagnoses in non-cardiovascular areas. This tendency enables us to
identify those clinical areas from which spillovers to cardiovascular patients are likely to be greatest.
Our empirical analysis draws on hospital discharge data from the Nationwide Inpatient Sample
(NIS), a database maintained by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ). The NIS
contains patient-level data on hospital stays for approximately 1,000 hospitals in the United States each
year. These hospitals are sampled from state-level hospital discharge databases and approximate a 20
percent stratified random sample of acute-care hospitals in the United States. Data in the NIS are reported
at the level of the patient, and all patients admitted to a sampled hospital are included for the year in
question. These data include details about the hospital (e.g., urban versus rural location, teaching status
and region of the country), individual patient demographics, the status of the patient upon discharge from
the hospital, and the patient’s primary and secondary diagnoses and procedures. We estimate both
hospital- and patient-level models based on individuals who underwent CABG surgery.
To develop our sample, we begin with the NIS for the years 1995 through 2004. During this
period, there were 661,910 discharges at 774 hospitals in the NIS data with a primary procedure of CABG
surgery. We exclude 996 observations that contain insufficient data. Additionally, to control for factors
that influence in-hospital mortality and to ensure greater homogeneity and comparability across patients,
we limit our sample to those patients who had one of three primary diagnoses consistent with a primary
procedure of CABG: acute myocardial infarction (AMI), acute and chronic ischemic heart disease, and

13

angina pectoris.5 Of the 661,910 discharges, 16,540 had a primary diagnosis other than the three noted
above and were, therefore, excluded from our data.
The number of states included in the NIS varies from 19 in 1995 to 37 in 2004. Given that the
NIS is a stratified random sample, hospitals do not appear in the NIS every year. Our empirical
specifications include one-year lags of certain variables, which require hospitals to appear in the data for
pairs of consecutive years. Therefore, we limit our sample to hospitals performing CABG surgery with at
least one pair of consecutive years in the NIS. Additionally, we exclude hospitals with very low volumes
of CABG procedures, following the practice of several public and private reporting organizations by
limiting our sample to facilities performing at least 30 procedures annually (e.g., Pennsylvania Health
Care Cost Containment Council, 2007). Following these exclusions, our base sample of discharges
includes 283,003 patients receiving CABG surgery in 382 hospitals (807 hospital-years) between 1996
(due to our lagged variables) and 2004.

Dependent Variable
Our regression models capture quality performance using the dependent variable of in-hospital
mortality. We note that in-hospital mortality—while a critical measure of quality performance—
represents but one dimension of operational performance in hospitals. Unfortunately, we do not have
access in our setting to other performance measures, such as cost or longer-term measures of clinical
quality (e.g., patient quality of life or survival following hospital discharge).
Due to heterogeneity in patient characteristics, raw mortality rates may be biased measures of
hospital performance that unfairly penalize (benefit) hospitals with a more- (less-) severe mix of patients.
We thus estimate the risk-adjusted mortality rate (RAMRjt) for each hospital j in year t using a logistic
regression. We pool all of the patient-level CABG observations in our database. The outcome variable in

5

This group includes patients with a primary International Classification of Diseases, Clinical Modification (ICD-9CM) diagnosis code between 410 and 414. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2010) provides a description
of the ICD-9-CM system.

14

this regression is MORTijt, an indicator that equals one if patient i in hospital j in year t died in the
hospital, and zero otherwise. The form of this regression is as follows:

 pr(MORT ijt  1 xi )
ln 
 1  pr(MORT  1 x
ijt
i



  α  βX i
) 

(2)

Xi represents a vector of patient-level risk factors, including demographic characteristics of the patient,
the patient’s primary condition, co-existing conditions, and other procedures performed during the same
hospitalization that may indicate a higher risk of death. We control for patient gender and age, with an
interaction term to capture the possibility that the effects of age may differ across gender. We categorize
the patient’s primary condition by the first three digits of the primary diagnosis code (ICD-9-CM code).
Additionally, we categorize patients with a primary diagnosis of acute myocardial infarction (AMI), or
heart attack, by the location of the infarction (e.g., anterior, inferior, right ventricular). We measure coexisting conditions using the approach of Elixhauser et al. (1998), which captures the presence of
approximately 30 comorbidities using indicator variables for each.6 Finally, we include indicators for two
procedures that, if occurring with CABG, represent complicating factors: angioplasty prior to CABG and
valve replacement surgery. Though performed by a cardiologist rather than a cardiac surgeon, angioplasty
represents a primary treatment for coronary artery disease; if angioplasty is not successful, CABG is often
used as an alternative. Valve replacement surgery, like CABG, is an open-heart surgical procedure.
To calculate hospital j’s risk-adjusted mortality rate in year t, RAMRjt, we average the predicted
values for each patient from (2) for hospital j in year t to create the predicted mortality rate PMRjt. We use
this value, along with the observed mortality rate OMRjt—defined as the total number of CABG deaths at
hospital j in year t divided by the total number of CABG patients in the hospital over the same time
period—to calculate RAMRjt:

6

These conditions include: Congestive Heart Failure, Valvular Disease, Pulmonary Circulation Disorders,
Hypertension (uncomplicated and complicated), Paralysis, Other Neurological Disorders, Chronic Pulmonary
disease, Diabetes (uncomplicated and complicated), Hypothyroidism, Renal Failure, Liver Disease, Chronic Peptic
Ulcer Disease, HIV and AIDS, Lymphoma, Metastatic Cancer, Solid Tumor without Metastasis, Rheumatoid
Arthritis/Collagen Vascular Disease, Coagulation Deficiency, Obesity, Weight Loss, Fluid and Electrolyte
Disorders, Blood Loss Anemia, Deficiency Anemias, Alcohol Abuse, Druge Abuse, Psychoses, and Depression.

15

RAMR jt 

OMR jt
PMR jt

* AMR
(3)

AMR represents the observed mortality rate across all hospitals for the study period and is included simply
to normalize the risk-adjusted rate.

Independent Variables
Though our analysis focuses on CABG patients, the NIS includes data on every patient in a
particular hospital in a given year. This feature allows us to observe a hospital’s focus on a particular
service area as a continuous variable based on the percentage of its total operational activity occurring in
that area. We measure a hospital's focus in cardiovascular services (FOCUSjt) as the percentage of
patients at that hospital in a particular year whose primary diagnosis—the principal reason for
hospitalization—falls in the area of cardiovascular disease.7 Formally,
n jt

FOCUSjt =

 CARDIO
i 1

ijt

n jt

(4)

where CARDIOijt is a binary indicator that equals one if patient i discharged from hospital j in year t had
a primary diagnosis in cardiovascular disease, and zero otherwise. The denominator njt represents the total
number of patients—cardiovascular or otherwise—discharged from hospital j during year t. We note that
cardiovascular disease includes, but is not limited to, patients receiving CABG. It also includes other
branches of cardiovascular care, such as diagnostic cardiology, interventional cardiology and angioplasty,
valve surgery, other forms of treatment for heart failure, and treatments related to cardiac rhythm
management. As a continuous, share-based measure, FOCUSjt captures operational specialization in a
more nuanced manner than studies that measure focus in a discrete way, such as a simple count of the
number of activities in which the organization participates or binary indicators for whether an

7

We define patients with a primary diagnosis in cardiovascular disease as those with a primary diagnosis in major
diagnostic category (MDC) 5 (i.e., diseases and disorders of the circulatory system).

16

organization is involved in a particular activity (Bozarth and Edwards, 1997; Hayes and Wheelwright,
1984; Kekre and Srinivasan, 1990; Suarez and Cusumano, 1996; Villalonga, 2004, Huckman and Zinner,
2008).
Beyond testing for returns to an operating unit’s focus on a given business segment, we also aim
to determine whether the composition of that unit’s other activities affects those returns. Specifically, our
purpose is to examine whether the impact of focus on quality performance depends on the intensity of
related services. To define related services, we identify hospital service categories with the greatest
potential for positive spillovers or complementarities with cardiovascular care. We do this by taking
advantage of data detailing secondary diagnoses (i.e., conditions that are present but not the primary
reason for the patient’s hospitalization) for each patient. We assume that the presence of these secondary
conditions suggests the need for knowledge and experience specific to treating them. The NIS database
includes information on up to 15 secondary diagnoses for each patient, which allows us to determine—
across our entire sample of cardiovascular patients—the frequency of specific secondary diagnoses. We
aggregate these secondary diagnoses into service groups using Major Diagnostic Categories (MDCs).
Each MDC corresponds to a single organ system or disease category. Table 1 summarizes the frequency
with which other MDCs appear as secondary diagnosis categories in patients with a primary diagnosis in
cardiovascular disease.
We define related service categories as those that appear as secondary diagnoses for at least 20%
of primary cardiovascular patients. The implication is that at least two of every ten cardiovascular patients
may benefit from access to expertise in these related areas through mechanisms such as knowledge
sharing (Henderson and Cockburn, 1996) among clinical specialists. Our analysis indicates that four of
the 24 non-cardiovascular MDCs meet this requirement: MDC 4 (Diseases and disorders of the
respiratory system), MDC 6 (Diseases and disorders of the digestive system), MDC 10 (Endocrine,
nutritional and metabolic diseases and disorders), and MDC 11 (Diseases and disorders of the kidney and
urinary tract). We define the degree to which hospitals are engaged in related service categories
(RELATEDjt) as follows:

17

n jt

 RELATED

ijt

RELATEDjt =

i1

n jt

(5)

RELATEDijt is an indicator equal to one if the primary diagnosis for patient i discharged from hospital j in
year t is in a service area that is related to cardiovascular care. Again, njt represents the total number of
patients discharged from hospital j in year t. RELATEDjt thus captures the extent to which a hospital
concentrates on treating patients whose primary needs fall into those areas that most commonly appear as
secondary needs for primary cardiovascular patients.
We recognize that our choice of 20% as a cutoff for including service categories in RELATEDjt
may seem arbitrary. Accordingly, we investigate the robustness of our results to relaxing this threshold.
Moreover, in our base specification, RELATEDjt is equivalent to a combination of variables representing
the share of patients in each of several individual MDCs. To validate our decision to combine these
categories, we employ factor analysis to determine the degree to which the individual MDCs load onto a
common factor. Though we do not report the results of this analysis in detail here, we note that they
suggest that the MDCs above the 20% threshold load onto the same factor, while those below do not.8
Though we estimate a version of our model including RELATEDjt as a continuous variable, most
of our models categorize RELATEDjt into discrete groups to facilitate the interpretation of interaction
effects. We initially split RELATEDjt at the median for each year, dividing it into
RELATEDBelowMedianjt and RELATEDAboveMedianjt. To allow additional flexibility in the
specification of interaction effects, our base model further divides relatedness into three levels
(RELATED1jt, RELATED2jt, and RELATED3jt), with cutoffs defined at the 33rd and 66th percentiles of
RELATEDjt for each year. Hospitals in the RELATED1 category thus have the lowest level of services that
are related with cardiovascular care while those in the RELATED3 category have the highest.

8

Factor loadings for MDCs 4, 6, 10, and 11 meet a threshold of 0.70, while those for MDCs 8 and 20 are closer to
zero. Chronbach’s alpha is 0.70 for the combination of MDCs 4, 6, 10, and 11. The removal of any one of these
individual MDCs results in a slightly lower alpha.

18

Finally, we include a measure of the total volume of admissions at hospital j in year t, which
allows us to control for the impact of a hospital's overall volume, or size, on mortality rates. In our
robustness checks, we also run versions of our model that substitute cardiovascular volume or CABG
volume for total volume. Table 2 presents summary statistics and correlations for the key variables in our
analysis. We note that FOCUS and RELATED have a correlation of -0.003. This low correlation suggests
that the effects of FOCUS and RELATED can be separately identified in our sample.9

Empirical Model
We estimate the following base model to test for the effects of focus and related service intensity
on risk-adjusted mortality rates:

RAMR jt
 α j  λt  1 RELATED2 jt 1   2 RELATED 3 jt 1  β3ln(FOCUS) jt 1*RELATED1 jt 1
 β 4 ln(FOCUS) jt 1*RELATED2 jt 1  β5 ln(FOCUS) jt 1*RELATED3 jt 1

(6)

 β6 ln (VOLUME ) jt 1  β 7 X jt  ε jt
We include year fixed effects (λt) to control for unobserved factors that may drive the average trend in
CABG mortality over time. We control for overall hospital size with ln(VOLUME)jt-1 and include Xjt, a
vector of hospital characteristics including urban versus rural location, teaching status and region of the
country, to capture hospital-level factors that may be associated with mortality rates.
We take the natural log of focus to allow for a non-linear relationship between FOCUS and
RAMR. In doing so, we note that our data include some hospitals with high values of FOCUS (e.g., >70%
of discharges in cardiovascular care). For these hospitals, a change in FOCUS of, say, five percentage
points is a less substantial shift (and is likely to have a smaller effect on RAMR) than for a hospital with a
much lower initial value of FOCUS. To examine robustness, we also estimate versions of our base model
Some may find this surprising as both FOCUS and RELATED are calculated by dividing hospital volume in certain
clinical areas over total hospital volume. Thus, to the extent that FOCUS increases, one might expect RELATED to
decrease. We note that this is not necessarily the case because hospitals also engage in clinical activities, classified
as unrelated non-focal activities, that are not captured by either FOCUS or RELATED. In fact, given that the means
of FOCUS and RELATED sum to roughly 0.40, unrelated non-focal activities account for 60% of hospital activity
on average.

9

19

in which FOCUS enters as a linear variable. We note, however, that the R2 for our models using the log of
FOCUS are consistently higher than those for otherwise similar models using FOCUS as a linear
regressor.10 Finally, we demean our measures of FOCUS to facilitate interpretation of interaction terms.
We lag FOCUS, RELATED, and VOLUME by one year to reduce concerns about reverse
causality in the relationship between these variables and hospital performance. We do this because it is
possible that hospitals with strong cardiovascular performance in one year may experience an increase in
their cardiovascular focus in subsequent years. To the extent that hospitals gain or lose cardiovascular
volume (and focus) based on their reputations as “good” or “bad” hospitals—reputations that plausibly
remain relatively stable over the time period we consider—we aim to control for this potential reverse
causality by including hospital random effects (αj). To examine the appropriateness of using random
effects versus fixed effects, researchers generally employ a simple Hausman test. However, our panel data
are clustered by hospital, a characteristic not permitted by the Hausman test, and thus we must rely on a
Hausman-like test of fixed versus random effects—a test of overidentifying restrictions—implemented in
Stata using the xtoverid command (Schaffer and Stillman, 2006). In our case, the xtoverid procedure
produces a test statistic that is not significant at conventional levels (p=0.203), suggesting that random
effects are both consistent and efficient. We also report the results of the fixed-effects model for
comparison.
To the extent that our random- and fixed-effects models fail to control for any remaining, timevarying unobservables, we supplement these models by running a reverse regression on our time-series
data to test directly for the effect of prior mortality performance on focus. For this reverse regression, we
model the current level of focus as a function of the one-year lag of a hospital’s risk-adjusted mortality
rate. The results of this analysis are discussed in our robustness section later in the paper.
In our base regressions, we interact FOCUS with each of the categories of RELATED to
determine the degree to which the returns to focus—in terms of mortality performance—depend on the

Except where explicitly noted in the remainder of this document, ln(FOCUS) and FOCUS are used
synonymously.

10

20

intensity with which hospitals engage in related activities. Given the construction of our variables, the
estimate of β3 represents the total effect of focus for hospitals in RELATED1, and β4 and β5 represent
similar total effects for hospitals in RELATED2 and RELATED3, respectively. Based on our hypotheses,
we expect to find that a greater level of FOCUS leads to lower mortality (i.e., β3<0, β4<0, and β5<0 per
Hypothesis 1), that a greater level of RELATED leads to lower mortality (i.e., β2< β1<0 per Hypothesis 2),
and that the marginal effect of FOCUS becomes greater in magnitude as hospitals move from RELATED1
to RELATED2 to RELATED3 (i.e., β5< β4< β3<0 per Hypothesis 3). Put differently, this final prediction
suggests that the marginal benefit of focus in terms of quality performance should be increasing in the
hospital’s level of specialization in related activities.

Results and Discussion
Base Results
Table 3 presents estimates for several versions of (6). In Column 1, we examine the average
effect of focus alone. Column 1 suggests that, on average, focus has a negative effect on risk-adjusted
mortality, a result that is significant at the 1% level. The estimate implies that a one-standard-deviation
increase from the mean value of FOCUS results in a reduction in the average mortality rate of 0.4
percentage points (i.e., a 14% reduction). This translates to an additional life saved for every 250 patients
treated. A similar estimate is reported in Column 2, where the logarithmic form of RELATED is added to
the model. These results support the beneficial average impact of focus on performance predicted in
Hypothesis 1. Column 3 presents the results of a model in which the continuous versions of FOCUS and
RELATED (both in logarithmic form) are interacted. Both variables have been demeaned to facilitate
interpretation. We begin by noting that specialization in related activities, in and of itself, does not have a
statistically significant effect on risk-adjusted mortality. That is, we do not find support for the positive
spillovers predicted in Hypothesis 2. The estimate on the interaction term in Column 3, however, is in the
predicted direction and statistically significant at conventional levels, suggesting that the marginal benefit

21

of specializing in cardiovascular care is amplified by greater specialization in related areas. Column 3
thus provides initial support for the complementarities predicted in Hypothesis 3.
In Columns 4 and 5, we employ various categorical forms of RELATED—first split at the median
and then into thirds—interacted with FOCUS. Our results again suggest that the marginal effect of focus
on mortality depends on the level of relatedness. In Column 4, the estimated coefficient on FOCUS is
negative (but significant only at the 10% level) for hospitals in the RELATEDBelowMedian category. For
hospitals in the RELATEDAboveMedian category, however, the estimated coefficient on FOCUS is
negative and significant at the 1% level. We note that this latter estimate is significantly different from the
estimate of FOCUS for the RELATEDBelowMedian category at the 1% level. Similarly, in Column 5, the
estimated effect of FOCUS is negative but insignificant for hospitals in RELATED1 and negative and
significant for hospitals in RELATED2 and RELATED3. These estimates indicate that a one-standarddeviation increase from the mean value of FOCUS results in an overall reduction in mortality of 0.71
percentage points for hospitals in the RELATED2 category and 0.74 percentage points for hospitals in the
RELATED3 category. These improvements correspond to an additional life saved for approximately every
135 patients treated. We note that while the estimate on FOCUS for hospitals in RELATED3 is not
significantly different from that for RELATED2, each of these estimates is significantly different from
that for RELATED1 at the 5% level. Overall, the results in Table 3 suggest that hospitals with the
moderate-to-high levels of specialization in related services experience greater returns to focus (in terms
of quality performance) than those with lower levels of specialization in related services.
A key implication of these findings is that, in the extreme, hospitals with 100% focus on
cardiovascular care—which do exist in practice and fall, by definition, into the RELATED1 category—
may experience lower returns to focus than a hospital that maintains a substantial focus on cardiovascular
care but also offers primary services in related areas. As such, these results provide strong support for
Hypothesis 3 and suggest the importance of complementarities in explaining the benefits of related
diversification in this setting.

22

We acknowledge that any endogeneity in our key explanatory variables may lead to biased
estimates. As noted earlier, we recognize that hospitals with higher-quality CABG programs may attract
larger absolute volumes of CABG patients, thereby increasing their level of focus on cardiovascular care.
Though we believe that the lagging of the focus variable and the inclusion of hospital random effects go a
long way in addressing potential endogeneity concerns, we are able to directly test for reverse causality
by running a reverse regression model, with the natural log of a hospital’s current focus as the dependent
variable and its lagged risk-adjusted mortality rate for CABG as the independent variable. The model
includes hospital random effects and year fixed effects.11 If focus is indeed endogenously related to
performance, we would expect to find a negative and significant relationship between the lagged riskadjusted mortality rate and the degree of focus in cardiovascular disease. Though we find that the
coefficient on RAMR is negative, it does not approach conventional levels of statistical significance
(p=0.878). We note that a similar result is observed if hospital random effects are replaced by hospital
fixed effects. These results are encouraging, as they mitigate concern that a hospital’s level of focus is
endogenously determined by its prior performance.

Robustness
Our results may be sensitive to the choices we have made in generating our sample, measuring
our variables of interest, and constructing our base model. We conduct several robustness checks to
examine the extent of this potential sensitivity.
First, our base model relies on hospital random effects, an approach supported by our test of overidentifying restrictions. We do, however, examine the robustness of our results to the inclusion of hospital
fixed effects (Table 3, Column 6). To ensure sufficient precision in estimating hospital effects, the sample
for our fixed-effects model includes only facilities with at least three annual observations in the sample.
11

The model is specified as follows, where, as before, αj and λt are hospital and year fixed effects, respectively:
ln

23

The results in Column 6 are consistent with those reported in Column 5 and suggest that our finding of
greater benefits from focus at higher levels of specialization in related services is robust to using fixed
effects.12
Second, our definition of related services includes the four MDCs that account for secondary
diagnoses in at least 20% of cardiovascular patients. To examine alternative definitions of related
services, we consider the impact of restricting and relaxing this threshold. Specifically, we begin by
defining RELATED to include only the most frequently occurring secondary MDC (MDC 10) and then
progressively add the next most frequent MDC, working our way down the list in Table 1. The results of
these models are presented in Table 4. The model specifications are the same as in (6) except that
RELATED1, RELATED2, and RELATED3 have been defined using the MDCs specified in each column.
Column 4 repeats our base results. The results in Columns 1, 2 and 3 suggest that as we make the
threshold more restrictive, the complementarity we see in our base results continues to hold. Columns 5
and 6 suggest that as we relax the threshold, we initially see little or no effect on our results when adding
MDC8 but begin to see complementarity dissipate as we further relax the threshold by adding MDC20.
Specifically, a test of the difference between the estimates on FOCUS for hospitals in RELATED1,
RELATED2, and RELATED3 in Column 6 suggests that they are statistically indistinguishable at
conventional levels. These results are consistent with our predictions, as one would expect
complementarities from related services to decline as the definition of relatedness is expanded to include
clinical areas that are progressively less likely to appear as secondary diagnoses for cardiovascular
patients.
Though not presented in detail here, we perform a number of additional robustness checks. These
include: (1) running our base models at the patient-level rather than the hospital-level13; (2) defining

One slight difference in these results is that in Column 5, the impact of FOCUS for RELATED2 and RELATED3
are significantly different both from zero and from the impact of FOCUS for RELATED1. Yet the impacts of
FOCUS for RELATED2 and RELATED3 are not significantly different from each other. In Column 6, the impact of
FOCUS for RELATED3 is significantly different both from zero and from the impact of FOCUS for RELATED1 and
RELATED2. In addition, the impacts of FOCUS for RELATED1 and RELATED2 are not significantly different from
each other. In both cases, however, the finding of complementarities in specialization is present.

12

24

FOCUS at the procedure level (i.e., CABG cases as a share of total hospital volume) rather than the
disease level (i.e., cardiovascular cases as a share of total hospital volume); (3) controlling for
cardiovascular volume and CABG volume in place of total hospital volume; (4) including only patients
who actually have secondary conditions in disease areas defined as RELATED; and (5) limiting the
sample for our fixed-effects model to those hospitals with at least four (rather than at least three)
observations in the data to improve the precision in estimating our hospital fixed effects. The results of
each of these additional analyses are consistent with the results presented in Table 4. A few of these
checks, however, merit additional discussion.
We begin by noting that our base models capture total hospital volume as part of two different
variables: ln(VOLUME) and ln(FOCUS). The coefficient on ln(FOCUS) thus represents the marginal
impact that variable has on mortality, holding ln(VOLUME) constant. An alternate specification would
replace ln(FOCUS) with logged cardiovascular volume for the hospital. We do not use this approach for
several reasons. First, we explicitly want to measure the impact of cardiovascular focus, or specialization,
rather than absolute cardiovascular volume. Second, there is a high degree of co-movement between the
logged values of cardiovascular volume and total hospital volume (correlation=0.806), so we are not able
to observe independent variation in each measure. The same is not true for ln(VOLUME) and ln(FOCUS)
(correlation=-0.192). Third, this alternate specification constrains the impact of a one-unit increase in
logged cardiovascular volume to be the same, regardless of the level of logged total hospital volume.
However, the change in ln(FOCUS) for a one-unit increase in cardiovascular volume would differ
depending on the level of ln(VOLUME), and we want to capture this difference in testing our hypotheses.
We also note that our base model considers all CABG patients. However, one might expect the
complementary effect of specialization in related areas to be particularly beneficial for patients that
actually have secondary conditions in those areas. We thus run a version of our base model with the
sample limited to the 83% of all CABG patients who had at least one secondary diagnosis in the four

13

These patient-level models are identical to the model presented in (6), with the exception that they also include the
patient-level covariates in the vector Xi from the regression used to risk-adjust mortality (see (2)).

25

major diagnostic categories that define RELATED in our base regressions. This analysis produces
estimates that are very similar to those presented in Table 3.

Conclusion
Our paper examines how managers can balance the benefits of focus and diversification within
individual operating units. We begin by establishing within our setting that operational focus is, on
average, associated with better quality performance. We then examine the extent to which specialization
in related activities generates positive spillovers that impact the level of quality performance for a focal
activity; we find no evidence of such spillovers. Finally, we investigate whether there are
complementarities in specialization across related areas. We find that hospitals with greater levels of
specialization in related business segments experience a higher marginal benefit to specialization in a
focal segment. That is, there are complementarities resulting from co-specialization in focal and related
segments.
Our study contributes to the literature on specialization in several ways. First, we find that the
benefits of related diversification—which have been identified across operating units within firms—also
exist within operating units. Like studies conducted at the firm level, our results at the level of the
operating unit suggest that related activities play an important role in the connection between focus and
performance. Our findings, however, push this analysis deeper by offering evidence that
complementarities—not just positive spillovers (e.g., simple economies of scale in shared resources)—
play a role in explaining the benefits of related diversification. These results are robust to changes in the
level of observation, definition of focus, and designation of related businesses.
In the context of the hospital industry, our work highlights the need for a broader
conceptualization of what it means for a hospital to specialize. The model of the single-specialty hospital
has become increasingly popular in areas such as cardiovascular care, orthopedics, and obstetrics.
Nevertheless, our findings suggest that single-specialty hospitals—and multi-specialty facilities interested
in emphasizing a specific clinical service—need to look beyond their focal activity to build strong

26

capabilities in complementary areas. This is consistent with the view that, to deliver value for patients
with specific diseases, health care organizations should include “all needed specialties and the prevalent
comorbidities” (Porter and Teisberg, 2007).
Our study faces several potential limitations, and its results should be interpreted accordingly.
First, we reiterate the empirical issues regarding specification and potential endogeneity that we have
addressed with the robustness checks discussed above. Second, our study is limited to one technology
(CABG surgery) and one industry, which may limit the generalizability of its findings. Nevertheless, the
theoretical foundation of this paper has its roots in other industries. For example, the literature on focus
has largely centered on manufacturing firms (Hayes and Wheelwright, 1984; Brush and Karnani, 1996;
Bozarth and Edwards, 1997), while the literature on related diversification includes large samples of firms
representing a cross-section of industries (Rumelt, 1974; Christensen and Montgomery, 1981; Rumelt,
1982; Palepu, 1985).
Third, we consider one measure of performance—quality as captured by risk-adjusted
mortality—but are not able to consider other important operational metrics, such as cost. As a result, our
paper cannot speak to the impact of focus on overall value (e.g., cost-adjusted quality). The data used in
this study do not provide information on costs. What is available is data on hospital charges, which, due
to the varied discounts offered across hospitals and across services within hospitals, are not representative
of either actual prices or costs. Despite this limitation, quality—which we are able to study—remains a
critical component in determining the value of health care provided. Examining the implications of
related diversification for overall value represents an important topic for future study.
Fourth, our study considers the impact of focus and related diversification on the execution of an
organization’s current tasks, not on its innovative performance (i.e., its ability to develop new products or
services). The work of several authors (e.g., Abernathy and Wayne, 1974; March, 1991; and O’Reilly and
Tushman, 2004) suggests that focused organizations may face significant challenges with respect to
innovation. Examining whether our findings translate to innovation-based settings thus represents a
fruitful avenue for future research.

27

Finally, we define related areas based on the frequency with which cardiovascular patients have
secondary needs in those areas. We assume that related areas represent those most likely to generate
positive spillovers or complementarities with cardiovascular care. Unfortunately, our data does not allow
us to isolate the precise mechanism generating the complementarities we observe in our empirical results.
For example, we cannot determine whether these complementarities are due to physical proximity of
related services, direct interactions among physicians in different specialties, or the transfer of
information by specific individuals who span boundaries (Tushman, 1977; Tushman and Scanlon, 1981)
across clinical specialties (e.g., nurses working with patients in both focal and related areas).
Additionally, while interactions among individuals may be important in knowledge-intensive settings like
health care delivery, other mechanisms may be more important sources of complementarities in other
environments. Additional work is required to investigate such mechanisms.
Despite these caveats, our study highlights the potential role of complementarities in enhancing
the benefits of focus on performance. In so doing, it emphasizes that the benefits of related diversification
may be derived from sources beyond the simple amortization or sharing of fixed assets. Specifically, our
findings suggest that the returns to an operating unit specializing in a given line of business may depend
upon the degree to which the unit “co-specializes” in related activities. Ultimately, these results provide a
potential explanation for why one might find decreasing returns to focusing an organization on a single
operating activity (or narrow set of activities), especially when it is possible to invest in other activities
that complement the organization’s area of concentration.

28

References
Abernathy, W.J., & Wayne, K. 1974. The limits of the learning curve. Harvard Business Review,
52(5): 109-118.
Ai, C., & Norton, E. 2003. Interaction terms in logit and probit models. Economic Letters, 80: 123129.
Anderson, S.W. 2001. Direct and indirect effects of product mix characteristics on capacity
management decisions and operating performance. International Journal of Flexible Manufacturing
Systems, 13: 241-265.
Barro, J.R., Huckman, R.S. & Kessler, D.P. 2006. The effects of cardiac specialty hospitals on the
cost and quality of medical care. Journal of Health Economics, 25(4), 702-721.
Berger, P.G., & Ofek, E. 1995. Diversification’s effect on firm value. Journal of Financial
Economics, 37: 39-65.
Bergus, G., Randall, C., Sinift, S. & Rosenthal, D. 2000. Does the structure of clinical questions
affect the outcome of curbside consultations with specialty colleagues? Archives of Family Medicine, 9:
541-547.
Boh, W.F., Slaughter, S.A. & Espinosa, J.A. 2007. Learning from experience in software
development: A multilevel analysis. Management Science, 53(8): 1315-1331.
Bozarth, C., & Edwards, S. 1997. The impact of market requirements focus and manufacturing
characteristics focus on plant performance. Journal of Operations Management, 15(3): 161-180.
Brush, T., & Karnani, A. 1996. Impact of plant size and focus on productivity: An empirical study.
Management Science, 42(7): 1065-1081.
Campa, J. M., & Kedia, S. 2002. Explaining the diversification discount. Journal of Finance,
57(4): 1731-1762.
Carey, K., Burgess, J.F., & Young, G.J. 2008. Specialty and full-service hospitals: A comparative
cost analysis. Health Services Research, 43(5): 1869-1887.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2010. Classificaiton of diseases, functioning, and
disability, http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/about/otheract/icd9/abticd9.htm (accessed June 8, 2010).
Christensen, C.M., Grossman, J.H., & Hwang, J. 2009. The Innovator’s Prescription: A Disruptive
Solution for Health Care. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Christensen, H. K., & Montgomery, C. A. 1981. Corporate economic performance: Diversification
strategy versus market structure. Strategic Management Journal, 2(4): 327-343.
Cohen, W. M., & Levinthal, D.A. 1990. Absorptive capacity: A new perspective on learning and
innovation. Administrative Science Quarterly, 35(1): 128-152.

29

Cram, P., Rosenthal, G., & Vaughan-Sarrazin, M. 2005. Cardiac revascularization in specialty and
general hospitals. New England Journal of Medicine, 352(14): 1454-1462.
Dwyer, W. M. 2000. Globalized, focused healthcare? Frontiers of Health Services Management,
16(3): 37.
Elixhauser, A., Steiner, C., Harris, D.R., & Coffey, R.M. 1998. Comorbidity measures for use with
administrative data. Medical Care, 36(1): 8-27.
Fisher, M.L., & Ittner, C.D. 1999. The impact of product variety on automobile assembly
operations: Empirical evidence and simulation analysis. Management Science, 45(6): 771-786.
Fayol, H. 1967. General and Industrial Management. London: Pitman.
Gawande, A. 2009. The Checklist Manifesto. New York: Metroplitan Books.
Ginsburg, P. B. 2000. Are focused factories the wave of the future? Frontiers of Health Services
Management, 16(3): 41.
Greenwald, L., Cromwell, J., Adamache, W., Bernard, S., Drozd, E., Root, E., & Devers, K. 2006.
Specialty versus community hospitals: Referrals, quality, and community benefits. Health affairs, 25(1):
106-118.
Hayes, R. H., & Wheelwright, S. C. 1984. Restoring our Competitive Edge : Competing Through
Manufacturing. New York: Wiley.
Henderson, R., & Cockburn, I. 1996. Scale, scope, and spillovers: The determinants of research
productivity in drug discovery. RAND Journal of Economics, 27(1): 32-59.
Herzlinger, R. E. 1997. Market-Driven Health Care. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Herzlinger, R. 2000. Market-driven, focused healthcare: The role of managers. Frontiers of Health
Services Management, 16(3): 3.
Heskett, J.L. 1986. Managing in the Service Economy. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School
Press.
Hoetker, G. 2007. The use of logit and probit models in strategic management research: Critical
issues. Strategic Management Journal, 28 (4): 331-343.
Huckman, R., & Zinner, D. 2008. Does focus improve operational performance? Lessons from the
management of clinical trials. Strategic Management Journal, 29 (2): 173-193.
Hwang, C.W., Anderson, G.F., Diener-West, M., & Powe, N.R. 2007. Comorbidity and outcomes
of coronary artery bypass graft surgery at cardiac specialty hospitals versus general hospitals. Medical
Care, 45(8): 720-728.
Hyer, N.L., Wemmerlov, U., & Morris, J.A. 2009. Performance analysis of a focused hospital unit:
The case of an integrated trauma center. Journal of Operations Management, 27 (3): 203-219.
Johnston R. 1996. Achieving focus in service organizations. Service Industries Journal, 16(1): 1020.

30

Kahneman, D. 1973. Attention and Effort. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Kc, D., & Terwiesch, C. 2009. The effects of focus on performance: Evidence from California
Hospitals, working paper.
Kekre, S., & Srinivasan, K. 1990. Broader product line: A necessity to achieve success?
Management Science, 36(10): 1216-1231.
Ketokivi, M., & Jokinen, M. 2006. Strategy, uncertainty and the focused factory in international
process manufacturing. Journal of Operations Management, 24(3): 250-270.
Kuo, D, Gifford, D. & Stein, M. 1998. Curbside consulation practices and attitudes among primary
care physicians and medical subspecialists. Journal of the American Medical Association, 280 (10):
905-909.
Lang, L. H. P., & Stulz, R. M. 1994. Tobin's q, corporate diversification, and firm performance.
Journal of Political Economy, 102(6): 1248.
Lapre M.A., & Tsikriktsis N. 2006. Organizational learning curves for customer dissatisfaction:
Heterogeneity across airlines. Management Science, 52(3): 352-366.
Levitt, B. & March, J. 1988. Organizational Learning. Annual Review of Sociology, 14: 319-340.
MacDuffie, J.P., Sethuraman, K., & Fisher, M.L. 1996. Product variety and manufacturing
performance: Evidence from the international automotive assembly plant study. Management Science,
42(3): 350-369.
Manian, F & Janssen, D. 1996. Curbside consultations: A closer look at a common practice. JAMA,
275 (2): 145-147.
March, J.G. 1991. Exploration and exploitation in organizational learning. Organization Science,
2(1): 71-87.
March, J., & Simon, H. 1958. Organizations. New York: Wiley.
Markides C., & Williamson P.J. 1994. Related diversification, core competences and corporate
performance. Strategic Management Journal 15: 149-165.
Milgrom, P., & Roberts, J. 1994. Complementarities and systems: Understanding Japanese
economic organization. Estudios Económicos, 9(1): 3.
Milgrom, P., & Roberts, J. 1990. The economics of modern manufacturing: Technology,..
American Economic Review, 80(3): 511.
Milgrom, P., & Roberts, J. 1995. Complementarities and fit strategy, structure, and organizational
change in manufacturing. Journal of Accounting and Economics, 19(2-3): 179-208.
Nallamothu, B.K., Wang, Y., Cram, P., Birkmeyer, J.D., Ross, J.S., Normand, S.T., & Krumholz,
H.M. 2007. Acute myocardial infarction and congestive heart failure outcomes at specialty cardiac
hospitals. Circulation, 116: 2280-2287.

31

Mukherjee, A., Mitchell, W., & Talbot, F.B. 2000. The impact of new manufacturing requirements
on production line productivity and quality at a focused factory. Journal of Operations Management, 18:
139-168.
Narayanan, S., Balasubramanian, S., & Swaminathan, J.M. 2009. A matter of balance:
Specialization, task variety, and individual learning in a software maintenance environment. Management
Science, 55(11): 1861-1876.
Ocasio, W. 1997. Towards and Attention-Based View of the Firm. Strategic Management Journal,
18: 187-206.
O’Reilly, C.A., & Tushman, M.L. 2004. The ambidextrous organization. Harvard Business
Review, 82(4): 74-81.
Palepu, K. 1985. Diversification strategy, profit performance and the entropy measure. Strategic
Management Journal, 6(3): 239-255.
Panzar, J.C., & Willig, R.D. 1981. Economies of scope. American Economic Review. 71(2): 268272.
Parrino, T. & White, A. 1990. Grand rounds revisited: results of a survey of US departments of
medicine. The American Journal of Medicine, 89: 491-495.
Pennsylvania Health Care Cost Containment Council, 2007. Technical Notes for PHC4’s Report
on CABG and Valve Surgery, Calendar Year 2005. Harrisburg, PA: State of Pennsylvania.
Porter, M.E., & Teisberg, E.O. 2006. Redefining Health Care: Creating Value-Based Competition
on Results. Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Porter, M.E., & Teisberg, E.O. 2007. How physicians can change the future of health care. Journal
of the American Medical Association. 297: 1103-1111
Rhoades, S.A. 1974. A further evaluation of the effect of diversification on industry profit
performance. Review of Economics and Statistics. 56: 557-59.
Roberts, J. 2004. The Modern Firm. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ross, L. & Nisbett, R. 1991. The Person and the Situation: Perspectives of Social Psychology.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Rumelt, R. P. 1974. Strategy, Structure, and Economic Performance. Boston, MA: Division of
Research, Graduate School of Business Administration, Harvard University.
Rumelt, R. P. 1982. Diversification strategy and profitability. Strategic Management Journal,
3(4): 359-369.
Schaffer, M. E.and Stillman, S. 2006. “XTOVERID: Stata module to calculate tests of
overidentifying restrictions after xtreg, xtivreg, xtivreg2 and xthtaylor.”
http://ideas.repec.org/c/boc/bocode/s456779.html
Schilling, M., Vidal, P., Ployhart, R., Marangoni, A. 2003. Learning by doing something else:
variation, relatedness, and the learning curve. Management Science, 49 (1): 39-56.

32

Schmenner, R.W., & Swink, M.L. 1998. On theory in operations management. Journal of
Operations Management, 17: 97-113.
Schneider, J.E., Ohsfeldt, R.L., Morrissey, M.A., Zelner, B.A., & Miller, T.R. 2005. Economic and
policy analysis of specialty hospitals. Health Economics Consulting Group working paper.
Servaes, H. 1996. The value of diversification during the conglomerate merger wave. Journal of
Finance, 51(4): 1201-1225.
Siggelkow, N. 2003. Why focus? A study of intra-industry focus effects. Journal of Industrial
Economics, 51(2): 121-150.
Simon, H. 1947. Administrative Behavior: A Study of Decision-Making Processes in
Administrative Organizations. Chicago: Macmillan.
Skinner, W. 1974. The focused factory. Harvard Business Review, 52(3): 113-121.
Smith, A. 1776. An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations. London:
Printed for W. Strahan, and T. Cadell.
Suarez, F. F., Cusumano, M. A., & Fine, C.H. 1996. An empirical study of manufacturing
flexibility in printed circuit board assembly. Operations Research, 44(1): 223.
Tanriverdi, H. & Venkatraman, N. 2005. Knowledge relatedness and the performance of multibusiness firms. Strategic Management Journal, 26(2): 97-119.
Taylor, F. W. 1911. The Principles of Scientific Management,. New York, London : b Harper and
Brothers ; c 1911: .
Teece, D. J. 1980. Economies of scope and the scope of the enterprise. Journal of Economic
Behavior & Organization, 1(3): 223-247.
Teece, D.J., Rumelt R., Dosi, G., & Winter, S. 1994. Understanding corporate coherence: theory
and evidence. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 23(1): 1-30.
Tsikriktsis N. 2007. The effect of operational performance and focus on profitability: A
longitudinal study of the U.S. airline industry. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 9(4):
506-517.
Tushman, M.L. 1977. Special boundary roles in the innovation process. Administrative Science
Quarterly, 22: 587-605.
Tushman, M.L. & Scanlan, T. 1981. Boundary spanning individuals: Their role in information
transfer and their antecedents. Academy of Management Journal, 24 (2): 289-305.
Villalonga, B. 2004. Diversification discount or premium? new evidence from the business
information tracking series. Journal of Finance, 59(2): 479-506.
Vokurka, R. & Davis, R. 2000. Focused factories: Empirical study of structural and performance
differences. Production and Inventory Management Journal, 41(1): 44-55.

33

Young, J., Foster, D., & Heller, S. 2005. Correspondence: Cardiac revascularization in specialty
and general hospitals. New England Journal of Medicine, 352;26: 2754-2754.

34

Table 1—Frequency of secondary diagnoses in patients with primary diagnosis in cardiovascular care
(MDC=5)

MDC

MDC Description

Frequency

10
4
6
11

Endocrine, nutritional and metabolic diseases and disorders
Diseases and disorders of the respiratory system
Diseases and disorders of the digestive system
Diseases and disorders of the kidney and urinary tract

64%
31%
21%
20%

8
20
23
16
19
1
18

Diseases and disorders of the musculoskeletal system and connective tissue
Alcohol/drug use and alcohol/drug‐induced organic mental conditions
Factors Influencing Health Status
Diseases and disorders of blood, blood‐forming organs and immunological disorders
Mental diseases and disorders
Diseases and disorders of the nervous system
Infectious and parasitic diseases (systemic or unspecified sites)

19%
18%
15%
15%
14%
13%
10%

Note: There are 12 MDCs that appear as a secondary diagnosis for less than 10% of patients with a cardiovascular
primary diagnosis. These MDCs are: Skin, subcutaneous tissue, and breast (MDC 9); male reproductive system
(MDC 12); hepatobiliary system and pancreas (MDC 7); ear, nose, mouth, and throat (MDC 3); eye (MDC 2);
injuries, poisoning, and toxic effects of drugs (MDC 21); neoplastic disorders (MDC 17); female reproductive system
(MDC 13); human immunodeficiency virus (MDC 25); newborns and other neonates (MDC 15); burns (MDC 22);
and pregnancy, childbirth, and the puerperium (MDC 14).

Table 2—Summary statistics and correlations
(N=807)

Mean

SD

Min

Max

RAMR

Focus

Volume

RAMR

0.028

0.018

0.000

0.244

1

Focus

0.197

0.088

0.067

0.884

‐0.092

1

Volume

19,125

10,255

2,490

68,464

0.007

‐0.168

1

Related

0.220

0.043

0.073

0.387

‐0.038

‐0.003

‐0.172

Related

1

35

Table 3—Regressions testing the effect of focus and relatedness on mortality rates
(Standard errors in parentheses)
COEFFICIENT
Ln(Volume)
Ln(Focus)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

RAMR

RAMR

RAMR

RAMR

RAMR

RAMR

‐0.0041

‐0.0043

‐0.0039

‐0.0040

‐0.0042

0.0168

(0.0035)

(0.0035)

(0.0034)

(0.0033)

(0.0034)

(0.0150)

‐0.0116**

‐0.0115**

‐0.0136**

(0.00411)

(0.0044)

(0.0050)

0.0002

‐0.0012

(0.0015)

(0.0026)

Ln(Related)

‐0.0046

‐0.0011

(0.0036)

(0.0042)

Ln(Focus)*Ln(Related)

‐0.0145*
(0.0072)

Related(AboveMedian)

0.0010
(0.0015)

Ln(Focus)*Related(BelowMedian)

‐0.0056†
(0.0030)

Ln(Focus)*Related(AboveMedian)

‐0.0245**
(0.0085)

Related2
Related3
Ln(Focus)*Related1

‐0.0015

‐0.0011

(0.0021)

(0.0041)

‐0.0042

‐0.0065

(0.0032)

(0.0126)

Ln(Focus)*Related2

‐0.0200*

‐0.0158

(0.0086)

(0.0147)

Ln(Focus)*Related3

‐0.0210**

‐0.0536**

(0.0071)

(0.0240)

Categories of related
Method

None

None

None

Halves

Thirds

Thirds

Random
Effects

Random
Effects

Random
Effects

Random
Effects

Random
Effects

Fixed
Effects

Observations

807

807

807

807

807

400

Number of Hospitals

382

382

382

382

382

103

0.051

0.054

0.055

0.056

0.066

0.130

R‐squared

Robust standard errors are clustered by hospital.
Regressions include hospital random or fixed effects and year fixed effects. Random effects models also include
indicators for the following hospital characteristics: urban location, teaching status, and geographic region.
** p<0.01, * p<0.05, † p<0.1

36

Table 4—Regressions testing different definitions of RELATED
(Standard errors in parentheses)
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

COEFFICIENT

RAMR

RAMR

RAMR

RAMR

RAMR

RAMR

Ln(Volume)

‐0.0041

‐0.0040

‐0.0043

‐0.0042

‐0.0034

‐0.0043

(0.0033)

(0.0034)

(0.0036)

(0.0034)

‐0.0015

0.0001

‐0.0012

0.0002

(0.0032)
‐0.0007

(0.0037)
0.0011

(0.0015)

(0.0014)

(0.0014)

(0.0015)

(0.0013)

(0.0015)

‐0.0006

0.0020

‐0.0007

‐0.0015

0.0019

‐0.0004

(0.0017)

(0.0019)

(0.0023)

(0.0021)

(0.0028)

(0.0022)

‐0.0042

‐0.0085*

Related2
Related3
Ln(Focus)*Related1
Ln(Focus)*Related2
Ln(Focus)*Related3
MDCs in Related

‐0.0058

‐0.0047

‐0.0086

(0.0032)

(0.0030)

(0.0052)

(0.0032)

‐0.0053†
(0.0031)

‐0.0075†

‐0.0162†

‐0.0108*

‐0.0200*

‐0.0098*

‐0.0133

(0.0041)

(0.0083)

(0.0047)

(0.0086)

(0.0042)

(0.0082)

‐0.0299**

‐0.0221**

‐0.0198**

‐0.0210**

‐0.0279*

‐0.0166**

(0.0100)

(0.0071)

(0.0068)

(0.0071)

(0.0124)

(0.0060)

10

4,10

4,6,10

4,6,10,11

MDCs Added
Observations
Number of Hospitals
R‐squared

807
382
0.076

807
382
0.070

(0.0036)

4,6,10,11,8 4,6,10,11,8,20
8

8, 20

807

807

807

807

382
0.056

382

382

382

0.066

0.060

0.056

Robust standard errors are clustered by hospital.
Regressions include a hospital random effects, year fixed effects, and indicators for the following hospital
characteristics: urban location, teaching status, and geographic region.
** p<0.01, * p<0.05, † p<0.10

37

