NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HAPPINESS ON TAP:
PIPED WATER ADOPTION IN URBAN MOROCCO
Florencia Devoto
Esther Duflo
Pascaline Dupas
William Pariente
Vincent Pons
Working Paper 16933
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16933

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2011

We are grateful to Olivier Gilbert, from Veolia Environnement, for numerous helpful discussions,
and seminar participants at Harvard/MIT, RAND, IADB, USC and UC Louvain for useful comments.
We thank the entire team at Amendis for their generous collaboration and Diva Dhar for excellent
research assistance. We gratefully acknowledge funding from Veolia Environnement, and disclose
that Amendis is a wholly owned subsidiary of Veolia Environnement. However, Veolia Environnement
did not influence the research design, the conduct of the research, or the write-up of this paper. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Florencia Devoto, Esther Duflo, Pascaline Dupas, William Pariente, and Vincent Pons.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Happiness on Tap: Piped Water Adoption in Urban Morocco
Florencia Devoto, Esther Duflo, Pascaline Dupas, William Pariente, and Vincent Pons
NBER Working Paper No. 16933
April 2011
JEL No. D12,I38,O12
ABSTRACT
We study the demand for household water connections in urban Morocco, and the effect of such connections
on household welfare. In the northern city of Tangiers, among homeowners without a private connection
to the city’s water grid, a random subset was offered a simplified procedure to purchase a household
connection on credit (at a zero percent interest rate). Take-up was high, at 69%. Because all households
in our sample had access to the water grid through free public taps (often located fairly close to their
homes), household connections did not lead to any improvement in the quality of the water households
consumed; and despite significant increase in the quantity of water consumed, we find no change in
the incidence of waterborne illnesses. Nevertheless, we find that households are willing to pay a substantial
amount of money to have a private tap at home. Being connected generates important time gains, which
are used for leisure and social activities, rather than productive activities. Because water is often a
source of tension between households, household connections improve social integration and reduce
conflict. Overall, within 6 months, self-reported well-being improved substantially among households
in the treatment group, despite the financial cost of the connection. Our results suggest that facilitating
access to credit for households to finance lump sum quality-of-life investments can significantly increase
welfare, even if those investments do not result in income or health gains.

Florencia Devoto
Paris School of Economics
48 boulevard Jourdan
75014 Paris France
fdevoto@povertyactionlab.org
Esther Duflo
Department of Economics
MIT, E52-252G
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
eduflo@mit.edu
Pascaline Dupas
Department of Economics
UCLA
8283 Bunche Hall
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
pdupas@econ.ucla.edu

William Pariente
Institut de Recherche Économique et Sociale (IRES)
Universite Catholique de Louvain
Place Montesquieu 3, B-1348
Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium
william.pariente@uclouvain.be
Vincent Pons
MIT Department of Economics
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
vpons@mit.edu

1. Introduction
Worldwide, 1.1 billion people have no access to any type of improved drinking source of water
within 1 kilometer. Furthermore, only about 42 per cent of the people with access to water have a
household connection or yard tap (WHO/UNICEF, 2005). As a result, households in developing
countries spend considerable amount of time fetching water. For example, Kremer et al. (2010)
estimate that a rural household in Western Kenya does around seven water-fetching trips per day,
with each trip requiring a 20-minute walk on average. In urban Morocco, the setting of this
study, households that rely on public taps spend more than seven hours a week collecting water,
despite the higher density of water taps. The time-burden of water collection does not typically
spare anyone in the household, but in many countries it is borne primarily by women and girls.
This burden generates considerable stress and tension. For example, in Morocco, 66% of
households without a water connection report that water is a major source of concern; 16% have
had a water-related conflict within the family; and 12% have had water-related conflict with their
neighbors.
The prime objective of connecting poor households to the drinking water network is usually to
improve their physical health. Yet, over and beyond its direct effect on physical health, improved
water access could have important effects on household well-being. By reducing the time burden
of water collection, it not only frees up time that could be spent on additional leisure or
production, it also removes an important source of stress and tension. On the other hand, if
women face restricted mobility besides their daily trips to the public water source, a home water
connection could cut off an important source of opportunities to socialize, and possibly reduce
their well-being.
The first order effects of access to clean water on health, even in cities, have been amply
demonstrated (Merrick, 1985; Galiani, Gertler and Schardrogsky, 2005; and Gamper-Rabindran,
Khan and Timmins, 2010). Given these first-order effects, it is difficult, in most settings, to
separate the effects of clean water due to the reduced burden of water collection from the effects
due to health. This paper uses a randomized design to study the non-health effects of easier
access to in-home water connections on poor urban households in Morocco. Because households
in our sample already had access to clean water from a public tap, household connections did not

lead to improvements in water quality, allowing us to identify the specific effect of a reduced
water-collection burden on time use, social integration, and mental well-being. We find
considerable improvement in all these dimensions, without any change in the incidence of
waterborne diseases (despite an apparent increase in the quantity of water consumed). This
suggests that the time and resources spent on water collection substantially reduce welfare of
poor households, a finding consistent with their high willingness to pay for a household
connection.
We worked in collaboration with Amendis, the local affiliate of Veolia Environnement, an
international private utility company, which operates the electrical and wastewater collection
networks as well as the drinking water distribution in Tangiers, Morocco. In 2007, Amendis
launched a social program to increase household direct access to piped water. As of the end of
2007, approximately 845 low-income households living in “on-the-grid neighborhoods” of
Tangiers (i.e. in principle easily connectable) did not have a household water connection because
they could not afford the connection fee. Before getting a connection, all these households had
free access to public taps installed in their neighborhood, and they had access to sanitation at
their house. The Amendis program provided an interest-free loan to cover the cost of the water
connection (which was not subsidized, on average). The loan was to be repaid in regular
installments with the water bill over three to seven years. We implemented an encouragement
design at the start of the program: we conducted a door-to-door awareness and facilitation
campaign in early 2008 among 434 households, randomly chosen from the 845 that were eligible
for a connection on credit. Those households received information about the credit offer as well
as help with the administrative procedures needed to apply for the credit and the water
connection: specifically, all the necessary paperwork was photographed in their house, and
brought to the municipal office for bulk approval. The remaining households (the comparison
group) were eligible to apply for a connection on credit if they wanted to (10% of them did), but
they received neither individualized information nor procedural assistance.
The information and facilitation drive was very successful: by August 2008 (6 months after the
start of the information campaign), 69% of households in the treatment group had purchased a
connection (against 10% in the control group), and as a result their average monthly water bill

doubled, from 78 to 147 Moroccan dirhams (MAD), or US$11 to $21 a month.3,4 The quality of
water was unchanged since public taps are also maintained by Amendis and the water flowing
into public or private taps comes from the same source. There was, however, a large increase in
the quantity of water consumed, which some have argued could be as important for health as
water quality (Esrey et al., 1991). Despite this change in water quantity, we find no change in the
incidence of waterborne diseases, such as child diarrhea. This confirms the meta-analysis of
Fewtrel and Colford (2004), arguing that water quantity may not, after all, matter for child
health.
In contrast, the connection generated important time gains. These time gains did not lead to
increases in labor market participation, income, or schooling attainment. Rather, the spared time
was used for leisure and socializing. The private connection reduced the risk of conflict or illfeelings between neighbors. Overall, despite the financial cost, we observe that households’
reported well-being improves substantially when they get connected to the water system. These
results echo those of Cattaneo et al. (2009), showing that a program in Mexico replacing dirt
floors with cement floors significantly improved adult welfare, as measured by increased
satisfaction with their housing and quality of life. However, Cattaneo et al. (2009) find that
cement floors also improve child health, and they hypothesize that that may be a source of the
increase in happiness.
Given the important change in well-being we observe among households in the treatment group,
it is quite striking that the simple “nudge” of providing information and facilitating
administrative procedures had such a large effect on the take-up of the credit offer from
Amendis. This could be due either to a lack of information (the credit program was not discussed
in the media nor discussed at town hall meetings), or to the fact that households on their own
were not able to surmount the quite formidable administrative barriers imposed by the program.
A natural question is thus whether the experience of households in the treatment group
encouraged their neighbors or social contacts to also invest in a household connection. By
August 2009 (18 months after the awareness campaign had taken place among treatment
households), the fraction of control households that had applied for a connection had risen to
27% (from 10% a year earlier). To test whether this rise can be attributed to social diffusion
3
4

The exchange rate at the time of the study was approximately 7 MAD to US$1.
The cost at baseline was non-zero because some households were purchasing water from their neighbors.

effects, we exploit the random variation in the density of households sampled for the
encouragement treatment. Among control households that had at least one other study household
within 20 meters of their house, holding the number of study households within that radius
constant, we find that those who had at least one treatment household within 20 meters were 18
percentage points more likely to have bought a water connection by August 2009 than those who
did not have any treatment households within 20 meters. This difference is significant at the 5%
level, and suggests important social diffusion effects.
Overall, our results suggest that, at least in the Moroccan context, households have a relatively
large willingness to pay for the convenience of a water connection at home. This is particularly
interesting in light of recent evidence from randomized experiments in Zambia (Ashraf et al,
2010) and Kenya (Kremer et al, 2009, 2010) suggesting that the willingness to pay for water
quality (in terms of money spent on chlorine or extra time spent collecting water) is relatively
low. In contrast, households seem to be willing to pay a lot for quantity and ease of access.
To our knowledge, this paper provides the first experimental estimates of the effect of providing
households with the option to connect to the piped water system in a setting where public taps
with good water quality exist, in contrast with only providing public taps, arguably a cheaper
way to ensure everyone has access to safe drinking water. Improving access to safe drinking
water and basic sanitation is one of the Millennium Development Goals, and accordingly, many
initiatives in the developing world, such as the “National Initiative for Human Development” in
Morocco, are planning or are in the process of increasing access to safe drinking water by
helping poor households get connected to piped water. Our results suggest that such initiatives,
while they may not improve child health, can have substantial welfare effects at relatively low
marginal public cost, since households are willing to pay for the extra cost of the connection to
the grid. Our findings also suggest that access to credit, rather than costs, may be a significant
barrier to improvement in household infrastructure. Overall, our results suggest that access to
credit can enable households to invest in lump-sum quality-of-life investments that can
significantly improve welfare, even if they do not result in income gain.5 Finally, the contrast
between the willingness to pay the water bills and the large increase in life satisfaction for
households who got a connection on the one hand, and the important effects on take-up of a
5

This finding is consistent with that of Banerjee, Duflo, Glennerster and Kinnan (2010), who find that, in India,
households use microcredit loans to purchase assets for their homes more often than to start a new business.

campaign that simply reduced informational and administrative barriers on the other hand, is
quite striking. It underscores the power of the status quo and the potentially high returns of
designing programs with simplicity and ease of access in mind, even when they are expected to
have high benefits.

2. Research Design
2.1. Amendis’s BSI program
Amendis is a public-private partnership (a wholly owned subsidiary of Veolia Environnement)
responsible for the management and operation of public services such as potable water,
sanitation and electricity distribution networks in the city of Tangiers.
One of Amendis’s mandates is to increase access of low-income households to basic
infrastructure. As such, Amendis created a program called “Social Home Connections” (in
French, “Branchements Sociaux Individuels” or BSI), which allows low-income households to
buy a connection to the water and sanitation network at full cost, but on credit. The price of a
connection is a function of the works required to install a pipe from the network to the home
entrance. Households in the inner city face one of three prices, depending on their distance from
the grid: the zone 1 price is 3,790 MAD (around US$540), the zone 2 price is 6630 MAD ($940)
and the zone 3 price is 9,370 MAD ($1,340). All three price categories represent relatively
important lump sums that many households without access to formal credit can probably not pay
upfront. The BSI program offered interest-free credit to households in Tangiers’ inner city
interested in getting a connection. Households have to repay the credit over a period of 3, 5 or 7
years (depending on the price they faced for the connection) at a monthly rate of 105 MAD or
$15.
2.2. Sampling Frame
Using detailed maps of the city of Tangiers, and merging them with information on existing
water connections registered in the Amendis database, we first identified 4,600 “plots” that did
not seem connected to the city water system but that fell within the three zones that Amendis had
delineated for the BSI program. A team of surveyors we hired inspected these plots and carried

out a quick survey to estimate their eligibility for the program. Eligibility required that (1) the
plot was indeed not already connected to a water network (12% of plots did not meet this criteria,
due to flaws in the Amendis database); (2) the plot was used for residential purposes (25% plots
were excluded because they were empty, and 14% were excluded because they were used for
commercial purposes); (3) the plot hosted the main residence of at least one owner or non-paying
family occupant (20% of plots were excluded because they were occupied by tenants).
Our final sample includes 845 households residing on 732 plots. These plots host relatively small
houses, with a surface below 100 square meters for 96% of the houses. Most plots were inhabited
by only one household (79% of plots), but 15% included two households, and 6% of plots
included three or more households. Close to 60% of households relied on the public tap as their
main source of water (Table 1). The rest were getting their water from a neighbor (either directly
through a hose or by filling containers), in which case they typically shared the water bill with
them. These “informal” connections are called “piquage” and are illegal, but tolerated. We
discuss these baseline characteristics in more detail in section 3.3.
2.3. Experimental Design
The experiment relied on an encouragement design. Households in the sample were randomly
assigned to a “treatment” and a “control” group. The “treatment” consisted of an information and
marketing campaign about the BSI program, along with assistance in preparing the application.
The three main hurdles in the application process were the following: obtaining an authorization
from the local authorities, providing photocopies of important identification documents, and
making a down payment at the branch office. We simplified these procedures radically for
households in the treatment group, by obtaining pre-approval from the authorities in bulk,
making digital copies of their identification document at home (with cameras), and bringing a
branch officer to their home to collect the payment. Thus, control households could have
obtained a connection (some did), but they would have to be aware of the new program and
manage all the paperwork, while treatment households were individually informed and helped.
Since part of the strategy relied on differential access to information, in order to avoid assigning
immediate neighbors to different groups, the assignment of households to the treatment and
control groups was done after clustering by location. But we also wanted to be able to test for the

presence of “post-connection” spillovers, e.g. to test whether non-connected households who
interact with newly connected households are more likely to apply for a connection. For this
reason, the randomization was done at an intermediate cluster level: neither at the household
level, nor at the water source level, but at what we call the “block level”.
Specifically, the 732 plots in the sample were grouped into blocks, or "clusters", as follows: two
adjacent plots, or two plots facing each other on the street or up to one house apart, were
considered part of the same cluster. In total, this method generated 626 clusters. These clusters
were then randomly assigned (by the research team) to one of the two groups: the treatment
group (315 clusters, including 372 plots and 434 households) and the control group (311 clusters,
including 360 plots and 411 households). These clusters are sufficiently close to each other that
the information can probably flow from one cluster to the next. In section 6.2 below, we study
the diffusion of the information on the water connection to geographic neighbors who were not
directly targeted by the intervention.
The random allocation of clusters between treatment and control groups was stratified by
location, water source, the number of children under-five, and number of households within the
cluster.

3. Data
3.1. Data Collection
Baseline Household Survey
A baseline survey was administered in August 2007. It included modules on socioeconomic
characteristics, work and work-related conditions, health, hygiene practices, water collection,
storage and treatment practices, social networks, as well as a time use survey for the female head
and the main child in charge of fetching water. In addition, for a random subsample of
households, the drinking water was tested for levels of chlorine and the presence of the fecal
coliform bacteria E coli. This test was performed in a laboratory.

Incidence of illnesses: daily follow-up via « illness diaries »
We carried out an initial month-long survey in December 2007 to estimate the occurrence of
illnesses among children (diarrhea, fever and vomiting). Data collection of this type requires
multiple successive visits to the households in order to record an evolution in the occurrence of
illnesses. We did this as follows. In each household, a first visit was made to distribute an
“illness diary”. The adult identified as the primary caretaker of the children (the mother in most
of the cases) was asked to fill out the diary each day, and mark with crosses the occurrence of
fever, vomiting or diarrhea attacks. The diary had been designed in such a way that even an
illiterate person would be able to fill it out (a copy of the diary is presented in Appendix A). At
the end of each of the 4 weeks during which the diary was filled, a surveyor visited the
households to collect the week’s information and discuss about illness episodes with the female
head, and, if necessary, complete and correct the diary for that week. Note that, as these
questions only concern children under the age of 15 years, the illness diaries were used only with
the 437 households who had declared having children in this age bracket at the time of the initial
survey.
Treatment and control households with children under the age of 15 years participated in a
similar health monitoring scheme in the months of May, August and November 2008. During
each of these three months, the households filled a new illness diary with the regular help of a
surveyor. The diaries used were identical to the one used in the initial survey of December 2007
and the protocol used to monitor their use was the same as that used at baseline.
Endline Household Survey
A final survey, similar to the initial survey, was carried out in August 2008, 6 months after the
information and marketing campaign, and on average, 5 months after the installation of
household connections for the treatment group. (On average, households received the water
connection 25 days after completing their BSI application.)
Among the 845 households who participated in the baseline survey, 793 households (94%) could
be resurveyed. Attrition was due to the following: around 2% of the baseline household had
moved house, without leaving behind their new address. 2% refused to answer, despite repeated
efforts made by the surveyors. The remaining 2% consisted of households who were absent (on
vacation, Hajj pilgrimage, etc.), or households whose sole-member had passed away.

3.2. Data Quality Assurance
To obtain truthful information from households and to avoid creating any desirability bias in the
treatment group, the data collection efforts were completely separated from the BSI program
implementation itself. Namely, the staff that conducted the information campaign and assisted
households in the treatment group with their connection application was completely different
from the team of enumerators that administered surveys. We obtained a waiver of informed
consent from the relevant IRBs in order to not be obligated to disclose the full design of the
study to the participants until the very end.6 This also enabled us to ensure that the survey team
did not know about the research team’s relationship with the BSI program.
3.3. Verifying Randomization
Table 1 presents summary statistics for households in the sample, separately for the control and
treatment groups. We also show the difference between the means of the two groups and report
the p-value of a test of the null hypothesis that they cannot be distinguished from each other.
Overall, households in the two groups are extremely similar. Out of 57 differences shown in
Table 1, only 3 are significantly different from zero at the 10% level and only 2 are significant at
the 5% level, as should be expected.
As mentioned above, at baseline just below 60% of households used the public tap as their main
source of water. Of those, 22% (15% of the total) lived sufficiently close to the public tap to use
a hose to fill their water containers at home. The remainder (around 43% of our sample) had to
take their containers to the public tap. On average, those households who carried containers to
and back from the public tap lived 112 meters away from the closest public tap. At baseline,
they reported filling 52 containers per week. The average time spent fetching water was around
7.2 hours per week for these households. Water collection trips are common among both men
and women, but done mostly by adults: while households do more than 7 trips per 3-day period
to the public tap, less than one of those trips is done by a child under 15.

6

At the end of the study, we fully informed all participants about the study, and asked them for informed consent to
let us use the data collected from them over the previous two years. Participants in the control group were visited at
their home in January 2009 and given full information about the BSI program.

4. The Demand for Private Taps: Take‐up of the BSI credit offer
Figure 1 presents summary statistics on the take-up of the BSI offer by group (Panel A) and by
initial water source among those in the treatment group (Panel B). The randomized
encouragement design had a very large effect on the probability of obtaining a water connection.
By August 2008, 6 months after the initiation of the encouragement for the treatment group, 298
(68.7%) of the 434 households in the treatment group had gotten connected to the water system.
In contrast, only 40 out of 411 households in the control group (9.7%) were connected.
Among households in the treatment group who did not get connected to the water system, the
most commonly cited reasons for refusing the BSI offer were the following: inability to pay,
especially for households with just one member, who was typically an elderly person;
inheritance problems (i.e., no clear property rights over the house); and plans to move out.
We formally estimate the correlates of the demand for a household connection in Appendix
Table A1. We present the results of a linear probability model regression, estimated on the
treatment group only. The dependent variable is a dummy equal to 1 if the household bought the
household connection. We control for geographic variables (longitude and latitude) and cluster
the standard errors at the block level (the unit of randomization, as described above). Perhaps
somewhat surprisingly, the price of the water connection had little effect on demand. Demand
was actually highest in the highest price group (zone 3), and lowest in the second price group
(zone 2), although the differences are insignificant. The number of households living on the plot
also did not affect the demand, even though it typically implied a lower price (since some of the
fixed construction costs were shared). This suggests that the underlying demand for a connection
may have been quite high, and access to credit and/or administrative complexity were the
barriers.
The other baseline characteristics have the expected sign. Households who relied on the public
tap at baseline (by contrast to those who got water through a neighbor) were significantly more
likely to take up the connection, and distance to the public tap significantly increased take-up.
The number of water fetching trips in the past three days reported at baseline does not explain
take-up, but the share of those trips done by children significantly increased the likelihood that
households invested in a connection. Finally, larger households, who presumably have higher
water needs, as well as richer households, were more likely to take-up the connection.

5. Short‐run effects of improved water access
5.1. Empirical Strategy
We estimate the effect of getting easier access to a household connection on a host of outcomes:
quality and quantity of water consumed, water-related time and financial costs incurred by the
household, child health, time use, social integration, and overall well-being. For each series of
outcomes, we estimate two parameters of interest. First, we are interested in the effect of being
assigned to the treatment group, examined for each outcome using the following specification:
′

1

where Yi is the outcome of interest for household i, Treati is a dummy equal to 1 if the
household has received the encouragement and Xi is a vector of household characteristics.
| ,

Randomized assignment of Treati ensures that

0, and therefore OLS

estimates of β1 will be unbiased. We adjust the standard errors for clustering.
Secondly, we are interested in evaluating the average effect of actually having a household
connection on each outcome. This is estimated with the following specification:
′

2

where Connectedi is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the household is connected to the water grid,
and is instrumented with Treati as follows :

The estimation of this first stage equation is presented in the first column of Table 2.
In all tables that follow, we present estimates of equation (1) in Panel A, and estimates of
equation (2) in Panel B. For brevity we only present results that include controls for household
characteristics (Xi), but the results remain essentially unchanged when such controls are omitted.7
In addition to estimating the average treatment effects, we also provide evidence of the treatment
effects estimated separately for households that were truly unconnected at baseline, and
7

The baseline household characteristics included as controls are: number of children under 15, quintile in asset
distribution, water consumption, and distance to the public tap.

households that were indirectly connected through an illegal pipe linked to their neighbor’s tap.
While households who already had running water through their neighbors had potential
incentives to purchase a private connection through the BSI program, it is likely that the switch
from an indirect to a direct connection had a lower impact on their lives than the switch from no
running water to running water.8 To allow for such heterogeneity in the treatment effects by
initial water source, we estimate the following equation:
′

(3)

where Ni is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the household’s main source of water at baseline was
an illegal pipe linked to a neighbor connected to the grid. In this specification, β3 estimates the
impact of the treatment for those truly without running water at baseline, while the sum of the
coefficients β3 + γ3 estimates the impact of the treatment for those who already had running water
at baseline (through their informal connection).
We present results on a wide array of outcomes. While we typically estimate impacts on each
individual outcome through independent regressions, we also follow Kling, Liebman and Katz
(2007) and construct summary indices that aggregate information over multiple treatment effect
estimates, for given families of outcomes. For example, we create a child diarrhea index that
averages the treatment effects estimated over the three waves of diarrhea data collected.
Likewise, we create a mental health index that averages the treatment effects estimated over
three measures of mental well-being. Specifically, we look at the average treatment effect where
τ is the mean effect size over K outcomes, based on the treatment effect estimate βk on each
outcome:
1
We estimate the standard error of τ using seemingly unrelated regressions, in order to account for
the covariance in the treatment effects.

8

Given Amendis’s water pricing scheme (which includes consumption brackets), the average cost per cubic meter
could potentially go down for households that stopped sharing a meter with their neighbor and instead acquired their
private connection. The availability of the BSI program also reduced the potential “monopoly” pricing power of
connected neighbors. Finally, water is often a source of tension between neighbors. Buying one’s private connection
might have been a way to buy peace with one’s neighbors.

5.2. Quality and Quantity of Water Used
The impact of the BSI offer on the quality and quantity of water used is analyzed in Table 2. We
find no effect of getting connected to the water system on the main indicator of the quality of
drinking water, the level of fecal bacteria E coli detected (column 3) even though there is a 15
percentage points increase in the likelihood that chlorine was detected in the drinking water of
treatment households (column 5). These results suggest that the quality of water coming from
public taps is relatively high (though not perfect, since the E coli count is around 10 on average,
and not zero as recommended), and that there is no further contamination during the transport of
water carried home, or while the water is stored at home.
While there is no effect on the quality of drinking water, getting connected seems to lead to a
substantial increase in the quantity of water available. Households in the treatment group are 20
percentage points more likely to report having enough water for bathing (the mean in the control
group is 67%) and 16 percentage points more likely to report having enough water for cleaning.
The IV estimates suggest that water shortages are completely eliminated for households that get
connected. Finally, respondents in the treatment group report increasing their frequency of baths
and showers: the number of times respondents in the treatment group had a bath or shower at
home during the last 7 days is 11% higher than in the control group (0.30/2.75, column 11). Note
that, unsurprisingly, all these effects are concentrated among households who did not have
running water at baseline: the coefficients on the treatment effects for those who had an informal
connection at baseline (row 3) have the same magnitude but the opposite sign as those of the
main treatment effects (row 1), which implies that the total treatment effects for those
households already connected was essentially zero.
5.3. Costs
Table 3 estimates the impact of the BSI offer on the time and financial costs experienced by
households. Overall, we find that household connections generate a substantial time gain for
their beneficiaries, but at the same time generate a substantial financial cost since households
now have to pay for their water as well as repay the BSI credit.
Columns 1 to 8 of Table 3 show that the connection considerably reduced the number of water
fetching trips in the treatment group. The time the household spent fetching water in the last 3
days reduced from 82 minutes on average in the control group, to essentially zero. This effect is

entirely concentrated among those who did not have running water to start with – reassuringly,
the effect for those with an informal connection at baseline is literally zero (the sum of the
coefficients in row 1 and row 3 is close to zero for all these time outcomes).
The finding that trips to the public tap went down to zero for those initially relying on it is more
interesting than it seems. Water at public taps is free, while households have to pay for the water
that is piped directly to their home. Therefore one of the concerns at the time the BSI program
was designed was that people would keep using the public tap and limit their private tap usage,
in order to limit the size of their water bill. We find little supporting evidence for this.
The spared time comes at a cost. First, households had to pay a relatively large fixed cost to get
connected (column 9 and 10). Second, once connected, households have to pay both their
monthly water bill and their monthly installment. Overall, the IV estimates suggest that the
average monthly water costs almost doubled for those who bought a connection, from 78 to
around 147 MAD, a jump from US $11 to $21 (Table 3, columns 11-12). This increase
corresponds to 2% of reported total household expenditures, and to 13% of declared labor
income for the household. (Labor income is likely to be underreported in our sample, however.)
5.4. Health
The major result arising from the analysis of our health data is the absence of any systematic
positive effect of the program on health of either children or adults. The data on the incidence of
water-related illnesses (diarrhea, vomiting, and fever) collected through detailed illness diaries
show no significant pattern. We present the results for diarrhea among children aged five or
younger in Table 4. None of the coefficients are significant, and their sign changes from one
wave of data to the next, suggesting no consistent pattern (Table 4). Overall, the point estimate
for the average effect across all waves is close to zero, and we can reject at the 5% level a
reduction of 16 percentage points (about half) in diarrhea incidence (column 10). The addition of
various control variables does not change the results. The effects on diarrhea among older
children, or on fever and vomiting, are similar (data not shown).
We collected data on two other water-related illnesses (skin and eye infections among adults and
children, and digestive problems for adults), but also find no effect of the treatment on any of
these, for any age group. We also do not find any effect when we look at the number of medical
visits reported at endline (data not shown).

The lack of effects on health is probably due to the fact that the households in our sample already
had access to relatively good quality water as well as good access to sanitation. Most households
reported using the Amendis sanitation system to discharge used water and 95% reported having a
toilet at home. Nevertheless, positive effects could have been expected from the improvement in
quantity and the corresponding increase in the washing frequency of households’ members
(Esrey et al., 1991). The fact that we find no health effects despite the effect on quantity suggest
that water quantity, alone, plays at best a small role in health, at least in the context studied (an
urban area where households still had relatively easy access to water from a nearby public tap).
5.5. Time Use
As shown earlier, the connection generated large time gains for households who no longer
needed to spend time fetching water. Five months after they got connected, these time gains
were still very salient for households. Table 5 presents estimates of respondents’ self-perception
of time availability. When asked to compare their current situation with that a year before,
respondents in the treatment group reported significantly more gains in time for daily activities
such as housework and watching television than the control group (column 1 to 4). Respondents
in the treatment group also reported having gained comparatively more time to engage in social
activities, such as visiting or receiving the visits of family or friends (columns 5 to 12).
Table 6 presents estimates of the respondents’ actual use of time. The effects are positive but not
always significant. When we create an index of time spent on leisurely activities, using detailed
time use data collected at endline, we find a positive and significant effect (columns 9 and 10).
Somewhat surprisingly, the point estimate of the effect is larger for those illegally connected at
baseline, but the difference is not statistically significant.
Table 7 presents results on two other time categories: labor market participation and schooling
participation (for children). Data on labor market participation comes from the question: “Did
this person engage in an income generating activity in the past 30 days?”, which was asked at
endline to the main respondent (typically the female head of the household) about each
household member. If the answer was yes, we then asked the income gained over the past 30
days. The data on school participation presented in columns 11-14 also comes from the endline:
we know the share of children aged between 5 and 15 who completed the 2007/2008 school year

(the endline was administered in the summer, between two academic years). We also collected
detailed school absenteeism data through the use of diaries (similar to the health diaries).
Overall, the results are clear: the time gained with the water connection had no impact on
productive activities. We find no increase in the probability that either male or female heads in
treatment households participate in the labor market. As a result, the program had no effect on
income (although our income data is extremely noisy and the standard errors are extremely large,
even with trimming). While it is possible that the impact of time gains on productive activities
might take more than 5 months to be effective and thus was not captured in our endline survey,
we also cannot rule out the possibility that our labor market participation and income data suffer
from under-reporting biases. While there is no reason to believe that the under-reporting bias
would be correlated with the water connection itself, it has been shown that under-reporting of
income increases as income goes up.
The analysis of the impacts on educational investments does not show any impact in time spent
studying either.

First, we find no effect on school participation as measured by school

completion (Table 7, columns 11-12). Second, detailed school absenteeism data collected
through the use of diaries show no impact on the intensive margin of schooling (data not shown).
Finally, the time use data collected at endline for children of school age suggests no change in
time spent doing homework. These results are not surprising since children were rarely involved
in water fetching at baseline (only 1 trip every two weeks on average, as shown in Table 1), and
since we find no health gains.
Overall, the results in this section suggest that households used the time saved for leisure only.
What willingness-to-pay for leisure does that imply, and how does that compare with the local
hourly wage? Assuming households in our sample discount the future at a reasonable rate, the
estimates in Table 3 suggest that the water connection cost households around 12 MAD per hour
saved. In comparison, the minimum wage for employees in Morocco is 9.6 MAD per hour. This
is likely an upper bound on the average wage in our sample, since the great majority of
individuals in our sample were either casual workers or unemployed. The fact that our estimated
willingness-to-pay for leisure is somewhat higher than the hourly wage suggests that the benefits
of the water connection likely went beyond the time saved. We know that there were no health
benefits, however. What other benefits could the water connection have brought? In the next

sections we study the impact of the connection on social integration and well-being. Consistent
with the relatively high implied willingness-to-pay, we find positive impacts on these outcomes.
5.6. Social Integration
While getting a household connection might have reduced the opportunities to socialize while
fetching water, the overall impact of the treatment on social integration seems to have been
positive. Table 8 presents results on various measures of the strength of social ties. The first two
columns suggest that the treatment increased the likelihood that households belong to a social
group. While overall participation in social groups is very rare (only 2% of the control group
report participating), it is twice as high in the treatment group. Interestingly, this effect is entirely
driven by an increase in the likelihood that households belong to a rotating savings and credit
association (ROSCA). This may be due to the fact that households get help from the ROSCA
structure to pay the installments, or that having to pay their bill regularly generates a habit of
regular contributions to a fund.
In addition, gaining access to a private water connection seems to ease the tensions that surround
access to water. Tensions arise when people compete for access to a public tap, or share a private
tap and need to divide water bills among relatives or neighbors. Even within the household, both
the allocation of the task of fetching water and the allocation of the water at hand among possible
uses can be a source of tension. And indeed, our data suggests that water is a common source of
conflict: at endline, 16% of control households stated that they were in conflict or disagreement
with family members on water-related problems (column 3), and 12% were in disagreement with
neighbors on such issues (column 9). These sources of tensions were almost completely
eliminated as a result of the program, as shown in columns 3-4 and 9-10 of Table 8. The ITT
estimates show a 69% reduction in the proportion of households in conflict or disagreement with
family members and neighbors on water-related problems, and the IV estimates suggest a
complete elimination of such conflicts for those who got a connection. Note that treatment
households are not less likely to report conflicts with respect to matters unrelated to the treatment
(property or heritage issues, in columns 5-9 and 11-12), which suggests that it is indeed access to
water that reduces water-related conflict.

5.7. Mental Well­Being
Overall, households in the treatment group relative to the control group were much less likely to
report feeling unhappy about their water situation. Table 9 presents estimates of the effects on
several measures of satisfaction. While 66% of control households mentioned water when
prompted to list their 5 major sources of concerns, only 28% of treatment households did so
(column 1). This went down to zero among households that did get connected, as shown by the
IV estimate in Panel B. Similarly, the proportion of households that mention that their house is
cleaner than it was at the same time a year earlier is nearly three times greater (from an average
of 13% of households in the control group to 13+21=34% in the treatment group, columns 3 and
4). Again, these reported levels are not driven by social-desirability bias: when asked whether the
water they have access to now tastes good, treatment households are not more likely to say yes
than treatment in the control group. This should be expected since all households have access to
the same water – the only difference between them is how far that water is from them.
In addition to this higher level of satisfaction with water-related issues, Table 9 also shows that
the BSI program, more generally, improved households’ perceived quality of life. While only
23% of respondents in the control group report that the life of their household has improved
compared to a year ago, this rises by 21 percentage points (almost a 100% increase) in the
treatment group (columns 7 and 8). Likewise, respondents in the treatment group are 28
percentage points more likely to report that their own life has improved (columns 9 and 10).
When asked to score their satisfaction level with their life on a scale from 0 to 10, respondents in
the treatment group were 6 percentage points more likely to give a score of 5 or above, off a 69%
base in the control group. We also asked respondents how often they felt sad, worried, etc. over
the past 7 days. We see a positive impact on mental health when we estimate the impact on a
summary index composed of all three measures, but the effect is not significant (columns 13 and
14).

6. Revealed Preferences: Long‐run Demand for Household Connection
The survey data analyzed so far suggests important leisure and subjective well-being gains for
households in the treatment group. These gains came at a substantial financial cost to the
households. Were they happier despite having to pay, or did they start to default on their loans

and water payments? In this section, we use revealed preferences to test for the welfare impact of
the BSI credit offer for participating households. We perform two sets of analyses.
First, we look at BSI repayment rates among households in the treatment group, two years after
they took on the BSI credit. Assuming that default on the loan has no cost other than
disconnection from the water grid (which is a reasonable assumption since there are no credit
bureaus in Morocco, and Amendis does not have the apparatus to take defaulters to court),
households for whom the household connection is welfare-decreasing should default on their
loan.
Second, we look at the long-run take-up of the BSI offer among households in the control group.
Recall that the BSI credit was available to control households throughout the study period and
afterwards, but control households had to apply on their own, without procedural assistance from
the research team. Given the relatively high procedural costs, the take-up rate among control
households was very low in the first 6 months (at only 10%). Over time, however, control
households could have observed or learned about the returns to taking up the connection from
their counterparts in the treatment group. If the returns are high enough, control households
should have been willing to pay the upfront procedural costs.
6.1. BSI Credit Repayment Rates in the Treatment Group
We obtained historical data on BSI loan repayment as well as water bill payments from Amendis
in June 2010, more than two years after households in the treatment group had been encouraged
to apply for a BSI connection.
BSI loan repayment rates were quite high, with 44% of treated households having repaid all their
installments to date, and 28% of households owing less than 20% of their total due. Only 5%
were delinquent on more than 50% of the total due to date, and none of the households had been
disconnected from the grid, suggesting that none had completely defaulted yet as of June 2010.
In addition, the water consumption data shows no downwards trend in usage, which suggests that
households did not revert to using the public tap over time.
6.2. Spillover effects: Adoption of Piped Water by Control Households
Given the large positive impacts we observe on the well-being of households in the treatment
group, a natural question is whether the experience of these households encouraged their

neighbors or social contacts to also invest in a home water connection. By August 2009 (18
months after the awareness campaign had taken place among treatment households), the fraction
of control households that had applied for a connection had risen to 27% (from 10% a year
earlier), despite the fact that they did not benefit from personalized assistance with their
application. They could have learned from their neighbors about the benefit of being connected.
To test whether the rise in connection rates among the control group over time can be attributed
to social diffusion effects, we exploit the random variation in the density of households sampled
for the treatment. 9
Specifically, using GIS coordinates, we compute, for each control household, the number of
sampled households that live within a given radius, and the number and share of them who were
sampled for the treatment. We then regress whether a control household bought a connection on
these measures of “exposure” to treated neighbors. We control for the total number of neighbors
sampled for the study within each radius, since that is not randomly assigned. This strategy
(employed by Kremer and Miguel (2007) and Dupas (2010)) provides clean identification for
social diffusion effects, which usually present difficult issues (Manski, 1993).
The results are presented in Table 10. They suggest important diffusion effects. Among control
households that had at least one other study household within 20 meters of their house, holding
the number of study households within that radius constant, we find that those who had at least
one treatment household within 20 meters were 18 percentage points more likely to have bought
a water connection by August 2009 than those who did not have any treatment households within
20 meters (column 3). This corresponds to a more than 100% increase, compared to the mean
connection rate of 15% among those with no neighbor assigned to the treatment.

9

All households in the control group received information about the credit program in January 2009 (as part of the
“debriefing” session we held with all study participants as per the IRB requirements), including information on the
various procedures required to apply for it. While the research team had obtained pre-approval from the local
authorities for all households in the control group to be allowed to apply for the credit program, a number of red tape
steps remained for households to perform on their own, including two visits to the local Amendis agency and one
visit to the Amendis headquarters.

7. Conclusion
This paper studies the impact of granting households in urban Morocco the option to purchase a
private connection to the water system on credit. We find that the demand for a household
connection is high, with 68% of households taking on a 3-, 5- or 7-year loan to get connected
when they are targeted by a door-to-door information campaign and helped with the necessary
paperwork. Only 10% of the households who were eligible for the same offer but did not receive
tailored information and procedural assistance connected over the same period.

After six months, this investment turned out to have significant private returns. While it freed up
a lot of time for household members, it did not generate increases in labor market participation
and income, but it led to important improvements in quality of life and welfare. In particular, it
increased reported happiness and social integration. While the private returns are high, the public
health impacts seem low, if not nonexistent. In the study context, household connections do not
reduce the incidence of waterborne diseases compared to the existing system of public taps. This
lack of health effect suggests that investing public funding in expanding access to household
connections might not be justified from a public finance standpoint. However, the high private
returns and high observed willingness to pay suggests that relaxing credit constraints for poor
households and making credit access straightforward and transparent might be sufficient to
generate important private investments in water connections.

These findings thus have some relevance for the debate on whether investment in water
infrastructure should focus on providing safe shared drinking water sources, or whether
providing individual access is important. Most experts conclude that it is not cost effective to
individually connect all households to water.10 Previous studies (Ashraf et al., 2010; Kremer et
al., 2010) have found very low willingness to pay for water purity, either in money (purchase of
chlorine) or time (walking to the improved source). Part of the public investments in improving
drinking water quality may be thus be lost if households are left to walk the “last mile”, because
they may simply not walk it (in our setting, all the public sources of water are clean, but in the
Kremer et al., 2010 study, where only some sources were improved, few households appeared to
10

However, some, like the NGO Gram Vikas in India, have the opposite point of view, and take it that it is essential
for every household to have its own tap as well as sanitation facilities.

switch source for most of their water needs). Our results, which reveal an important willingness
to pay for access to water, suggest that offering households the option to pay all or part of the
marginal cost to be individually connected with easy, affordable credit, may actually be a way to
increase the rate of returns to the public investment.

References
Ashraf, Nava, James Berry, and Jesse M.Shapiro (2010). “Can Higher Prices Stimulate Product
Use? Evidence from a Field Experiment in Zambia”. American Economic Review 100(5):
2383-2413.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, Rachel Glennerster and Cynthia Kinnan (2010). “The Miracle of
Microfinance ? Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation”, unpublished manuscript, MIT.
Cattaneo, Matias D., Sebastian Galiani, Paul J. Gertler, Sebastian Martinez, and Rocio Titiunik
(2009). “Housing, Health, and Happiness.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
1(1): 75–105.
Dupas, Pascaline (2010). “Short-run Subsidies and Long-run Adoption of New Health Products:
Evidence from a Field Experiment”. Mimeo, UCLA.
Esrey, S.A., J.B. Potash, L. Roberts, and C. Shiff, “Effects of improved water supply and
sanitation on ascariasis, diarrhea, dracunculiasis, hookworm infection, schistosomiasis, and
trachoma”, Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 69(5), 1991, pp. 609-621.
Fewtrell, Lorna, and John M. Colford, “Water, Sanitation and Hygiene: Interventions and
Diarrhea. A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis”, HNP Discussion Paper, World Bank,
July 2004.
Galiani, Sebastien, Paul Gertler and Ernesto Schargrodsky (2005). “Water for life: The impact of
the privatization of water supply on child mortality”. Journal of Political Economy, Volume
113, pp. 83-120.
Gamper-Rabindran, Shanti, Shakeeb Khan and Christopher Timmins (2010). “The Impact of
Piped Water Provision on Infant Mortality in Brazil: A Quantile Panel Data Approach,”
Journal of Development Economics 92(2): 188-200.
Kling, Jeffrey, Jeffrey Liebman and Lawrence Katz (2007). “Experimental Analysis of
Neighborhood Effects”. Econometrica, 75 (1): 83-119.
Kremer, Michael and Edward Miguel (2007). “The Illusion of Sustainability.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 122 (3): 1007-1065.
Kremer, Michael, Jessica Leino, Edward Miguel and Alix Zwane (2010). “Spring Cleaning:
Rural Water Impacts, Valuation and Institutions”, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
forthcoming.

Kremer, Michael, Edward Miguel, Sendil Mullainathan, Clair Null and Alix Zwaine (2009).
“Coupons, promoters, and dispensers: impact evaluations to increase water treatment”,
unpublished manuscript.
Manski, Charles (1993). “Identification of Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection Problem”.
Review of Economic Studies, 60(3): 531-42.
Merrick, Thomas W. “The Effect of Piped Water on Early Childhood Mortality in Urban Brazil,
1970 to 1976”, Demography, 22(1), February 1985, pp. 1-24.
WHO/UNICEF (2005). Water for Life: Making it Happen. WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring
Programme for Water Supply and Sanitation. WHO Press, Geneva, Switzerland.

Appendix A. Illness Diary

26

Figure 1. First Stage: Impact of the Encouragement Design

Panel A. Fraction of Households that Bought a Connection

.8

Had Bought Home Connection by August 2008

.2

Share
.4

.6

0.69

0

0.10

Control Households (n=411)

Treatment Households (n=434)

Panel B. Among Treatment Households: Take-up by Baseline Water Source
Share of Treatment Households who had Bought a Connection by August 2008
.8

by Main Water Source at Baseline (August 2007)
0.78

0.76

0.69

.6

0.69
0.59

0

.2

Share
.4

0.50

Containers Hose

Public Tap (n=252)

Containers Hose Illegal Pipe

Other

Neighbor's Tap (n=159)

Other (n=23)

Notes: Data on connection status collected in August 2008. No household had a connection to the piped water
system at baseline (August 2007). The encouragement intervention took place between February and April
2008.

27

Table 1: Summary Statistics
Comparison
Households
Household composition
Household size
Number of members 15 or older
Number of female members 15 or older
Number of members under 15
Number of female members under 15
Number of children under 5
Is this an extended family?

Mean
4.55
3.31
1.66
1.24
0.59
0.40
0.23

Sd

Head of the household
Head is male
Head's age
Head married
Head has no education
Head has 1 to 6 years of education

0.74
50.90
0.66
0.46
0.39

Household members involved in economic activities
Number of adults, in past 30 days
Number of children, in past 30 days

1.07
0.01

0.97

Socio-economic status
Number of rooms in the house
Income index
Assets index

3.20
4.21
-0.14

1.34

Hygiene and health
Index of knowledge of causes of diarrhea
Ranking of own's health
Expenditures for individual hygiene
Expenditures for house cleaning
Number of times respondant bathed in previous 7 days
Number of times respondant washed hands yesterday
Index of cleanness of the house (surveyor's observation)

1.25
6.58
67.33
57.28
4.27
2.84
0.67

1.09

Social insertion
Participation of the respondent to a group
Total number of activities with others listed
Total number of friends listed when asked for 5 names
Has someone to talk to about one's problems
Satisfaction level with one's life (on a scale from 1 to 10)

0.05
0.38
1.73
0.67
8.38

Water and storage
Are you storing water right now?
In how many containers are you storing water?
Do you treat the water?
Presence of chlorine in water sample

0.82
3.72
0.07
0.56

2.54
2.00
1.14
1.56
0.92
0.73
0.42

0.44
15.00
0.48
0.50
0.49

0.10

2.52
1.96

2.50
78.03
100.74
3.77
1.50
0.20

0.22
0.68
1.41
0.47
17.28

Treatment
Households
Mean
4.73
3.47
1.65
1.25
0.64
0.42
0.23
0.79
49.81
0.69
0.44
0.41

Obs.

0.294
0.240
0.936
0.961
0.505
0.704
0.995

841
838
837
836
836
833
834

0.157
0.293
0.274
0.484
0.565

833
801
833
833
833

0.222
0.156

833
833

0.251
0.256
0.596

838
759
842

0.784
0.248
0.297
0.011
0.923
0.237
0.516

842
806
745
838
818
837
623

0.690
0.617
0.169
0.290
0.214

837
845
845
831
839
838
840
706
250

Sd
2.48
1.99
1.13
1.40
0.87
0.70
0.42

0.41
14.24
0.46
0.50
0.49

1.16
0.00

0.95

3.31
4.42
-0.07

1.46

1.23
6.38
74.03
74.23
4.30
2.97
0.66

1.12

0.06
0.41
1.86
0.71
7.08

P-value
Treatment =
Control

0.05

2.50
1.97

2.33
95.21
90.53
3.27
1.60
0.19

0.23
0.68
1.47
0.46
12.84

0.50

0.85
3.58
0.05
0.63

0.49

0.308
0.618
0.217
0.290

0.38
4.33
0.25

0.36
3.62
0.21

Water Source and Collection
Main water source = public tap, using containers

0.44

0.50

0.43

0.50

0.728

839

Main water source = public tap, using hose

0.14

0.35

0.16

0.36

0.457

839

Main water source = neighbor's tap, using informal pipe

0.21

0.41

0.20

0.40

0.817

839

Main water source = neighbor's tap, using hose or containers

0.16

0.37

0.17

0.37

0.912

839

Distance to the public tap (in meters, measured by research team)
continued next page

139

158

134

133

0.638

845

28

Table 1: Summary Statistics (continued)
Comparison
Households

Treatment
Households

P-value
Treatment =
Control

Obs.

Time spent fetching water over the past 7 days (minutes)

233

420

204

385

0.300

821

Time spent in social activities while fetching water over the past 7
days (minutes)
# of Containers filled with water over the past 7 days

8.2

44.1

7.6

37.9

0.845

822

34.2

50.2

33.6

49.5

Volume of water consumed over the past 7 days (liters)

0.876

821

334

591

385

816

0.309

821

Payment made to get water over the past 7 days (dirhams)

20.05

70.67

19.79

55.88

0.95

829

Number of times a child (< 15) fetched water in the past 3 days

0.53

2.09

0.48

1.88

0.729

841

Number of times a grown-up (>= 15) fetched water in the past 3
days
Number of times a male fetched water in the past 3 days

3.68

5.23

3.87

6.06

0.623

841

1.86

3.56

2.35

4.86

0.094

841

Number of times a female fetched water in the past 3 days

2.35

4.91

2.00

4.29

0.271

841

Households with main source of water = public tap, using containers
Distance to the public tap (in meters, measured by research team)
106

167

118

127

0.481

346

Time spent fetching water over the past 7 days (minutes)

445

533

421

492

0.675

328

Time spent in social activities while fetching water over the past 7
days (minutes)
# of Containers filled with water over the past 7 days

5.6

26.5

7.8

35.5

0.512

329

52.6

48.3

51.9

47.1

0.894

328

Volume of water consumed over the past 7 days (liters)

361

336

433

467

0.107

328

Payment made to get water over the past 7 days

4.42

39.06

2.08

10.37

0.458

336

Number of times a child (< 15) fetched water in the past 3 days

0.78

2.30

0.90

2.54

0.654

346

Number of times a grown-up (>= 15) fetched water in the past 3
days
Number of times a male fetched water in the past 3 days

6.91

6.14

7.42

7.52

0.486

346

3.40

4.22

4.74

6.35

0.021

346

Number of times a female fetched water in the past 3 days

4.29

6.50

3.58

5.77

0.284

346

Notes: Household averages collected during baseline survey (August 2007).

29

Table 2: Impact on Water Quality and Quantity
(1)
(2)
1st Stage

Connected
Panel A. ITT Estimation
Treatment
Primary water source at baseline was an
informal pipe linked to neighbor's tap
Treatment X Informal pipe linked to
neighbor's tap

0.60
0.62
(0.03)*** (0.03)***
0.02
(0.05)
-0.10
(0.08)

(3)

(4)
(5)
Water Quality

(6)

Number of E Coli
Chlorine detected in
detected in
drinking water
drinking water

(7)

(8)

(9)
(10)
Water Quantity

HH reports having
enough water for
bathing

HH reports having
enough water for
cleaning

(11)

(12)

Number of baths or
showers taken by
respondent in the
past 7 days

2.80
(3.00)
-2.03
(3.76)

2.56
(3.44)
-2.50
(4.23)
1.11
(7.00)

0.15
(0.06)***
0.05
(0.08)

0.18
(0.06)***
0.10
(0.09)
-0.13
(0.14)

0.20
(0.03)***
0.17
(0.03)***

0.23
(0.04)***
0.26
(0.05)***
-0.18
(0.05)***

0.16
(0.03)***
0.15
(0.03)***

0.19
(0.04)***
0.23
(0.05)***
-0.16
(0.05)***

0.30
(0.16)*
-0.14
(0.25)

0.25
(0.16)
-0.27
(0.29)
0.25
(0.45)

Household Controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations
Mean in Control Group

793
0.10

793
0.10

371
10.43

371
10.43

374
0.43

374
0.43

792
0.67

792
0.67

791
0.71

791
0.71

789
2.75

789
2.75

0.27
(0.09)***
0.13
(0.12)
-0.20
(0.22)

0.33
(0.05)***
0.18
(0.03)***

0.37
(0.06)***
0.30
(0.06)***
-0.27
(0.09)***

0.27
(0.05)***
0.16
(0.03)***

0.31
(0.06)***
0.26
(0.06)***
-0.24
(0.09)***

0.50
(0.26)*
-0.12
(0.25)

0.40
(0.26)
-0.35
(0.36)
0.54
(0.83)

Yes
374

Yes
792

Yes
792

Yes
791

Yes
791

Yes
789

Yes
789

Panel B. Instrumental Variable Estimation: "Connected" Instrumented with "Treatment"
Connected
4.36
3.97
0.23
(4.70)
(5.30) (0.09)***
Primary water source at baseline was an
-2.23
-3.01
0.04
informal pipe linked to neighbor's tap
(3.82)
(5.33)
(0.08)
Connected X Informal pipe linked to
1.79
neighbor's tap
(11.13)
Household Controls
Observations

Yes
371

Yes
371

Yes
374

Notes: Data source: Endline survey conducted in August 2008. Clustered standard errors in parentheses. ***, **, * indicate significance at 1, 5 and 10%.
Columns 3-6: Water quality tests were performed on a random subsample of participating households.
Household controls include: Number of children under 15 at baseline, quintile in asset distribution, quantity of water consumed the week before baseline, and distance to the public tap.

30

Table 3: Impact on Time and Financial Costs
(1)

Panel A. ITT Estimation
Treatment
Primary water source at baseline was an
informal pipe linked to neighbor's tap
Treatment X Informal pipe linked to
neighbor's tap
Household Controls
Observations
Mean in Control Group

(2)

Number of times a
grown-up(>= 15)
fetched water in the
past 3 days
-2.47
-2.88
(0.32)*** (0.37)***
-1.29
-2.35
(0.33)*** (0.62)***
2.07
(0.67)***
Yes
787
3.11

Yes
787
3.11

(3)

(4)

Yes
787

Yes
787

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

Number of times a
Minutes Spent
child (< 15)
Minutes Spent Fetching
Socializing while
Fixed Water Costs paid
Monthly water
Water in the past 3
fetched water in the
Fetching Water in the
by Household in past
expenditures
past 3 days
days
year (dirhams)
(in dirhams)
past 3 days
-0.69
-0.91
-66.56
-79.59
-3.21
-3.97
411.79
443.65
68.60
66.03
(0.23)*** (0.29)***
(8.78)*** (10.49)***
(1.69)*
(2.06)*
(42.55)*** (50.36)*** (17.51)*** (13.65)***
-0.46
-0.97
-30.75
-63.74
-4.13
-6.08
-135.66
-54.98
81.16
74.65
(0.17)*** (0.30)***
(8.56)*** (13.05)***
(2.10)**
(2.94)**
(61.23)**
(51.21)
(38.37)** (24.18)***
0.95
64.31
3.80
-157.26
12.69
(0.32)***
(15.60)***
(1.85)**
(87.78)*
(67.72)
Yes
455
0.86

Yes
455
0.86

Panel B. Instrumental Variable Estimation: "Connected" Instrumented with "Treatment"
Connected
-4.09
-4.63
-1.04
-1.30
(0.53)*** (0.58)*** (0.33)*** (0.41)***
Primary water source at baseline was an
-1.41
-2.70
-0.49
-1.15
informal pipe linked to neighbor's tap
(0.35)*** (0.79)*** (0.18)*** (0.35)***
Connected X Informal pipe linked to
3.00
1.35
neighbor's tap
(1.21)**
(0.47)***
Household Controls
Observations

(5)

Yes
455

Yes
455

Yes
793
81.92

Yes
793
81.92

Yes
793
4.13

Yes
793
4.13

Yes
793
82.51

Yes
793
82.51

Yes
793
78.51

Yes
793
78.51

-110.81
(14.39)***
-34.61
(9.13)***

-127.92
(16.60)***
-75.73
(16.22)***
96.35
(27.22)***

-5.34
(2.78)*
-4.32
(2.18)**

-6.39
(3.27)*
-6.84
(3.26)**
5.92
(2.85)**

685.58
(57.32)***
-111.73
(53.08)**

713.60
(65.64)***
-44.42
(48.66)
-157.77
(134.00)

114.20
(28.14)***
85.14
(38.58)**

106.29
(20.86)***
66.13
(31.59)**
44.56
(124.17)

Yes
793

Yes
793

Yes
793

Yes
793

Yes
793

Yes
793

Yes
793

Yes
793

Notes: See Table 2.

31

Table 4. Impact on child health: Data from Illness Diaries (1 month each)
(1)
(2)
(3)

Panel A. ITT Estimation
Treatment

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

Average Weekly Number of days with intense diarrhea†:
Children 0 to 7 years old at baseline
1st follow-up:
2nd follow-up:
3rd follow-up: November
May 2008
August 2008
2008
0.05
(0.09)
-0.01
(0.17)

(11)

(12)

Average effect over three
follow-ups

0.02
(0.08)
-0.01
(0.17)

-0.07
(0.08)

-0.07
(0.09)
-0.01
(0.19)

-0.07
(0.09)
-0.02
(0.20)

0.05
(0.08)

0.02
(0.08)
0.14
(0.22)

0.00
(0.08)
0.14
(0.22)

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

470
0.249

473
0.259

473
0.259

473
0.259

458
0.253

458
0.253

458
0.253

1401
0.254

1401
0.254

1401
0.254

Panel B. Instrumental Variable Estimation: "Connected" Instrumented with "Treatment"
Connected
0.08
0.08
0.03
-0.11
(0.12) (0.13) (0.12)
(0.12)
Connected X Informal pipe linked to
0.01
-0.01
neighbor's tap
(0.31) (0.31)

-0.11
(0.14)
-0.05
(0.35)

-0.1
(0.14)
-0.07
(0.37)

0.09
(0.12)

0.02
(0.12)
0.28
(0.39)

0.00
(0.12)
0.26
(0.40)

0.02
(0.09)

0.00
(0.10)
0.08
(0.24)

-0.02
(0.10)
0.09
(0.24)

Treatment X Informal pipe linked to
neighbor's tap

0.05
(0.07)

(10)

Child Controls (age, gender)
Yes
Yes
Household Controls
Yes
Yes
Control for # of Intense Diarrhea days observed in baseline diary
Observations
Mean in Control Group

470
0.249

470
0.249

0.011
0.001 -0.014
(0.056) (0.066) (0.066)
0.042
0.050
(0.137) (0.134)

Child Controls (age, gender)
Yes
Yes
Household Controls
Yes
Yes
Control for # of Intense Diarrhea days observed in baseline diary

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Observations

470

473

473

473

458

458

458

458

458

458

470

470

Notes: Data source: Illness Diaries collected at three points in time (May 2008, August 2008 and November 2008).
Clustered standard errors in parentheses. Household controls as in Table 2. All regressions also include a control for the number of days the diary was properly filled and a dummy for
"Informal pipe linked to neighbor's tap".
†

Intense diarrhea defined as follows: at least three loose stools within 24 hours

32

Table 5: Perceived Time Availability
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

Compared to last year, do you have less/as much as/more time to …
.. do housework?
Panel A. ITT Estimation
Treatment
Treatment X Informal pipe
linked to neighbor's tap

0.11
(0.046)**

...watch tv?

...visit your family?

...visit friends/
neighbors?

...receive the visit
of your family?

0.14
0.16
0.20
0.13
0.12
0.07
0.06
0.09
0.05
(0.053)** (0.044)*** (0.048)*** (0.043)*** (0.049)** (0.034)** (0.04) (0.041)** (0.05)
-0.12
-0.21
0.05
0.07
0.20
(0.10)
(0.107)**
(0.11)
(0.09)
(0.106)*

...receive the visit
of friends/
neighbors
0.02
(0.03)

-0.03
(0.04)
0.24
(0.078)***

Household Controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations
Mean in Control Group

791
-0.02

791
-0.02

785
-0.05

785
-0.05

790
-0.17

790
-0.17

790
-0.14

790
-0.14

790
-0.09

790
-0.09

788
-0.06

788
-0.06

0.03
(0.05)

-0.05
(0.06)
0.44
(0.151)***

Panel B. Instrumental Variable Estimation: "Connected" Instrumented with "Treatment"
Connected
0.19
0.22
0.27
0.33
0.21
0.19
0.12
0.10
0.00
0.00
(0.075)** (0.084)*** (0.074)*** (0.077)*** (0.072)*** (0.078)** (0.057)** (0.06) (0.068)** (0.07)
Connected X Informal pipe
-0.18
-0.34
0.13
0.14
0.00
0.00
linked to neighbor's tap
(0.17)
(0.197)*
(0.20)
(0.17)
0.00
(0.202)*
Household Controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations

791

791

785

785

790

790

790

790

790

790

788

788

Notes: Clutered standard errors in parentheses. ***, **, * indicate significance at 1, 5 and 10%.
Answers to the questions were coded as follows: less time: -1; same time: 0; more time: +1.
Household controls as in Table 2. All regressions include a dummy for "Informal pipe linked to neighbor's tap".

33

Table 6: Actual Time Use
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

Over the past 7 days, did you…
...do housework at
least once a day?
Panel A. ITT Estimation
Treatment

...watch tv at least
once a day?

...visit family
...receive the visit of
members or
family members or
friends/neighbors at friends/neighbors at
least twice?
least twice?

Average effect on 8
leisurely activities
(timetable data)±

0.051
(0.036)

0.061
(0.040)
-0.048
(0.084)

0.059
(0.035)*

0.072
(0.039)*
-0.060
(0.083)

0.000
(0.038)

0.004
(0.042)
-0.020
(0.095)

0.070
(0.035)**

Household Controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations
Mean in Control Group

790
0.59

790
0.59

788
0.43

788
0.43

791
0.32

791
0.32

789
0.19

789
0.19

788
1.33

788
1.33

Treatment X Informal pipe
linked to neighbor's tap

Panel B. Instrumental Variable Estimation: "Connected" Instrumented with "Treatment"
Connected
0.086
0.098
0.099
0.115
-0.001
0.006
(0.059)
(0.065)
(0.058)*
(0.064)*
(0.063)
(0.067)
Connected X Informal pipe
0.00
-0.090
-0.036
linked to neighbor's tap
(0.15)
(0.151)
(0.175)

0.116
(0.059)**

0.031
0.170
(0.039) (0.047) **
0.192
(0.081)**

0.050
0.281
(0.063) (0.080) **
0.371
(0.161)**

0.158
(0.054) **
0.056
(0.105)

0.253
(0.088) **
0.150
(0.197)

Household Controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations

790

790

788

788

791

791

789

789

788

788

Notes: Clustered standard errors in parentheses. ***, **, * indicate significance at 1, 5 and 10%. Households controls as in Table 2. All regressions include a
dummy for "Informal pipe linked to neighbor's tap".
±

Across 8 leisurely activites, average number of 30-min periods for which the respondent recalls performing activity. The 8 activities are: watching TV,
exercising, being on the phone, going on a walk, praying, visiting other people, receiving other people at home, or "other leisure" (going to coffee shop,
beach, etc.).

34

Table 7: Labor Market and School Participation
(1)
(2)
(3)

Panel A. ITT Estimation
Treatment

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

A child age 5-15 (if
Male Head had an Female Head had
Share of children 5any) had an
Income generated Income generated
income generating
an income
15 (if any) who
income generating
by Male Head
by Female Head
activity
generating activity
completed the
in past 30 days
in past 30 days
activity
in past 30 days
in past 30 days
school year
in past 30 days
0.00
(0.03)

0.00
(0.04)
-0.04
(0.08)

-0.03
(0.02)

-0.05
(0.03)*
0.09
(0.06)

-0.02
(0.02)

-0.02
(0.02)
0.00
(0.04)

9.1
(67.5)

34.0
(74.1)
-127.8
(172.9)

-39.0
(36.2)

-55.8
(42.6)
83.7
(79.2)

-0.03
(0.03)

-0.02
(0.04)
-0.01
(0.07)

Household Controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations
Mean in Control Group

793
0.51

793
0.51

793
0.14

793
0.14

363
0.05

363
0.05

769
710.8

769
710.8

788
160.1

788
160.1

363
0.88

363
0.88

54.1
(118.4)
-223.5
(308.9)

-64.6
(60.1)

-89.4
(68.5)
139.4
(141.3)

-0.040
(0.05)

-0.030
(0.05)
-0.020
(0.11)

Treatment X Informal pipe
linked to neighbor's tap

Panel B. Instrumental Variable Estimation: "Connected" Instrumented with "Treatment"
Connected
0.000
0.010
-0.050
-0.080
-0.030
-0.030
15.0
(0.06)
(0.06)
(0.04)
(0.05)*
(0.03)
(0.03) (111.2)
Connected X Informal pipe
-0.070
0.150
-0.010
linked to neighbor's tap
(0.15)
(0.10)
(0.06)
Household Controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations

793

793

793

793

363

363

769

769

788

788

363

363

Notes: Clustered standard errors in parentheses. ***, **, * indicate significance at 1, 5 and 10%. Households controls as in Table 2. All regressions include a
dummy for "Informal pipe linked to neighbor's tap".

35

Table 8: Social Integration
(1)

Panel A. ITT Estimation
Treatment
Treatment X Informal pipe
linked to neighbor's tap

(2)

Do you belong to
a social group or
association?
0.02
0.03
(0.01)* (0.01)**
-0.03
(0.03)

(3)

(4)

(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
The respondent is in conflict or disagreement with:

People from
his/her family on
water matters

People from
his/her family on
property matters

People from
his/her family on
heritage matters

-0.01
(0.02)

-0.01
(0.02)
0.00
(0.03)

-0.03
(0.02)

-0.03
(0.03)
0.01
(0.04)

-0.11
-0.12
(0.02)*** (0.03)***
0.05
(0.05)

Neighbors on
water matters

(11)

(12)

Neighbors on
property matters

-0.08
-0.09
0.01
(0.02)*** (0.03)*** (0.01)
0.03
(0.04)

0.01
(0.01)
0.01
(0.02)

Household Controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations
Mean in Control Group

791
0.02

791
0.02

792
0.16

792
0.16

792
0.06

792
0.06

792
0.10

792
0.10

789
0.12

789
0.12

791
0.01

791
0.01

-0.04
(0.04)

-0.05
(0.04)
0.01
(0.07)

Panel B. Instrumental Variable Estimation: "Connected" Instrumented with "Treatment"
Connected
0.04
0.04
-0.18
-0.19
-0.02
-0.02
(0.02)* (0.02)** (0.04)*** (0.05)*** (0.03)
(0.03)
Connected X Informal pipe
-0.05
0.06
0.00
linked to neighbor's tap
(0.05)
(0.08)
(0.05)

-0.13
-0.14
0.02
(0.03)*** (0.04)*** (0.01)
0.03
(0.07)

0.02
(0.02)
0.03
(0.04)

Household Controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations

791

791

792

792

792

792

792

792

789

789

791

791

Notes: Clustered standard errors in parentheses. ***, **, * indicate significance at 1, 5 and 10%. Households controls as in Table 2. All regressions include a dummy for
"Informal pipe linked to neighbor's tap".

36

Table 9: Satisfaction and Well-Being
(1)
(2)

Panel A. ITT Estimation
Treatment
Treatment X Informal pipe
linked to neighbor's tap

Respondent
mentions water as
major source of
concern
-0.38
(0.04)***

(3)

(4)

Home is cleaner
than a year ago

(5)

(6)

(7)

Water tastes
good

-0.43
0.21
0.20
0.00
(0.04)*** (0.03)*** (0.04)*** (0.02)
0.22
0.03
(0.08)***
(0.07)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

Overall, the
Overall, the life of
Respondent rates
respondent's life
the household has
life satisfaction
has improved
level ≥ 5 (on 0-10
improved compared
compared to a year
to a year ago
scale)
ago

0.00
0.21
0.21
0.28
0.27
(0.02) (0.04)*** (0.04)*** (0.03)*** (0.04)***
0.03
0.01
0.04
(0.05)
(0.09)
(0.09)

(13)

(14)

Average effect on
mental well-being±

0.06
(0.03)

0.08
(0.04)*
-0.10
(0.07)

0.034
(0.025)

0.022
(0.028)
0.057
(0.060)

HH controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations
Mean in Control Group

792
0.66

792
0.66

792
0.13

792
0.13

791
0.57

791
0.57

792
0.23

792
0.23

792
0.24

792
0.24

793
0.69

793
0.69

788
0.60

788
0.60

0.09
(0.06)*

0.12
(0.06)*
-0.16
(0.13)

0.055
(0.041)

0.035
(0.044)
0.115
(0.110)

Panel B. Instrumental Variable Estimation: "Connected" Instrumented with "Treatment"
Connected
-0.64
-0.69
0.34
0.32
0.00
-0.01
0.35
0.34
0.46
0.43
(0.05)*** (0.05)*** (0.05)*** (0.05)*** (0.03) (0.03) (0.06)*** (0.06)*** (0.05)*** (0.06)***
Connected X Informal pipe
0.29
0.13
0.06
0.09
0.16
linked to neighbor's tap
(0.14)**
(0.12)
(0.10)
(0.16)
(0.16)
HH controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations

792

792

792

792

791

791

792

792

792

792

793

793

788

788

Notes: Clustered standard errors in parentheses. ***, **, * indicate significance at 1, 5 and 10%. Households controls as in Table 2. All regressions include a dummy for "Informal pipe linked
to neighbor's tap".
± Average effect over three measures (over past 7 days, respondent felt, more often than not, sad / worried / satisfied). Coded so that 1 reflects high well-being and 0 reflects low well-being.

37

Table 10: Social Diffusion: Adoption of Water Connection by Control Households
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Dep. Var: Bought BSI Connection
Among those with at least one
sampled household within Radius
R=20 meters
At least one household assigned to treatment within radius R

0.176
(0.076)**

Share of households assigned to treatment within radius R

0.078
(0.054)
0.148
(0.082)*

0.113
(0.067)*

# of households assigned to treatment within radius R
Total # of households sampled for study within radius R
Observations
Mean of Dep. Var. among those with no household
assigned to treatment within radius R

Among those with at least one
sampled household within Radius
R=50 meters

0.04
(0.030)
221

0.055
(0.028)*
221

0.108
(0.046)**
0.006
(0.035)
221

0.15

0.15

0.15

0.019
(0.010)*
345

0.022
(0.010)**
345

0.017
(0.020)
0.014
(0.015)
345

0.16

0.16

0.16

sample mean
[std. dev.]
of indep. var.
R=20

R=50

0.10
[.15]
0.08
[.15]
0.10
[.15]
1.91
[1.48]

0.05
[.16]
0.05
[.16]
0.05
[.16]
3.94
[3.01]

Notes: For each radius choice, sample restricted to households with at least one sampled household within the chosen radius. Clustered standard errors in parentheses. * significant at
10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.

38

Table A1. Correlates of Home Connection Take-up (among Treatment Group)

Dummy for Zone 2 Price (6640 MAD)
Dummy for Zone 3 Price (9370 MAD)
Number of households living on the plot
Main water source = public tap
Log (Distance to the closest public tap)
Total number of water fetching trips in the past 3 days
Share of water fetching trips in the past 3 days done by child (<15 years)
Household Size
Asset index
Number of adults with an income-generating activity
Household Head is Male
Latitude
Longitude
Observations
R-Squared
Mean of Dev. Var.

Bought a Home
Connection
-0.091
(0.082)
0.043
(0.116)
-0.015
(0.028)
0.087
(0.052)*
0.046
(0.027)*
0.001
(0.004)
0.184
(0.075)**
0.026
(0.010)**
0.048
(0.011)***
0.041
(0.023)*
0.022
(0.056)
2.000
(2.085)
-1.075
(1.250)
430
0.13
0.687

Notes: Sample restricted to households randomly assigned to the treatment group. Coefficient estimated through
OLS regression. Omitted price category is Zone 1 (3790 MAD).
Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the cluster level.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.

39

