                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               THE IMPACT OF THE RUNAWAY OFFICE ON
                  UNION CERTIFICATION ELECTIONS
                        IN CLERICAL UNITS


                      Beatrice J.   Freiberg

                       William   T. Dickens



                     Working Paper No. 1693




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                           August 1985




The authors thank Dean Francis and John Montoya of the Oakland,
California Regional Office of the NLRB for making available the
data used in this study. The authors also greatfully acknowledge
the help of Mary Ann Massenburg, Barbara Baran, Kay Eisenhower,
John Bowers, Phil Shapira, Lucas Guttentag, Suzy Teegarden, Rome
Aloise, Marcella Farinha, Jack McLaughlin, and many other union
organizers and researchers who gave generously of their time.
Finally, the authors also thank Philip Bokovoy for research
assistance and the University of California Presidential Fellowship
Committee and the Institute of Industrial Relations for generous
research support. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are
those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                         NBER Working Paper # 1693
                                         August 1985




              The Impact of the Runaway Office on
                 Union Certification Elections
                       in Clerical Units


                              ABSTRACT




    The law prohibits firms from moving work to avoid unionization. Still,

many employees fear that joining a union may cost them their jobs. This

paper assesses the impact of that fear on how clerical workers vote in

union certification elections. Two data sets were collected and analyzed

for this purpose, and three measures of the firms' ability to relocate

office work were developed.

    Clerical workers in offices that were judged to be easier to relocate

were found to be more likely to report that the fear of job loss was

important to their voting decision. Those who voted against the union were

most likely to report that the fear that they would lose their jobs was a

significant consideration. Further, workers in units judged to be most

easily relocated were found to have a 7 to 30% lower probability of voting

union than those who were in less mobile jobs.




Beatrice J. Freiberg                William T. Dickens
Office of the New York City         Department of Economics
   Comptroller                      University of California
Municipal Bldg. Room 526            Berkeley, CA 94720
New York, NY 10007                  (415) 642—4308
(212) 566—3770                               —5452
        "I've worked for Mutual Insurance for the past ten years doing

clerical work."

        "Are the clerical workers unionized at Mutual Insurance?"

        "Oh, no. We don't want a union."

        "Why   not?"
        "Job security. When the union won at Blue Shield, the employer moved

their jobs. The union couldn't hold on to their jobs. We don't want a

union. We prefer to have our jobs."

                       Conversation with a San Francisco clerical worker, June 1983



        In 1972 Office and Professional Employees Union (OPEU) organized 1700

keypunch and data processing employees at Blue Shield Insurance Company,

San Francisco. Eleven years later, only one hundred jobs were left. In

1974 the employer transferred 500—600 jobs to a nonunion office in San

Diego. Later, the union lost an organizing drive there. In 1981, the

largely minority—female work force struck Blue Shield. During the

five—month strike that ensued, Blue Shield relocated about 450 jobs to six

nonunion offices. The work, which was done on computer terminals, could be

easily transferred electronically to the other offices. Finally, more than

400 jobs were moved to three remote small—town offices in 1983. "Now,

wherever there's an organizing drive, employers use what happened at Blue

Shield as a warning to their workers," said a former Blue Shield employee.

"They tell them, 'Oh sure, you want to vote for the union. Well, let me

tell you what the union did for the employees in San Francisco——lost their

        11,1
jobs.

        Labor law places few restrictions on a unionized employer's right to

relocate work. Prior to the 1984 National Labor Relations Board (NLRB)
                                                                         2




decision,2 the only reasons for which an employer could not relocate union

jobs were 1) the cost of labor, 2) to avoid a union organizing attempt, or

3) to rid a company of a union. Under the new ruling, labor costs may

justify moving an operation. If the union succeeds in raising workers'

wages, the company has a legal excuse for relocating the work.

     Companies with organized office workers have taken advantage of the

allowances the law makes and have left the union behind. Blue Shield in

San Francisco moved 1600 organized clerical jobs to nine nonunion offices;

Consumer's Distributing Company relocated its Western Regional office with

50 organized clerical workers along with its other operations to Reno,

Nevada; Pacific InterMountain Express, a trucking company in Oakland,

California, moved its entire operations, including 100 organized clerical

jobs, to Florida; and O.N.C. Trucking Company, owned by Rocor

International, expanded and moved 130 union clerical jobs to Kansas City,

Missouri. In the course of our research, we encountered 22 cases of

runaway union offices in the San Francisco Bay Area between 1973 and 1983.

This list is by no means exhaustive.

     In the past, office work was as moveable as the company of which it

was a part.    But with advances in microprocessor technology and

telecommunications, office work is easy and inexpensive to move. Employers

can now relocate office work electronically. A 1983 Wall Street Journal

headline read, "Now we can move office work offshore to enhance output."3

According to the article, satellite technology and falling prices in

hardware, transmission costs, and earth stations make it cost effective for

large corporations, particularly in banking, insurance and publishing, to

move data entry and word processing jobs to remote locations.
                                                                         3



     One consequence of the ease with which office jobs can be moved may be

a heightened sense of job insecurity among office workers. Job security ——

once a compelling reason to vote for the union —— may ironically have

become a potent management threat, helping to prevent unionization.

     If the fear of relocation is a significant concern, then clerical

workers with mobile jobs should vote against unionization more often than

clerical workers with jobs that cannot be moved, all other things held

equal. This paper considers the hypothesis that the ease with which jobs

may be moved (job mobility) has a significantly negative impact on the

percent of workers voting union in certification elections. To do so, the

voting behavior of clerical workers in 101 union certification elections

(UCEs) was analyzed. We find that workers in the most mobile offices are 7

to 30 percent less likely to vote union than those in the least mobile

jobs, depending on the measure of mobility used and the specification used

to estimate the effect. These results may help explain why union

organizers believe that clerical organizing has been most successful in

not—for—profit organizations and the public sector, and less successful in

finance, insurance and real estate companies.4 To the extent that jobs in

not—for—profit organizations and the public sector are largely immobile,

they will be earier to organize.

     The next section discusses the data collected to analyze the impact of

the fear of relocation on voting in UCEs. The section following discusses

the measures of job mobility developed for this study. We then consider

whether workers in firms rated to be mobile by our criteria perceive their

jobs to be mobile and whether that was an important consideration in their

decision to vote union. Finally, we present the analysis of the voting
                                                                          4



data. The conclusion reviews the findings and considers their relevance

for explaining recent trends in UCE success rates and for labor law.



Data

       In order to determine the impact of office mobility, results from 101

TJCEs involving only office workers were gathered. The elections were held

in the Oakland and San Francisco regional NLRB districts between 1971 and

1983. Eighty—nine of these UCEs were randomly selected from the "closed

case't files of the Oakland regional office of the NLRB, and twelve from the

same files at the San Francisco NLRB regional office. The selection

process involved searching 12,000 index cards of closed cases and singling

out only those cases where an election in a clerical unit had been held.

From all the index cards a random sample of 101 clerical elections was

chosen. Clerical units were defined to be those including one or more of

the following jobs:     office—clericals, data processors, switchboard

operators, secretaries, PBX operators, plant clericals, warehouse

clericals, receptionists, reservationists, cashiers, desk clerks, customer

service representatives, key entry operators, dispatchers, and telephone

operators.

       There were 4,652 clerical workers involved in the 101 union elections.

The union won 61% of the elections, and the company won the remaining 39%.

Fifty—seven percent of all workers voted for the union. Although the

percentage of union victories in the sample is substantially greater than

the national or the California average for union wins in any year for which

data are available,5 there is no reason to expect that the percentage of

union wins in clerical units should be the same as for other types of

units. For example, win rates differ greatly by industry. Also, because
                                                                           5



of the difficulty in organizing clerical units, unions may only take on

those cases which ara more likely to win.

     In order to analyze the effect of mobility as a determinant of

election results, information on other variables known to influence

outcomes of union elections was obtained so that their effects could be

controlled for. Some of the background information on each election was

gathered from the NLRB election files: the election date, the company name

and location, the industry, the union name and local number, and the size

and job description of the office unit. To obtain the rest of the data,

the union organizer or local president involved in each election was

interviewed and asked: the number of other employees at each location,

whether these employees were organized, the number of other organized and

unorganized company locations, the degree of management resistance during

the organizing campaign,6 how easy it would be for the company to relocate,

a detailed description of the office work, and the gender and ethnicity of

the unit.




Measuring Mobility

     Measuring the mobility of clerical jobs poses a difficult problem.

Little research has been done on what types of firms are most likely to

relocate. Therefore, in order to distinguish between the mobile jobs and

immobile jobs in our sample, methods to measure the mobility of office work

had to be developed. Three different methods were used.      Each has

advantages and drawbacks. The evidence from the three measures is

complimentary and, together, much stronger than using any one by itself.

     The first method used to determine the mobility of election units was

to survey the organizers involved in each election. Each described the
                                                                         6




type of work the clericals performed and rated the work as mobile, somewhat

mobile, or immobile. Since the organizers have detailed information about

the company and its ability to relocate jobs, and since they knew which

offices they had previously organized had moved and which had not, they

should be qualified to make an informed assessment.

     The major disadvantage of this method is that the organizers are not

unbiased judges. Organizers know the outcome of the elections and whether

the work was relocated. They might be expected to exaggerate the mobility

in elections they lost to justify the outcome, thus causing a spurious

correlation between mobility and election losses. Also, a few of the

organizers were unfamiliar with office work and may not be expert judges of

mobility.

     The second method used for defining the clerical units as mobile or

not involved employing an expert on firm's locational choices. Our expert

was Barbara Baran, a doctoral candidate in the University of California,

Berkeley's Department of City and Regional Planning, who is writing a

thesis on how firms decide where to locate office jobs. The organizers

mentioned above were also asked to list the criteria they thought

important in determining mobility. Ms. Baran was given information on the

following 22 characteristics, which were the ones most frequently

mentioned.

1)   Do the office workers do general office work? (a variety of clerical

     tasks which need to be done on site, excluding computer work)

2)   Do the office workers do work for more than one office?

3)   Do the office workers work with computers?

4)   Are the office workers plant clericals?      (Clericals who track

     inventory and whose jobs could be moved only if the plant were moved.)
                                                                        7




5)   Do the office workers work in a health care facility?

6)   Do the office workers work for a utility?

7)   Do the office workers do mainly phone work?

8)   Do the office workers work on a switchboard?

9)   Do the office workers work with customers on site?

10) Number of clericals in the election unit.

11) Number of workers at site.

12) Year of the election.

13) Are there other workers organized at site?

14) Are other workers at site also voting in an election?

15) Are other company offices organized?

16) Are all other company offices organized?

17) Number of other company offices.

18) Is this a family—owned business?

19) Industry.

20) Population of city or town.

21) Union involved in the election.

22) Unique features of unit relevant to mobility of jobs. For example,

     brief, detailed job descriptions.

     She rated the clerical units as mobile, somewhat mobile, or immobile,

based on the above information. Besides the obvious advantage of using an

expert on office mobility to decide each firm's potential to relocate, the

other advantage of this method is that Ms. Baran did not know the results

of the union elections or whether any firms moved. However, this measure

has a drawback in that it was based on less information than the

organizers'.
                                                                          8




     For our third measure we constructed an index of mobility. The index

incorporated 15 of the 22 mobility determinants used by the expert judge's

analysis. Based on discussions with organizers, and other experts familiar

with office work and runaway jobs, the factors were assigned weights

according to their relative importance in determining the mobility of

office work. Positive points were awarded to those characteristics that

were associated with immobility and negative points were given for those

that are associated with mobility.



                            TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE



We began by assuming that a firm with none of these characteristics would

be mobile (—5 points). Points were added and subtracted from these. After

the adding and subtracting was done, firms with negative point totals were

rated as mobile.

     The advantages of the index of mobility are that it is systematic and

somewhat objective.7 Major disadvantages of this measure are that the

system uses only a limited amount of information and has no flexibility to

deal with unique cases.



Validating the Mobility Measures

     Do office workers know and care about mobility? If the theory is

correct that the fear of relocation makes office workers less likely to

vote for unionization, then office workers must be aware of the mobility of

their work. In order to document this awareness, a questionnaire was

developed to test whether relocation is more of a concern among office

workers with mobile jobs than among workers with immobile jobs.
                                                                          9




     The questionnaire was given to clerical workers at five locations

where TJCEs had recently been held. The five elections were the only recent

ones in the Bay Area where we were able to gain access to the workers. (A

copy of the questionnaire is provided in Appendix 1..)    The questionnaire

asked the office workers to rate the importance of ten factors in their

decisions to vote for or against the union. They could rate the factors as

very important (1 point), somewhat important (2 points), not too important

(3 points) and not at all important (4 points). The only response on the

questionnaire of interest was the rating given to the item ttthe concern

that your employer may have your job done at a different location, if the

union won."

     The first group of office workers who answered the questionnaire

worked for a major airline as phone reservationists. Applying the mobility

criteria from table 1, these jobs are considered mobile. Beginning with —5

points and adjusting for the applicable categories:

(6) there were other organized workers (2 points);

(11) the ratio of clerical work to nonclerical work was    66% (—4 points);

(12) the office workers worked entirely with computers (—4 points); and

(15) the sole function of the office was phone work (—2 points);

we arrive at a score of —13 points. The union certification election at

this airline company lost. The average response on the question about the

importance of fear of job loss was 3.50, halfway between not too important

and not at all important.

     The next group of workers who filled out the questionnaire worked for

a trucking company and their jobs were also determined to be mobile by the

criteria: (1) General office work (5 points); (6) other organized workers

(2 points); (11) ratio of clerical work to nonclerical is greater than or
                                                                              10




equal to 66% (—4 points); and (13) some of the office work is done on

computers (—2 points) ——   or   —4 points overall. The UCE lost here, too.

The average response of the clericals at the moving company was 2.5,

halfway between not too important and somewhat important.

     The third group of workers, employed by a retail food store, were

called immobile by the criteria. They were (—5 to begin) (2) plant

clericals (10 points), (9) the percentage of clericals was less than 10% (4

points), and (6) there were other organized workers (2 points) ——     for    11


points. The UCE held here won.

     According to the criteria, the plant clericals were the most immobile

group of workers. Their average response to letter D was 3.86 out of a

possible four points. More than four—fifths of those responding said that

the possibility of job loss was not at all important in their decision.

     The fourth group who filled out the questionnaire were the office

clericals for the same retail food store. The union was certified here,

too. The criteria determined the work to be immobile because (begin with

—5) (1) they did general office work (5 points); (6) other organized

workers (2 points); (9) percentage of clericals to nonclericals was less

than 10% (4 points); and (12) all the clericals worked with computers (—4

points); this total is two points.

     The average response of the office—clericals (the least immobile of

the immobile groups) was 3.62. More than three—fifths of those responding

said that the possibility of job loss was not at all important in their

decision.

     The criteria also defined the last group as immobile. They worked for

a Cable T.V. company and voted for representation. They did (begin with

—5) (1) general office work (5 points); (6) worked with organized workers
                                                                         11




(2 points); (9) the percentage of clericals to nonclericals was less than

10% (4 points); and (13) some of the clericals worked with computers (—2

points). This gave the unit a total of four points. The workers here

voted to certify the union. The average response that these clericals gave

to the importance of job relocation was 3.75. Over three fourths of the

clericals reported that job loss was not an important consideration in

their decision.

     The ratings that the five groups of workers gave to the importance of

the fear of job relocation were consistent with the mobility criteria; the

clericals with the mobile jobs rated the threat as more important. The

average rating for the mobile workers was 3.32 and the average rating for

immobile workers was 3.71 (with one meaning very important and four least

important). The difference of these means is statistically significant at

the .05 level using a one—tail T test.

     These results indicate that workers in mobile jobs do perceive and

care about the possibility of job mobility. Although on average workers

rated this factor somewhere between not too important and not at all

important, company voters in the two mobile units viewed the issue as being

"not too important" to "somewhat important" on average.8 Some saw it as

"very important." Further, workers in the two mobile firms viewed the

issue as more important, on average, than those in the units judged to be

immobile.

     Finally, the fact that in each election judged to be immobile the

union won, and in every case union voters saw mobility as a less important

issue than those who voted against certification, suggests the importance

of job mobility in determining the outcome of certification elections. The

next section considers this question in more detail.
                                                                             12




Analysis of the Voting Data

     Table 2 presents the one—way analysis of variances for the percent of

office workers voting for the union, broken down into mobile and immobile

groups using each of the three mobility measures.      In all cases, the

mobility effect is in the anticipated direction ——   lowering   the probability

of voting union. The magnitudes are roughly the same for the three

measures and workers in the most mobile units are statistically

significantly less likely to vote for the union. The F tests reject the

hypothesis at the .05 level for both the organizers and the mobility index

ratings. The expert judge's rating rejects the hypothesis at the 0.15

level.

     While these results support the hypothesis that more mobile clerical

units are more likely to vote against unionization, they are not

conclusive. The one—way analysis of variance provides no controls for

other factors which may be influencing election outcomes. Many factors

which determine mobility may have a direct effect on the election outcomes

as well. To account for these effects we used a statistical procedure with

multiple control variables. The procedure allows for the fact that the

percent voting union in an election is a limited dependent variable.       It

also allows for possible heteroskedasticity in the error term in the

equation predicting the proportion voting union, which is caused by the

variation in the number of people taking part in each election. The
                                                      2
procedure is a modified version of Haldane s minimum x      logit proposed by

Dickens9 (see Appendix 2 for a description).

     Initially, all the control variables listed in table 3 were entered

into the analysis and those with t <    1   were removed (except for the

mobility variables). Overall, the coefficient values for mobility either
                                                                          13




did not change or became smaller as variables were removed. However, the

standard errors became smaller as the degrees of freedom increased.

     Table 4 shows the results for the minimum x2 logit analysis. The

first column presents the coefficients of the mobility dummy variables.

The second column presents the approximate impact of mobility on the

proportion of workers voting for certification, and the third column

presents the results of the F tests for joint significance of each set of

mobility measures.

     The first set of results does not include controls for management

resistance. In this case the signs and relative sizes of the coefficients

are all as would be expected except for the units organizers rated as

somewhat mobile. There the coefficient is slightly positive but is far

from statistically significant. For both the expert judge's ratings and

the mobility index, the mobile units are statistically significantly less

likely to vote union and the impact on the probability of voting union is

nearly the same as for the one—way analysis of variance.

     Previous work on the determinants of voting in union certification

elections suggests the importance of management resistance.1° It is

possible that mobility is not responsible for reducing the probability of

workers voting union. Rather, management resistance might be stronger in

the mobile firms. The problem with controlling for management resistance

is that it is endogenous; in the companies where, for reasons we do not

observe, the organizing drive is weak, management's anti—union campaign

does not need to be as intense to win. Strong union organizing drives may

give rise to intense management efforts or no effort at all. Therefore,

the results including management resistance variables should be interpreted

with caution.
                                                                        14




    With management resistance included, the coefficients all have the

anticipated signs and relative magnitudes. In addition, their sizes do not

change much.   However, only the mobility index measure is still

statistically significant. This may mean that the management resistance

and mobility effects are substitutes for each other; when one effect is

present, the other does not matter. Therefore the impact of mobility on

elections should be examined where management resistance was negligible.

The third section of table 4 presents these results.      Here, the

coefficients all have the anticipated signs; three out of five are

statistically significant. The only peculiar result is that the effect of

"somewhat mobile" is greater than "mobile" in the expert judge's result.

However, the hypothesis that the effect of "mobile" is greater than

"somewhat mobile" cannot be rejected. In all three cases the impact of

mobility is large and, for the most mobile units, statistically

significant.

     The pattern of results is strongly consistent with the hypothesis that

the mobility of office work influences voting in union certification

elections. The effect was to reduce the percent voting for certification

by 7.5—30%, with most estimates around 15%. In this sample of clerical

elections, as in most UCEs, the elections are close so that a 1% decrease

in the probability of voting union translates into roughly a 2% drop in the

probability of a union victory. Thus, mobile office units appear to be

15—60% less likely to certify a union.
                                                                         15




Conclusion

     We have examined the role of job mobility in influencing the outcome

of union certification elections. To determine whether workers in more

mobile jobs perceived mobility to be an important problem, we constructed

and distributed a questionnaire to workers who took part in recent

certification elections. Workers in the two units judged to be mobile, on

average, felt that the fear of job loss was a more significant factor in

their voting decision than the workers in the three immobile units. Also,

those who voted against certification were more likely to report that

mobility was a significant factor in their decision.

     To determine the impact of mobility on voting, data was collected on

101 clerical unit certification elections which took place in Central and

Northern California between 1971 and 1983. Three measures of office

mobility were developed. The analysis of this data suggests that clerical

workers in potentially mobile jobs are considerably less likely to vote

union than those in immobile jobs.

     These results can help explain why union organizers believe clerical

organizing has been much more successful in the public sector and in

not—for—profit firms than in large private—sector firms. To the extent

that clerical units in private—sector firms are easier to move, they will

be harder to organize.   Additionally, if other types of workers are

similarly fearful that unionization will result in job loss and if the

claims by some authors that job relocation has been taking place more often

in recent years are true,11 these results may also help explain the

long—run decline in union success in organizing new workers. A recent Wall

Street Journal article describes how Ingersoll—Rand has reduced the percent

of its work force that is union by 30%. In part this has been done by
                                                                            16




shutting down union plants.12 The article also describes the effect of

this on how workers vote in union representation elections at

Ingersoll—Rand. At least according to union leaders interviewed by the

article's author, the fear of plant shutdowns was a major reason why

workers voted against unions in several elections.     If this pattern of

aggressive union resistance is typical —— as the article suggests ——   our
results may also help explain the decline of union density in

manufacturing.

     Finally, to the extent that it is the goal of U.S. labor law to

protect workers from employer coercion in choosing whether or not to be

represented by a union, the law is failing ——    at   least for clerical

workers. Our evidence strongly suggests that many workers are voting

against unions not because they would prefer no representation but because

they fear that if they choose representation they will lose their jobs.
                                                                         17




                                 Footnotes



1.   Conversation, 1983.

2.   N.L.R.B. "Milwaukee Spring II," cited in Labor Relations Reference

     Manual (Bureau of National Affairs: Washington, D.C.), Vol. 115, pp.

     1065—75 (1984).

3.   Kevin P. Powers, "Now We Can Move Office Work Offshore to Enhance

     Output," Wall Street Journal, June 9, 1983.

4.   Based on conversations with 60 union organizers in 1983.

5.   Annual Reports of the National Labor Relations Board for 1971 to 1981.

     The board has not published statistics for 1982 and 1983 yet.

6.   The union representative was asked to describe the company anti—union

     campaign. From their descriptions, campaigns that included management

     consultants, firings, illegal threats, unfair labor practices, or at

     least a five—month delay were defined as "intense." Campaigns where

     the employer conducted an anti—union campaign without the assistance

     of an employee relations consulting or law firm were considered

     "moderate." "Low key" campaigns were ones that involved little or no

     active management resistance. In the seventeen cases where the union

     representative did not know the information about the campaign, the

     decision about the degree of management resistance was based on

     information from the NLRB files. For an "intense" rating, the

     election had to have at least two of the following: management labor

     lawyers, charges of unfair labor practices, or substantial delays. If

     the election had only one of the above, it was rated as "moderate."

     The "low key campaigns" were the ones which had none of the above
                                                                           18




     conditions and had the election within three months after the petition

     was filed.

7.   We cannot claim that the index is completely objective, since we were

     familiar with the results and characteristics of the elections when we

     constructed it. While no conscious effort was made to modify the

     index on the basis of the election results, the index cannot be

     considered experimentally blind to the outcomes.

8.   The average score for all company voters was 2.90 compared to an

     average of 3.74 for those who voted union.

9.   William T. Dickens, "Error Components in Grouped Data: Why Its Never

     Worth Weighting," NBER Technical Working Paper No. 43 (April 1985).

10. See Richard B. Freeman and James L. Medoff, What Do Unions Do?, Basic

     Books: New York, 1984, pp. 230—239, for a review of the literature on

     the impact of management resistance.

11. Barry Bluestone and Bennett Harrison, The De—Industrialization of

     America: Plant Closings, Community Abandonment and the Dismantling of

     Basic Industry. New York: Basic Books, 1982.

12. David Wessell, "Fighting Of f Unions, Ingersoll—Rand Uses Wide Range of

     Tactics, It Moves Plants, Drops Lines and Wins Worker Votes," The Wall

     Street Journal, June 13, 1985, p. 1.
                                                                           19



                                  Table 1

                               Mobility Index


                                                                    Points

     At start                                                       — 5

1.   General office work
     a variety of clerical tasks which need to be done on site
     in order for the location to function (no computer work)          5

2.   .Inventory work; plant clericals (no computer work)              10

3.   Utility   ciericais                                              10

4.   Local or family ownership of a single operation.                 10

5.   No other offices                                                  4

6.   Other workers at plant or office are organized                    2

7.   No other unorganized locations                                    3

8.   Less than 3 other unorganized locations                           2


9.   Ratio of clerical workers to nonclerical workers at plant or
     office is   .1                                                    4

10. Office workers work with customers at the location.               10

11. Ratio of clerical workers to nonclerical workers at plant or
     office is   .66                                                   4

12. Office workers work entirely with computers                     — 4

13. Some of the office work is done on computers                    — 2

14. The office workers do work for at least two of the company's
     locations                                                         4

15. The sole function of the office is phone work                   — 2




Units with point totals     0 are assumed to be immobile. Those with
negative point totals were assumed to be mobile.
                                                                                          20



                                               Table 2

           One—Way Analysis of Variance of Percent of Workers Voting Union



Mobility Measure              % Voting       Difference     Standard Error for   F—Test of Joint
                                Union      Between Mobile   Difference Between    Significance
                                           and Not Mobile   Category and Not
                                                                  Mobile


Organizer s
Judgment:
  Not Mobile                  65.4%                                              significant
                    1A1..41
     ¶JWWLLd. I.. LLL1 I.)    JflJ1W
                                  • I I.    — ./ • 1107
                                                     1.           V • /07
                                                                      9/0            at.
  Mobile                      49.5%        _15.9%**               6.4%           .05 level

Expert 's
Judgment:
  Not Mobile                  62.6%                                              significant
  Somewhat Mobile             54.1%        — 8.5%                 8.2%               at
  Mobile                      45.9%        _16.7%*                9.3%           .15 level

Mobility Index:
  Not Mobile                  63.3%                                              significant
  Mobile                      51.2%        _12.2%*                5.9%           at .05 level




significant at .05 level *
               .01 level **

in   one—tail test
                                                                21




                                    Table 3

                 Control Variables Included in First Analysis



Composition of Unit:

     Percent   Women
     Percent   Black
     Percent   Asian
     Percent   Chicano
     Dummy =   1 for no data on race

Year election was held
Number of workers employed at this site
Number of workers in unit
Percent of work force at site doing clerical work

Union Dummies:

     Teamsters
     SEIU
     OPEU
     ILWtJ
     CWA
     (left out category is other)

Industry Dummies:

     Cannery
     Manufacturing
     Trucking and Warehousing
     Communications
     Wholesale and Retail
     Business Services
     Health Care
     Utility
     (left out category is FIRE)

Dummy   =1  if business has no other locations.
Dummy   = 1 if business has more than 10 other locations.
Dummy   = 1 if some other workers at site are organized.
Dummy   = 1 if some work is computer work.
        = 1 if clericals do work for other offices.
Dummy
        = I if clericals do general office work.
Dummy
Dummy   = 1 if clericals do inventory work.
Dummy   = I if clericals deal with customers in person.
Dummy   = 1 if clericals do only computer work.
Dummy   = 1 if clericals do phone work.
Dummy   = 1 if clericals operate a switch board.
Dummy   = 1 if   firm isfamily owned.
                                                                                   22




                                         Table 4

         Minimum x2 Logit Transformation of Fraction Voting Union

                 Regressed on Nobility Measures and Controls


Mobility Measures:               Coefficient and    dP/dX for t   Joint Significance
                                 Standard Error    Average Unit
Management Resistance
Not Included:
                             1
 Organizer's Judgment:
   Somewhat Mobile                 .029 (.254)         .007       Fail to reject
            Mobile                —.324 (.276)        —.078
                         2
 Expert' s Judgment:
   Somewhat Mobile                —.324 (.375)        —.078       Fail to reject
            Mobile                _.712*(.331)        —.171

 Mobility Index:3
            Mobile                —. 525*(.261)       —.126       Significant at
                                                                  .05 level

Including Management
Resistance:

 Organizer's Judgment4
   Somewhat Mobile                —.043 (.230)        —.010       Fail to reject
            Mobile                —.306 (.259)        —.073
                     5
 Expert s Judgment
   Somewhat Mobile                —.224 (.352)        —.054       Fail to reject
            Mobile                —.509 (.572)        —.122

 Nobility Index6:
            Mobile                _.684**(.214)       —.164       Significant at
                                                                  .01 level

Only Elections with
Light Management
Resistance7

 Organizer's Judgment4:
   Somewhat Mobile                —.096 (.329)        —.023       Fail to reject
            Mobile                _.675* (.380)       —.162

 Expert' s Judgment5:
   Somewhat Mobile               _1.30** (.480)       —.312       Significant at
            Mobile               — .72 (.677)         —.174       .05 level

 Mobility Index6:
            Mobile               _1.26** (.357)       —.302       Significant at
                                                                  .01 level

                                                                   (table continued)
                                                                          23



Table 4 continued

significant at .05 level *
               .01 level **

in   one—tail test

Footnotes:

tThis is an approximation to the expected change in the proportion of
 workers voting union in an average unit. It is constructed by multiplying
 the coefficient times the average proportion voting union times one minus
 that proportion.

1.    Control variables in equation after removal of those units with t
      statistics < I are: percent Chicano, more than 10 locations,
      teamsters, communications, some computer work, clericals do work for
      other offices, clericals do inventory work, utility, clericals do
      phone work, clericals operate switchboard.

2.     Control variables in equation after removal of those with t
       statistics < 1 are: more than 10 locations, CWA, communications
       industry, clericals do some computer work, clericals do work for more
       than one office, clericals do inventory work, utility, clericals do
       phone work, clericals operate switchboard.

3.     Control variables in equation after removal of those with t
       statistics < 1 are: percent Chicano, more than 10 locations,
       teamsters, communications industry, clericals do some computer work,
       clericals do work for other offices, clericals do inventory work,
       utility, clericals do phone work, clericals operate switchboard.

4.     Control variables in equation after removing those units with t
       statistics < 1 are: percent Chicano, more than 10 other locations,
       ILWIJ, communications industry, clericals do some computer work,
       clericals do inventory work, utility, clericals do phone work,
       clericals operate switchboard, and two dummy variables for elections
       with normal and intense management resistance.

5.     Control variables in equation after removing those with t statistics
       < 1  are: percent Chicano, year, more than 10 locations, teamsters,
       CWA, trucking industry, communications industry, utility, clericals do
       some computer work, clericals do some work for other offices,
       clericals do inventory work, clericals do phone work, clericals
       operate switchboard, and two dummy variables for elections with normal
       and intense management resistance.

6.     Control variables in equation after removing those with t
       statistics < 1 are: percent Chicano, more than 10 other locations,
       teamsters, utility, clericals do some computer work, clericals do work
       for other offices, clericals do inventory work, clericals do phone
       work, clericals operate switchboard, and two dummy variables for
       elections with normal and intense management resistance.

7.     Specifications are the same as those above except that the management
       resistance dummies were interacted with the mobility measure. Only
       the coefficients for mobility when resistance was light are reported.
                                                                            24

                                   Appendix 1

                Questionnaire Used to Validate Mobility Measures

      At your workplace an election for union representation was held. As
      office workers you were able to vote in the election. Regardless of
      how you voted, please evaluate how the following factors influenced
      your decision to vote for or against the union (or not to vote at
      all). YOUR ANSWERS ARE COMPLETELY CONFIDENTIAL.

For each question, please circle the number that best describes how
important each factor was in your decision to vote for or against union
representation.

                                          Very   Somewhat   Not too Not at all

A. Your pay at the time
     rfrha1e'rirrn                                  9

B. The information provided by
    union supporters about the union.      1        2         3         4

C. The union dues you would have to
    pay if the union won                   1        2         3         4
D.   The concern that your employer
     may have your job done at a
     different location if the
     unionwon                              1        2         3         4

E.   Your present relationship
     with management                       1        2         3         4

F.   Your opportunities for job
     training or promotion at
     your present job                      1        2         3         4
G.   The possibility of a strike
     if the union won                      1        2         3         4

H.   The information provided by
     your employer about the union . .     1        2         3         4

I.   The computerization of office
     work/word processing                  1        2         3         4
J.   The amount of influence you had
     on decisions affecting your work.     1        2         3         4

                                          For    Against     Did Not Vote

K.   How did you vote in the union
     representation election?              1        2         3

L.   Please list other factors that
     influenced your decision.



                                     THANK YOU
                                                                                25




                                         Appendix 2



                                   Estimation Technique




      One standard approach to estimating models where the dependent variable

is a proportion is to assume that the expected value for the proportion for

each observation p is a logistic function of observed variables X or



(1)                            1
                  pi =
                                   —x.
                                     1
                          1+e


Designating the size of each group i as N. and the actual proportion as
      if we assume that Np is a binomially distributed random variable with

expected value p.N. then the 8 s of (1) can be consistently estimated by

regressing log {;iI(l_;i)] on the X s and can be efficiently estimated

if the variables are all weighted by an appropriate approximation to the

variance of the random variable




                  v. =   log                 —   log   {pJ(1_p.)]


This is the method of Minimum Chi—Squared Logit.
                                                                                       26



    There are two problems with this as an approach to the data used here.

First some of the p. s are equal to one or zero so that the standard logit

transformation is undefined.          This problem is remedied by adopting the

alternative transformation proposed by Haldane,




                  L. =   log          +
                                           1__] /
                                                       —   +    1
                                                                        1   = xj
                                          2N.                  2N. i
                                                                    1
                                            1



The second problem is that both logit transformations assume that all attri-

butes of an election unit which determine the probability of a worker voting

union are observed. This is certainly not the case. To solve this problem we

augment the Haldane model by assuming



                  L. = X       + Y.
                   1    i         1



where 1.     is an unobserved i.i.d. error term. Dickens [19851 shows that

this model can be efficiently estimated using a 2—step procedure.                  In the

first step consistent estimates of the              s and the variance of the         are

obtained. Weighted estimation is done in the second step to obtain efficient

estimates.
