                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    FISCAL ZONING AND SALES TAXES:
DO HIGHER SALES TAXES LEAD TO MORE RETAILING AND LESS MANUFACTURING?

                                            Daria Burnes
                                           David Neumark
                                           Michelle J. White

                                         Working Paper 16932
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16932


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2011




The authors are grateful to the Public Policy Institute of California and the David A. Coulter Family
Foundation for support for using the NETS data for this research. We also thank Tony Soeller for assistance
with ArcGIS, Eve Irwin for assistance with the Florida population data and institutional detail, Sima
Kamouie and Linchun Chen for research assistance, and William Strange, George Zodrow, anonymous
reviewers, and seminar participants at UCI, Rice/University of Houston, the American Law and Economics
Association Conference, and the Southern California Conference in Applied Microeconomics. The
views expressed are not those of the Public Policy Institute of California or the National Bureau of
Economic Research. White is grateful to the Cheung Kong Graduate School of Business, Beijing,
for hospitality and financial support.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Daria Burnes, David Neumark, and Michelle J. White. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Fiscal Zoning and Sales Taxes: Do Higher Sales Taxes Lead to More Retailing and Less
Manufacturing?
Daria Burnes, David Neumark, and Michelle J. White
NBER Working Paper No. 16932
April 2011, Revised December 2012
JEL No. H71,J2,R52

                                                ABSTRACT

We test the hypothesis that local government officials in jurisdictions that have higher local sales taxes are
more likely to use fiscal zoning to attract retailing. We find that total retail employment is not significantly
affected by local sales tax rates, but employment in big box and anchor stores is significantly increased
in jurisdictions where sales tax rates increase. We also find that manufacturing employment is significantly
lowered in these jurisdictions. These results suggest that local officials in jurisdictions with higher
sales tax rates concentrate on attracting large stores and shopping centers and that their efforts crowd
out manufacturing. A rise of one percentage point in a county-level local sales tax rate is predicted
to result in 258 additional retail jobs and the loss of 838 manufacturing jobs.


Daria Burnes                                           Michelle J. White
Department of Economics                                Department of Economics
University of California at Irvine                     University of California, San Diego
3151 Social Science Plaza                              La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
Irvine CA 92697-5100                                   and NBER
dburnes@uci.edu                                        miwhite@ucsd.edu

David Neumark
Department of Economics
University of California at Irvine
3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697
and NBER
dneumark@uci.edu
I. Introduction

           Many U.S. states allow local governments to levy sales taxes that add to the state sales tax and to

keep some or all of the revenue (Lewis, 2001). These extra sales taxes, which have the same base as the

state sales tax, give local government officials an incentive to encourage retailing, since retailing

generates more sales tax revenue than other land uses. Correspondingly, these taxes also give local

government officials an incentive to discourage other land uses, since they generate less sales tax revenue

and could crowd out retailing.

           Local government officials have various policy instruments and practices that they can use to

encourage retailing: they can zone additional land for retail use, they can allow retail developments to

have higher density levels, and they can reduce the often-formidable set of approvals and inspections that

are required for construction or renovation. They can use all of these instruments and practices in reverse

to discourage other land uses. We use the term “fiscal zoning” to refer to local government officials’

efforts to encourage land uses that generate high tax revenue—which in this case we interpret as high

sales tax revenue. In this paper, we first develop a model of fiscal zoning that predicts that local

government officials are more likely to encourage retailing when the sales tax rate in their jurisdiction is

higher. We then test this prediction empirically by examining whether retail employment increases in

response to higher sales tax rates.

           Manufacturing may compete with large stores and shopping centers for land, because both

occupy large tracts of flat land, often close to highways. In addition, manufacturing generates less sales

tax revenue than retailing, because all sales by retail stores are subject to sales taxes, while most sales by

manufacturing firms are exempt.1 As a result, local officials’ efforts to attract retailing in order to increase

sales tax revenue may come at the cost of discouraging manufacturing—an important policy issue since

jobs in manufacturing are often better-paid than jobs in retailing (Leroy, 2005).

           Our empirical analysis uses data from Florida, which is a useful “laboratory” for analysis because

it had a constant state sales tax over our sample period (1992-2006), but also allowed county


1
    See below for data and further discussion.

                                                        1
governments to levy additional sales taxes on the same base—these vary considerably both cross-

sectionally and over time. Because we study one state, and because we use panel data models that include

year and county fixed effects, we are able to control for fixed differences across counties in local taxation

and also for changes over time that are common to all counties. We also take explicit account of other

local programs that cause variation in local taxes, including Enterprise Zones and Tax Increment

Financing in redevelopment areas (see discussion below).

         We have three main findings. First, total retail employment is not significantly affected by

variation in local sales tax rates. This may be because local government officials do not use fiscal zoning,

but it alternately may occur because the positive effect of fiscal zoning on retail employment is fully

offset by the dampening effect of higher sales tax rates on consumer demand.2 Second, and more

consistent with the fiscal zoning hypothesis, we find that higher local sales tax rates lead to more

employment in “big box” stores and department stores that anchor shopping malls. This result suggests

that local officials concentrate their fiscal zoning efforts on attracting large stores and shopping malls and

that they compete more heavily for these when local sales tax rates are higher. The fiscal zoning effect on

big box and anchor stores may arise because these stores generate particularly high sales tax revenue or

because they are particularly sensitive to local officials’ efforts to attract them. And third, increases in

sales tax rates lead to lower employment in manufacturing, suggesting that local officials’ efforts to

attract big box stores and shopping centers crowd out manufacturing.

II. Literature Review

         The hypothesis that local government officials use zoning to choose land uses based on the

relationship between the local tax payments they generate and the cost of providing them with local

public goods was first proposed by Hamilton (1975) as an extension to the Tiebout Model (1956). In

Hamilton’s model, the main source of local government revenue is the property tax, and local

governments use zoning to prevent land uses from being developed if they would cost the local

government more than they would generate in property tax payments. The model assumes that households

2
  See Mark et al. (2000) for an analysis of the effects of sales taxes and other taxes on economic activity within a
single metropolitan area.

                                                           2
can move costlessly between jurisdictions, so that households that are excluded from one jurisdiction

because they would pay less than their cost of local public goods move to other jurisdictions and

households that would pay more in property taxes than their cost of local public goods choose to move to

other jurisdictions. As a result, all jurisdictions are homogeneous with respect to housing and demand for

local public goods, so that the property tax becomes a benefit tax. White (1975) and Ohls et al. (1974)

extended the model by assuming that local government officials use zoning to select land uses that

maximize the local government’s tax revenue net of the costs of supplying local public goods.3 They

argued that local government officials tend to prefer single-family houses over apartments, because

single-family houses generate higher property tax payments, and prefer commercial and industrial land

uses over housing since housing generates high costs for local governments by increasing enrollment in

public schools.4

         Political scientists have also examined local officials’ use of zoning to encourage land uses that

generate high tax revenues, and they extended the idea to include local sales taxes as well as property

taxes. They argue that local officials use zoning to encourage retailing at the expense of other land uses,

because retailing brings in the most sales tax revenue. These studies often use California as their setting,

since property tax revenues in California have fallen sharply since restrictions were imposed in the late

1970s, and local governments there are allowed to adopt local sales taxes. One such study, by Lewis and

Barbour (1999), surveyed city managers in California to determine what types of development they favor

and why. The study concluded that city managers strongly favor retailing and do so because it generates

additional sales tax revenue. But Lewis and Barbour’s study failed to examine whether local officials are

more likely to use zoning to attract retail activity when sales tax rates are higher, nor did it examine

whether officials’ efforts were successful.5,6



3
  See Mieszkowski and Zodrow (1989), Fischel (1992, 2001), and Zodrow (2001) for discussion of the Tiebout
model with zoning, the conditions for the property tax to be a benefit tax, and other approaches to the incidence of
the property tax. A recent paper that uses the concept of fiscal zoning to model the behavior of local governments in
China is Gordon and Li (2012).
4
  However, commercial and industrial land uses may be undesirable if they generate high pollution or congestion.
5
  Political scientists tend to ignore the issue of whether different types of development generate different costs of
supplying local public goods. For other discussions by political scientists of fiscal zoning and competition for

                                                          3
III. Theoretical Model

         In this section, we develop a theoretical model of fiscal zoning under sales taxes and derive

testable implications. Assume that local government officials use their zoning power to determine the

types of development that occur within their jurisdictions. They do so by assigning tracts of vacant land to

zoning categories that include retailing, manufacturing, office buildings, housing, and others. Although

local officials have multiple tools at their disposal for controlling development, in the model we focus

exclusively on zoning. Suppose Zr denotes the number of acres of vacant land zoned for retail use in

jurisdiction j and Zm denotes the number of acres of vacant land zoned for manufacturing use in

jurisdiction j. When local officials in jurisdiction j zone additional land for retail use, they may

compensate by zoning less land for manufacturing use, less land for any other use, or they may leave less

land vacant in the jurisdiction. Similarly, when they zone additional land for manufacturing, they may

zone less land for retail use, less land for any other use, or leave less land vacant. This means that the

relationship between the amount of land zoned for retailing versus manufacturing can range from

complete substitution to no substitution, or −1 ≤ ∂Zr/∂Zm ≤ 0. At the extremes, if ∂Zr/∂Zm = −1, then

zoning one more acre of land for retail use implies zoning one less acre of land for manufacturing use

and, if ∂Zr/∂Zm = 0, then zoning one more acre for retail use has no effect on the number of acres zoned

for manufacturing use.7,8



retailing, see Misczynski (1986), Fulton (1998), and Schrag (1998).
6
  Another paper related to ours is Wassmer (2002). Wassmer regresses the amount of retailing in U.S. metropolitan
area suburbs on sales tax and property tax collections, using data for 55 U.S. metropolitan areas. He finds a positive
relationship between suburban retail sales and sales tax collections, but no relationship between retail sales and
property tax collections; he argues that this provides evidence of fiscalization of land use. A problem with
Wassmer’s study is that it ignores the upward bias in the relationship between retail sales and sales tax collections
that results from the mechanical relationship between them.
7
  For ∂Zr/∂Zm to take values greater than −1 but less than 0, it must be the case that the total amount of land
developed for retail plus manufacturing use is less than the total amount of vacant land in the jurisdiction. In theory,
∂Zr/∂Zm could also take values greater than 0 or more negative than −1, but we ignore these possibilities.
8
  We also assume that all land zoned for retail or manufacturing use is developed quickly for that use, so that zoning
is a binding constraint on the amount of retail and manufacturing development. In actuality, local officials might
zone more land for particular uses than developers wish to build on, so that zoning is not a binding constraint. In that
case, higher sales tax rates would probably have a negative effect on the level of retail sales, since retailers would
tend to choose jurisdictions with low sales tax rates. Given that we find evidence of a positive rather than a negative
relationship for certain types of retail stores, our results cannot be explained by the lack of a binding zoning
constraint on retail development. We also ignore rezoning of already developed land. When developed land is
rezoned, it is allowed to remain in the old use (“grandfathered”), subject to some limitations. See Fischel (2001) and

                                                           4
         The value of land zoned for retail use and manufacturing use in jurisdiction j is denoted Vr and Vm

per acre, respectively. Vr depends negatively on the total amount of land zoned for retail use in

jurisdiction j, Zr, and may also depend negatively on the local sales and property tax rates in jurisdiction j,

denoted σ and π.9 Also, because sites in neighboring counties are substitutes for sites in jurisdiction j, Vr

depends positively on the sales tax rate in neighboring jurisdictions, denoted τ.10 Similarly, Vm may

depend negatively on the total amount of land zoned for manufacturing Zm and on the property tax rate in

jurisdiction j, π. The value of retail sales per acre in jurisdiction j is denoted S, where S could depend

either positively or negatively on the amount of land zoned for retailing Zr. The relationship between S

and Zr is likely to be negative because additional stores compete with each other for sales, but could be

positive if additional stores increase shopping agglomeration economies—possibly by increasing variety.

Because taxes are passed on to consumers in part as retail price increases, S also depends negatively on

the sales and property tax rates in jurisdiction j, σ and π, and positively on the sales tax rate in neighboring

jurisdictions, τ. S may also have a random component to reflect the fact that stores and shopping centers

may be successful or unsuccessful. The cost of providing local public goods to new retail or

manufacturing uses is assumed to be G per acre.11

         Local officials are assumed to choose how much land to zone for retail and manufacturing use so

as to maximize the net tax revenues (NTR) generated by new development. They are assumed to treat

local tax rates as fixed, because rates are chosen by voters in a referendum or by the local legislature. NTR

is given by:




Zodrow (2001) for discussion of whether zoning is binding, and further references.
9
  If local taxes are benefit taxes for retailing firms, then the revenue generated by an increase in the sales tax and/or
property tax rate on retail firms would be fully offset by increases in spending on local public goods that benefit
retailers. In this case, there would be no relationship between the sales and/or property tax rates and the value of
land zoned for retailing. See Zodrow (2001) for discussion of conditions under which local taxes become benefit
taxes and no capitalization of local taxes occurs. But this question has been not been investigated for models in
which there are multiple land uses or multiple tax sources.
10
   We simplify by assuming there is only one neighboring tax rate.
11
   For lack of evidence to the contrary, we assume that this cost is the same for retailing and manufacturing. A
planning manual for local officials on how to assess the fiscal impact of development (Burchell et al., 1985) does not
distinguish between the fiscal impact of new manufacturing versus commercial development, suggesting little
difference in the cost of providing local public goods to them. Local public goods provided to non-residential uses
include services such as police and fire or infrastructure or both.

                                                           5
     NTR   S(Zr , , , )Zr   Vr (Zr , , , )Zr   Vm (Zm , )Zm  G(Zr  Zm ) .                   (1)

         The first and second terms in (1) are local sales tax and property tax revenues from newly-

developed retail stores, while the third term is property tax revenues from newly-developed

manufacturing firms.12 The fourth term is the cost of supplying local public goods to newly-developed

retail stores and manufacturing firms.13

         Local government officials choose Zr and Zm so as to maximize NTR.14 Assuming an interior

maximum, the first-order condition determining the amount of land zoned for retailing Zr is:

                                                                           Z m        Z
       S[ S ,Z  1]    Vr [ V ,Z  1]    Vm [ V   ,Z m    1]         G[1  m ]  0 .             (2)
                r                  r   r                 m
                                                                           Z r        Z r

         The first term in (2) is the increase in local sales tax revenue that occurs when jurisdiction j zones

more land for retailing and therefore increases the number of stores in jurisdiction j. This term will be

positive as long as the elasticity of retail sales per acre with respect to the amount of land zoned for

retailing,  S ,Z r , exceeds −1 (that is, as long as sales per acre do not decline too sharply in response to

zoning more land for retail use). The second term is the change in property tax revenues from zoning

more land for retailing. This term is positive as long as the elasticity of the value of retail land per acre

with respect to the amount of land zoned for retailing,  Vr ,Zr , exceeds −1 (that is, as long as the value of


12
   See Section V below for discussion of our assumption that manufacturing firms pay little or no sales tax.
13
   We also worked through an alternate version of the model which assumes that local governments maximize a
utilitarian social welfare function rather than net tax revenue. We defined social welfare over the population of
existing residents and assumed that any new development would be non-residential (which means that the
population of residents whose preferences must be considered remains constant). New development is assumed to
generate enough revenue to pay for the marginal cost of local public goods provided to the development plus a
surplus used to provide additional local public goods to residents (e.g., a new park). As in the current model, we
assumed that land zoned for retailing and manufacturing may either be substitutes or unrelated.
   The results are similar in the sense that all the terms in our model also show up in exactly the same way in the
social welfare model. But the social welfare model contains additional terms that capture the negative direct effect
on residents’ utility of having additional land devoted to retailing or manufacturing (i.e., more pollution or
congestion) and the positive indirect effect of having additional local public goods. How these extra terms affect the
amount of land zoned for retail or manufacturing use is ambiguous. Since the social welfare version of the model is
more complicated and does not change the implications for our main analyses, we use the simpler net tax revenue-
maximizing model.
14
   We ignore strategic interactions between local governments, and treat policy in other jurisdictions as captured in τ;
we defined τ to be the neighboring jurisdiction’s sales tax rate, but we could also introduce the property tax rate in
neighboring jurisdictions without changing the results. Although officials may care about net tax revenues per
capita, we treat population as fixed rather than modeling population responses to policy changes.

                                                                    6
retail land does not decline too sharply when more land is zoned for retail use).

        The third term is the indirect effect of zoning more land for retail use on property tax revenues

from manufacturing. This term is negative as long as land zoned for retail versus manufacturing use are

substitutes (∂Zm/∂Zr is negative) and the elasticity of the value of manufacturing land per acre with respect

to the amount of land zoned for manufacturing, Vm , Z m , is greater than −1 (that is, as long as the value of

land zoned for manufacturing does not increase too sharply when less land is zoned for manufacturing

use). Finally, the last term measures the direct and indirect effect of zoning more land for retail use on the

cost of supplying local public goods to retailing and manufacturing uses. The direct effect must be

negative since costs rise when more land is zoned for retail use; while the indirect effect will be positive

as long as land zoned for retail use is a substitute for land zoned for manufacturing use, but it is likely to

be small.

        Similarly, the first-order condition for the amount of land for zoned for manufacturing is:

                         Z r                         Z                               Z
      S [ S ,Z  1]           Vr [ Vr ,Z r  1] r    Vm [ Vm , Z m  1]  G[ r  1]  0 .     (3)
               r
                         Z m                         Z m                             Z m

        Each term in equation (3) has the same interpretation as the analogous term in (2), except that

direct effects in one expression become indirect effects in the other. As long as ∂Zr/∂Zm is negative, all of

the terms in (3) have the opposite signs of the analogous terms in (2). In particular, the first term is

negative, so that more land zoned for manufacturing reduces sales tax revenue.

        Now consider how an increase in the local sales tax rate affects jurisdiction j’s gain from zoning

additional land for retailing versus manufacturing, which is central to the question we study. The increase

in net tax revenue from zoning additional land for retailing when the sales tax rate  rises is:

     2 NTR                                      V
             S[1   S ,Zr ]  [1   S , ]   r [1   Vr ,Z r ] .                                   (4)
    Z r                                       

where, for simplicity, we have assumed that the elasticity terms in (2) are constants, and that Vm and

∂Zr/∂Zm do not change with changes in σ.

        The first term in (4) is the effect of the rise in the sales tax rate on sales tax revenues. It must be


                                                               7
positive as long as  S,Zr > −1 and  S , > −1. These inequalities require that sales per acre not decline so

precipitously with increased zoning for retail use that total retail sales in jurisdiction j would fall, and that

sales per acre not decline so precipitously with a higher sales tax rate that total retail sales in jurisdiction j

would fall. The fact that jurisdictions zone any land for retail use and that they impose local sales taxes

suggest that these two elasticity conditions are satisfied.15

         The second term in equation (4) is the effect of the rise in the sales tax rate on property taxes

collected on land zoned for retailing. ∂Vr/∂σ will be negative, except in the extreme case when local sales

tax revenues are used entirely to fund local public goods for retail firms (when it equals zero). The

elasticity term that multiplies it captures the additional effect on property tax revenues that comes about

because additional land zoned for retail use reduces the value of retail land per acre. This term is negative

as long as Vr ,Zr > −1, which means that the value of retail land does not decline so precipitously as more

land is zoned for retailing that total property tax revenue from retail land use in jurisdiction j falls.16 But

the second term is multiplied by the property tax rate—which in Florida is around 2%—so that it is

small.17 Thus, equation (4) implies that the return to zoning more land for retail use increases with the

sales tax rate, except in the anomalous case where zoning more land for retail use generates losses in

property tax revenue that more than offset the gains from additional sales tax revenue.

         Equation (4) being positive does not directly imply that the amount of land zoned for retailing

increases in response to a higher sales tax rate, but rather just shows how the effect of zoning more land

for retailing on NTR varies with the local sales tax rate. To get a more specific prediction of how the


15
   There are of course other factors that can influence the gain from zoning additional land for retail at a given sales
tax rate, such as the size and income of the population in the neighboring jurisdiction, commuting patterns, traffic
congestion levels, the level of retail variety in both own and neighboring jurisdictions, and negative or positive
externalities. These should drop out of equation (4) because they do not change when a given jurisdiction’s sales tax
rate changes. However in the econometric analysis, the implication could be that the effects of changes in sales tax
rates are heterogeneous. In our empirical work, we incorporate some variables that could be related to heterogeneity,
such as population density and sales tax rates of cross-border jurisdictions.
16
   Note that the second term in equation (4) becomes positive if Vr ,Zr < −1. If we think of the second term in (4) as
the partial with respect to Zr of ∂NTR/∂σ, then this means that the value of retail land falls sharply as Zr increases,
implying that the property tax penalty from raising the sales tax rate becomes smaller.
17
   ∂Vr/∂σ is likely to be a multiple such as 10 to 20 times ∂S/∂σ, because the value of retail land equals the net
present value of future sales. But ∂Vr/∂σ is multiplied by the small property tax rate.

                                                            8
amount of land zoned for retailing is related to the sales tax rate, we totally differentiate equation (2) with

respect to σ and Zr , which yields:

                                                                                          
                                                                 dVr                      
                                 S  [ S ,  1][ S ,Zr 1]       [ Vr ,Zr  1]
                                                                 d                       
     dZ r / d                                                                    2     .                (5)
                   dS                       dVr                    dVm  dZ m            
                   dZ [ S ,Zr  1]   dZ [ Vr ,Zr  1]   dZ  dZ  [ Vm ,Zm  1] 
                      r                        r                      m        r        

         The numerator is the same as equation (4). The denominator represents the additional effect of

changing Zr when taking the total differential. We just argued that the numerator is positive. Under the

same types of assumptions as made earlier that all of the elasticity terms are greater than −1, each term in

the denominator must be negative, since S and Vr were assumed to be negatively related to Zr, and Vm was

assumed to be negatively related to Zm. Thus, coupled with the negative sign outside the brackets, the

entire expression is positive.

         Overall, then, jurisdiction j gains from zoning additional land for retailing when the local sales

tax rate rises, as long as retail sales per acre do not fall too quickly as zoning for retail use increases, and

sales and land values do not fall too quickly as the local sales tax rate increases. Although we do not

distinguish in our model between small retail stores versus big-box or anchor stores, this point may

provide a reason why local jurisdictions respond to higher sales tax rates by zoning more land for big box

or anchor store development. Compared to small stores, these developments are likely to generate higher

sales per acre and/or shopping agglomeration economies that benefit small stores in jurisdiction j. The

higher values of S raises the value of ∂Zr/∂σ for big box or anchor stores compared to small stores.18

         We can also solve for the effect on net tax revenues from zoning additional land for

manufacturing when the local sales tax rate rises. The result (not shown) is the same as equation (4),

multiplied by ∂Zr/∂Zm. Assuming that ∂Zr/∂Zm is negative, this effect must be negative as long as (4) is

positive. Thus, when the local sales tax rate rises, jurisdiction j has an incentive to zone more land for

retail use and less land for manufacturing use. Or, more precisely, if jurisdiction j has an incentive to zone

18
  The value of (5) will also tend to be higher if the jurisdiction’s stores have greater retail variety or less
competition from stores in neighboring jurisdictions, because sales per acre are higher and/or because sales are less
elastic with respect to the sales tax rate.

                                                           9
more land for retail use, then it also has an incentive to zone less land for manufacturing use. Further,

suppose we assume that there is a stronger tradeoff between land used for large retail developments and

manufacturing than between land used for small retail stores and manufacturing, because large retail

developments and manufacturing firms tend to demand the same kinds of land. Then higher sales tax

rates are likely to have a larger negative effect on the amount of land zoned for manufacturing because

they make it more profitable for local officials to zone for big box stores and shopping centers.

        Now turn to the question of how local sales tax rates affect employment in retailing in jurisdiction

j (because we have data on employment, rather than land use or zoning). To analyze this question, we

must shift from analyzing the behavior of local officials to analyzing the behavior of retail store owners.

To keep the analysis simple, we treat all retail stores in jurisdiction j as though they were a single store

occupying all of the land zoned for retailing in jurisdiction j. Retail profits are then:

      1
            Qr (Zr , Lr , )  wLr  (r   )ZrVr (Zr , , , ).                                      (6)
    (1  )

        Here Qr denotes revenue from retail sales including sales taxes, which depends positively on

inputs of land zoned for retailing Zr, and labor in retailing Lr. Qr is also assumed to depend on the sales

tax rate, since retailers may pass on sales tax increases by raising prices. We make the usual convexity

                                                       r           r
assumptions for the retail production function, i.e., QLL  0 and QLZ  0 , and we assume that the marginal

                                                                           r
revenue product of labor falls when the local sales tax rate rises, i.e., QL  0 . The second term in (6) is

the cost of labor, where the wage rate is denoted w, and third term in (6) is the rental cost of land per acre

per year, (r + π)Vr, where r is the interest rate. Retail store owners hire labor until the marginal revenue

product of labor equals the wage rate, or

      1
            QLr  w .                                                                                  (7)
    (1  )

        To consider how retail store owners change the level of retail employment when jurisdiction j’s

sales tax rate rises, we totally differentiate (7) and solve for dLr/dσ. The wage rate w is assumed to be

fixed on the assumption that it is set in a larger market. The result is:


                                                         10
     dLr   QLr      QLr QLZ
                          r
                             (dZr / d )
                                      .                                                              (8)
     d (1  )QLL QLL
                r     r         r
                              QLL

        This equation has three terms. The first term captures the negative effect on retail employment

from loss of revenue due to the rise in the sales tax rate, which must be negative. The second term

captures the effect of the higher sales tax rate on the marginal revenue product of labor, which is also

                r
negative since QL  0 , but is likely to be small. The third term captures the effect of the sales tax change

through zoning. When the sales tax rate is higher, local officials zone more land for retailing (dZr/dσ > 0),

which causes the cost of retail land to fall and the land-to-labor ratio in retailing to rise. Retail

                                                                                     r
employment therefore rises because the marginal revenue product of labor is higher (QLZ  0) . The third

term therefore is positive and offsets the negative first and second terms, so that fiscal zoning either

makes the retail employment-sales tax relationship less negative or changes its sign from negative to

positive. We test for this in our empirical work.

        Finally, if the fiscal zoning response to an increase in the local sales tax rate is stronger for big

box and anchor stores, then dZr/dσ in equation (8) will be more positive for these stores, and we will be

more likely to find a positive employment response to higher sales tax rates when we examine large store

employment.

        We can similarly model manufacturing employment using a single manufacturing firm that is

assumed to occupy all of the land zoned for manufacturing in jurisdiction j. Manufacturing profits are

then:

    Qm (Zm , Lm )  wLm  (r   )ZmVm (Zm ,  ) .                                                      (9)

        In equation (9), Qm denotes manufacturing revenue, which depends on inputs of land Zm and labor

                                             m           m
Lm. We also assume the convexity conditions QLL  0 and QLZ  0 . We follow the same procedure as

above to derive dLm/dσ, using the indirect relationships between land zoned for manufacturing, land

zoned for retailing, and the local sales tax rate. The result is:




                                                       11
                m    dZm dZr
              QLZ
     dLm             dZr d
                              .                                                                        (10)
     d               m
                     QLL

        This condition is analogous to the third term in (8) multiplied by ∂Zm/∂Zr. Thus the local sales tax

rate affects manufacturing employment only through its effect on the amount of land zoned for retailing

and manufacturing use. If there is no substitutability between the amount of land zoned for manufacturing

versus retailing (∂Zm/∂Zr = 0), then (10) equals zero and manufacturing employment is predicted to be

unrelated to the sales tax rate. But if there is some substitutability (∂Zm/∂Zr < 0), then local officials

respond to an increase in the sales tax rate by zoning more land for retailing and less land for

manufacturing. As a result, the cost of manufacturing land rises, so that the labor-to-land ratio in

manufacturing rises and the marginal product of labor falls. Thus owners of manufacturing firms are

predicted to reduce the number of manufacturing jobs. We also test this prediction in our empirical work.

IV. Institutional Environment for Local Sales Taxes in Florida

        We use Florida data from 1992-2006 for our study. Florida has a state sales tax, which during our

sample period was always 6%. Counties in Florida can also adopt local sales taxes that are added to the

state sales tax; they are adopted or changed either by county voters in a referendum or by adoption of a

county ordinance (The Florida Legislature’s Office of Economic and Demographic Research, 2011).

Although in the aggregate, property taxes are a more important source of revenue for Florida local

governments than are local sales taxes, the latter are growing much more rapidly. After correcting for

inflation, local sales tax revenue in Florida increased nearly three times as fast as property tax revenue

between 1992 and 2008, rising from 1.9% of local government tax revenue to 3.8% (U.S. Census Bureau

Census of Governments, 1992 and 2007). Moreover, local sales taxes are an important share of the taxes

that retail stores pay to local governments. Using data for 2008-09 payments of sales tax and property tax

by the commercial sector in Florida, we estimate that during our study period commercial properties paid

56% as much in local sales taxes as they paid in property taxes—and the figure would be higher if we

could separate retail stores from other commercial properties. Overall, these figures suggest that Florida is



                                                       12
a good test case for studying the effects of increased reliance by local governments on sales taxes.19

            Local sales taxes consist of seven separate taxes. All are levied at the county level, apply

uniformly across the county, and have the same tax base as the Florida state sales tax. The overall local

sales tax rate in a county is capped at 1.5%. Tax revenues from two of these taxes—the infrastructure tax

and the small county surtax—go directly to local governments (which in Florida are called

municipalities).20 These two taxes are the most commonly-used local sales taxes in Florida and they

account for most of the revenues. During our sample period, an average of 44 out of 67 Florida counties

imposed one or both of these taxes and the average sales tax rate for the two taxes in counties using them

was 0.96%. Revenues from these two taxes are shared among municipalities either based on their shares

of county population or on where the sales occurred. For revenues to be distributed according to where

sales occurred, the county must adopt an interlocal agreement.21 During our sample period, around 35%

of counties that used these two taxes had interlocal agreements (Florida Legislative Committee on

Intergovernmental Relations, 2003).

            The other five local sales taxes are levied by counties but go to county-level special-purpose

authorities, such as school boards, and health, welfare or transportation authorities. During our sample

period, an average of only eight school boards, two health or welfare authorities, and one transportation

authority levied local sales taxes. The average local sales tax rate for these taxes in counties that levied

them was 0.48% during our sample period. See Table 1A for information on local sales tax rates by type

of tax.22


19
   Sales tax and property tax payments by the commercial property sector in Florida were $6,393,000,000 and
$1,193,000,000, respectively, in 2008-09. (We were unable to obtain these figures for earlier years.) The figure for
sales tax payments includes both state and local sales taxes. Using average figures for our sample period, the
average total sales tax rate was 6.7%, of which the local sales tax rate was 0.7%. Thus the ratio of local to total sales
tax payments was 10.4%. (See Table 3.) This implies that the ratio of local sales tax payments to property tax
payments by the commercial property sector is approximately .104 (5.4) = .56. This information comes from Florida
Department of Revenue, http://dor.myflorida.com/dor/property/taxpayers/cmdata/08table2.html (viewed November
4, 2012) and http://dor.myflorida.com/dor/taxes/colls_from_7_2003.html (viewed October 7, 2012).
20
   The small county surtax can be used only by counties with populations less than 50,000.
21
   Although county-specific interlocal agreements can be proposed by either the county or municipal governments,
the governing bodies representing the majority of the respective county’s municipal population must ultimately
approve the agreements.
22
   School boards in Florida differ from other county-level authorities because they have independent authority to
levy local sales taxes; other authorities’ local sales taxes must be levied by the county. The school board tax is the

                                                           13
         Formally, land-use policy in Florida is set at the municipal level, while local sales tax policy is set

at the county level. One issue is that officials in most Florida municipalities might appear to have little

incentive to engage in fiscal zoning, because the sales tax revenue that additional retailing would generate

either goes to county-level authorities or is shared among municipalities within a county according to

relative population. However counties that adopt local sales taxes clearly have an interest in attracting

retailing and county officials have various ways of encouraging municipal officials to adopt zoning

policies that favor retailing. One method is for the county to adopt an interlocal agreement that distributes

revenues from the local sales tax to municipalities based on where retail sales occur. Another method is

for the county to directly reward municipalities that engage in fiscal zoning by giving them additional

infrastructure. A third method is for county officials to engage in fiscal zoning directly by encouraging

retail development in unincorporated areas; in these areas, counties rather than municipalities are

responsible for zoning.23

         In our empirical work, we ignore the county-municipality distinction and treat counties as though

they both decide the local sales tax rate and determine zoning policy. We therefore examine the fiscal

zoning hypothesis using county-level data as our unit of analysis. This potentially raises endogeneity

concerns, since sales tax rates could be set in response to changes in retailing or manufacturing activity.

We examine this issue further in Section VI.

         Finally, an important advantage of using Florida data is that counties adopted local sales taxes or

changed their rates fairly frequently during our study period. As of 1992, nearly half of Florida counties

had no local sales taxes; by 2006, this figure had dropped to 13%. Also, between 1992 and 2006, there

were 75 changes in aggregate local sales tax rates and 32 instances of counties imposing a local sales tax

where there was none before.

School Capital Outlay Tax, the transportation tax is the Charter County Transit System Tax, and the health/welfare
authority taxes are the Indigent Care and Trauma Center Tax (Dade County only), the County Public Hospital Tax
(Dade County only), and the Indigent Care Tax. In addition, there are several other local sales taxes that we exclude
from our study, including a tourist development tax, a convention center tax, and a professional sports facility tax.
These are excluded because they are imposed on hotels/motels and therefore do not create incentives for local
governments to expand retail activity. See Florida Legislative Committee on Intergovernmental Relations (2009 and
earlier years).
23
   Municipalities may nonetheless benefit by subsequently annexing the newly-developed land along with nearby
areas (e.g., King, 2010; Shoer Roth, 2010).

                                                         14
        Tables 1B and 2 give a history of local sales tax rate changes by county over this period. Given

that our empirical approach is based on a difference-in-differences analysis relating changes in

employment to changes in county tax rates, this extensive within-county variation in sales taxes is

essential to identifying the effects of sales taxes. Aggregating across all of the changes in Table 2, there

are 56 sales tax increases and 19 decreases. The table also shows a relatively consistent pattern of

increases throughout the sample period, rather than any kind of cyclical pattern that could potentially

confound our estimation of the effects of sales tax rates.24

V. Data and Approach

        We use panel data from the National Establishment Time Series (NETS) on the universe of

individual business establishments in Florida from 1992 to 2006. For each establishment, we know

employment each year and the establishment’s name, industry, and location.25 We aggregate these data to

get total employment in retailing and manufacturing by county for each of the 67 Florida counties for

each year from 1992 to 2006.

        The NETS data are not the only source of county-level employment information. The County

Business Patterns data, closely related to the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages, also provide

such information. However, the data are often suppressed or reported as ranges for confidentiality

reasons. Moreover, much of our interest focuses on big box and anchor retail stores, which can be

identified by name in the NETS data. This is not possible in the County Business Pattern data, because

company names are not included and there are no sub-categories within the retail sector. We therefore use

the NETS data for our analysis.

        Our basic model estimates how changes in local sales tax rates affect retail employment. As

discussed in connection with equation (8) above, the predicted sign of this relationship is ambiguous:

fiscal zoning can make it positive, but it will be negative if there is no zoning response to a rise in the


24
   Nonetheless, our models include fixed effects which control for aggregate cyclical effects. But because
economic conditions across counties can diverge, we also estimated our models including a control for county-level
unemployment rates—the results were virtually identical to those reported below.
25
   A detailed discussion of the NETS data along with assessment of its quality is provided in Kolko and Neumark
(2007) and Neumark et al. (2007).

                                                        15
sales tax rate. Another factor not discussed in the model is that competition across counties to attract

retailing may be a zero-sum game, since one county’s success may come at the expense of nearby

counties if the area can only support a limited number of stores. To the extent that counties compete with

each other for retailing in response to sales taxes, the estimated relationship will tend to be weaker.

Finally, if fiscal zoning has little overall effect on land use (because most land zoned for retailing remains

vacant), then the estimated relationship will tend to be small/insignificant. Given all these considerations,

finding a positive relationship between changes in local sales tax rates and the level of retail activity

would clearly provide evidence of fiscal zoning.26

         Another question is whether the level of retail employment is well suited to measuring the

strength of fiscal zoning. A more direct measure would be the amount of land zoned for retail use. But

land zoned for retailing is an imperfect measure of the level of retail activity, both because stores may be

vacant and because some land zoned for retailing may be vacant. Vacancies of both types may result if

local government officials zone too much land for retailing (contrary to the assumptions of our model). In

addition, as noted in Section I, local government officials can also encourage retailing by allowing land

zoned for retailing to be developed at higher density levels or by expediting permit and inspection

procedures. Using retail employment as our measure of the effect of fiscal zoning has the advantage that it

encompasses all three policies and that it measures retail activity only for stores that are actually in

operation.

         Because large retail concentrations are particularly valuable in areas with higher local sales tax

rates, we also examine the effect of fiscal zoning on retail employment in big box stores, such as Wal-

Mart, Home Depot, and Costco, and department stores of the type that anchor large shopping malls, such

as Macy’s. Our hypothesis is that local government officials in jurisdictions that have high local sales

taxes are particularly likely to compete for these stores and the associated shopping malls.27


26
   An additional factor is that the price elasticity of demand for goods bought from brick-and-mortar stores has been
increasing over time as sales migrate to the internet. See Goolsbee and Zitran (1999).
27
   The stores in our big box/anchor category are: Best Buy, Big Lots, Bloomingdales Inc., Circuit City, Costco,
Federated Retail Holdings (Lord & Taylor), Home Depot, J.C. Penney, K-Mart, Lowes Home Centers, Macy’s, May
Department Stores, Montgomery Ward, Neiman Marcus Group Inc., Nordstrom Inc., Office Depot, Office Max,

                                                         16
         We also estimate similar models for manufacturing employment.28 As discussed in connection

with equation (10) above, county-level manufacturing employment is predicted to fall in response to

higher local sales tax rates if local officials engage in fiscal zoning. This is because local government

officials zone less land for manufacturing and more for retailing when the sales tax rate is higher, causing

manufacturing to be crowded out by retailing. In contrast, if there is no fiscal zoning then our prediction is

that there will be no relationship between manufacturing employment and local sales tax rates.

          Table 3, Panel A, gives summary statistics for our county-level sample. All sales tax rates are the

sum of the state sales tax rate of 6% and local sales tax rates. The neighboring sales tax rates in the

county-level sample are a weighted average of the sales tax rates in all bordering counties, using the

lengths of the borders with each neighboring county as weights.29 Sales tax rates in Florida ranged from

6.0% to 7.5% during our sample period, while sales tax rates in the neighboring counties in Alabama and

Georgia (which also use local sales taxes) ranged from 5.0% to 7.0%.30 The table also shows that industry

employment shares vary widely across areas. For example, in the county-level sample, the share of

employment in retail ranges from 4.17% to 29.30%, and the share of employment in manufacturing

ranges from 1.55% to 47.29%. Employment levels also vary greatly—for example, from near zero to

241,000 jobs in retailing and from near zero to 112,000 jobs in manufacturing at the county level.

         Finally, as we describe in more detail in Section VII, we also examine a separate sample in which


Saks & Company, Sears Roebuck, Staples, Target Corporation, and Wal-Mart. The list of big box retailers is taken
from Mazzolari and Neumark (2012) and we added additional stores identified as those that anchor malls in Florida,
from Oyston (2007).
28
   Our model simplified by assuming that manufacturers do not pay any local sales tax; but in fact manufacturers in
Florida are required to pay sales tax on sales to contractors, but not on sales to resellers (the latter resell the product
in the same form or after further processing). Figures given above in footnote 19 imply that the ratio of local sales
tax payments to property tax payments for the retail/commercial property sector in Florida is 56%. If we follow the
same procedure for the manufacturing sector, we find that ratio of local sales tax payments to property tax payments
for manufacturer/industrial property in Florida is only 12%. The more than four-fold difference in local sales tax
payments across the two sectors justifies the fact that we ignore sales tax payments by manufacturers. Additional
evidence suggesting that sales tax payments by manufacturing firms are low comes from Hawkins and Murray
(2004), who run a regression explaining sales tax collections as a function of manufacturing employment and other
variables, using data for six states including Florida. They find that sales tax collections have little relationship to the
level of manufacturing employment. Ring (1999) and Traeger and Williams (1997) both calculate the fraction of
general sales tax revenue paid by Florida businesses versus consumers, but they do not distinguish between retail
versus manufacturing firms.
29
   To account for coastline and not overweight land borders, we include coastline as part of the border, using the
county’s own tax rate as the tax rate on this border.
30
   Data are from Georgia Department of Revenue (2011) and Alabama Department of Revenue (n.d.).

                                                            17
counties are divided into border versus interior regions. The statistics for these border and interior regions

are reported in Table 3, Panel B. Because these regions are subdivisions of counties, the sales tax rates are

the same, but employment levels are lower.

VI. County-level Specifications and Results

Empirical Approach

          Our base case model, for the analysis of the effects of sales tax rates on county-level retail

employment, is the following:

    ln REct = α + β1taxct + β2taxc,t−1 + γ1neighbortaxct + γ2neighbortaxc,t−1

             + Dcδ + Dtλ + Dctθ + εct .                                                                  (11)

          In equation (11), REct is retail employment in county c in year t. The variables taxct and taxc,t−1 are

the state plus local sales tax rates in county c in the current year and the previous year, respectively, while

neighbortaxct and neighbortaxc,t−1 are the weighted averages of the same sales tax rates in county c’s

neighboring counties (including counties across state borders) in the current year and the previous year,

respectively. Dc and Dt are county and year fixed effects, and Dct is a set of county-specific linear time

trends.

          The coefficients of interest are β1 and β2 and their sum, or the percentage change in retail

employment when the sales tax rate in the current year and/or the previous year rises by one percentage

point, holding neighboring counties’ sales tax rates fixed. Note that because the Florida general sales tax

rate was 6% throughout our sample period, all changes in sales tax rates are due to changes in local sales

tax rates. Therefore, what we identify is the effect of variation in local sales tax rates only, and

identification comes from changes in individual counties’ sales tax rates over time. This regression

captures the key equations from our theoretical model—equations (5) and (8). Equation (5) implies that a

jurisdiction is likely to zone additional land for retailing when the sales tax rate rises. Equation (8) implies

that retail employment will be negatively related to the sales tax rate in the absence of fiscal zoning, but

can become positively related to the sales tax rate if zoning is sufficiently strong.

          The county fixed effects in equation (11) control for time-invariant differences between counties


                                                        18
in unmeasured county-specific characteristics that may affect the level of retail employment, while the

year fixed effects and county-specific time trends capture any national changes and local trends in retail

employment. The county-specific trends, in particular, are intended to capture sources of endogenous

variation stemming from trends in retail growth that could affect sales taxes, an issue we discuss more

below. We estimate equation (11) using OLS. Robust standard errors are clustered at the county level to

allow for arbitrary patterns of serial correlation within counties and for heteroscedasticity across

counties.31

        For the county-level analysis, we report both unweighted regressions and regressions weighted by

1992 county population levels, which are closely related to county employment levels at the beginning of

our sample period.32 Because county population and employment levels vary widely in Florida, the

weighted estimates of how sales tax rates affect retail employment are more representative of how the

average individual is affected. Moreover, the unweighted data give us some high estimates of marginal

effects, because increases in employment levels can be very high in percentage terms when they start

from a low base. Using weights in effect reduces the influence of these extreme measurements in small

counties.33

Basic Results

        Results of regressions explaining total retail employment are shown in Table 4A. The results in

columns (1) and (1’) include only the current sales tax rates, while those in columns (2) and (2’) include

31
   We would have liked to incorporate property tax rates as well as sales tax rates in our regressions. However
property tax rates in Florida are set by 600+ municipalities rather than by counties and we were not able to locate
historical data. Property taxes in Florida are paid mainly by residential rather than non-residential property and
therefore are set based on residential property assessments. Because Florida residential property assessment cannot
rise by more than 3% per year or the inflation rate (whichever is lower)—since a property tax limitation measure
implemented in 1995—changes are likely to be similar across counties. In contrast, local sales tax rates are the sum
of the seven local sales taxes discussed above, and counties vary widely in which taxes they levy. As a result,
changes in these tax rates vary substantially across counties, as documented in Tables 1-2. Because of these
differences, we expect property tax rates to be accounted for by the county and year fixed effects and we do not
expect property tax rates and sales tax rates to be highly correlated.
32
   County population estimates for 1992 were supplied by the Bureau of Economic and Business Research,
University of Florida. We use weights at the beginning of the sample period to avoid any responses of population to
the policy variation we study. However, we also re-estimated our key models using population weights as of 2000—
just past the middle of the sample period—and the results were nearly identical.
33
   When researchers use a dataset that constructs aggregates from a sample, they must worry about
heteroscedasticity driven by variation in the number of observations from which the aggregates are estimates.
However in the case of the NETS, we have the universe of business establishments, not a sample.

                                                        19
both the current and lagged sales tax rates. Column numbers without primes give results from unweighted

regressions, while those with primes give results from weighted regressions. The results show that total

retail employment is not significantly related to sales tax rates, regardless of whether weights are used and

whether we include the lagged sales tax rate in addition to the current rate. This is true for the individual

coefficient estimates, as well as for the sums of the current and lagged sales tax rates, which are shown in

the second-to-last row of the table. The summed effect of the current plus lagged sales tax rate on total

retail employment is positive—which is consistent with fiscal zoning—but statistically insignificant. In

columns (3) and (3’) we add the neighboring counties’ sales tax rates, both current and lagged, to isolate

the effects of independent variation in local sales tax rates. The coefficients of the own local sales tax

variables remain insignificant, and are largely unchanged. Thus our results suggest that fiscal zoning by

counties with high local sales tax rates does not result in a significant increase in total retail employment.

        In Table 4B we report estimates of the same regression models, but our dependent variable is now

employment in big box and anchor stores only. Here the coefficient of the current sales tax rate is positive

and significant at the 5% level in the weighted regression shown in column (1’), and at the 10% level in

the unweighted results in column (1). Also the combined coefficient of the current and lagged sales tax

rates is positive and significant in the weighted regressions in columns (2’) and (3’), regardless of whether

the neighboring sales tax rate is included or not. For the latter specification, the sum of the unweighted

estimates is positive and statistically significant as well (column (3)). The weighted regression results

suggest that employment in big box and anchor stores rises by 15% to 17% for each percentage point

increase in the local sales tax rate. In elasticity terms, the increase is around 0.9 to 1.1. The unweighted

regression results are larger, but they may be influenced by large employment changes from a small base

in sparsely-populated counties (which are down-weighted in the weighted estimates).

        In terms of the model, in discussing equation (8) we showed that the employment response to a

higher sales tax rate could become positive if local officials increase the amount of land zoned for retail

use. Thus, these results for big box and anchor stores indicate that local officials focus their fiscal zoning

efforts on big box stores and shopping centers when sales tax rates rise, and their efforts are


                                                      20
successful.34,35

         Another implication of the strong positive relationship between higher sales tax rates and

employment in big box and anchor stores is that large retail establishments and shopping malls may

crowd out smaller retail establishments in counties that impose a local sales tax. If this were true in

general, it might be a contributing factor to our finding of an insignificant relationship between the local

sales tax rate and total retail employment. To test this hypothesis, we estimated the effect of the local

sales tax rate on small store retail employment, which we define as total retail employment minus

employment in big box and anchor stores. The results, which are reported in Table 4C, show that small

store retail employment is not significantly related to local sales tax rates, although the point estimates are

negative. These results suggest that big box/anchor stores do little to crowd out smaller stores (and that

local government officials do not try to attract small stores in response to higher sales taxes).

         Up to this point, we have found no effect of the sales tax rate on retail employment overall, but a

positive effect of the sales tax rate on employment at big box and anchor stores. We attribute these results

to the fact that big box and anchor stores provide local officials with the strongest incentive to use zoning

to encourage development. As a falsification test, we estimated similar models for employment at grocery

stores. Under Florida law, sales of grocery stores are untaxed, except for prepared foods and non-food

items (Fla. Stat. Section 212.08 (2012)). Therefore, as long as we exclude grocery stores that sell many

other items, we should find no effect of the sales tax rate on retail employment at these stores.36 In

contrast, if the mechanism underlying our evidence for big box/anchor stores had more to do with

34
   An alternative explanation for the fact that we find stronger effects of sales taxes on employment at big
box/anchor stores than on overall retail employment is that demand for the products sold by big box/anchor stores is
less price-elastic. Since the negative effect of an increase in the local sales tax rate on retail employment offsets the
positive fiscal zoning effect, our results could be explained by the weaker negative price effect for big box/anchor
stores than for retailing in general. We think this explanation of our results is unlikely, in part because our big box
and anchor stores range from Wal-Mart to Neiman Marcus, for which the elasticity of demand is likely to be quite
varied. Even if the alternative explanation based on different price elasticities is correct, our results would still
suggest that fiscal zoning plays an important role for big box/anchor stores, since for these stores the net effect of a
higher sales tax is increased employment.
35
   As suggested by a referee, our evidence that higher sales tax rates lead to more employment in big box/anchor
stores, but no increase in retail employment overall, could be explained by higher sales per worker at big box/anchor
stores, coupled with higher sales tax rates leading to a substitution of big box/anchor stores for smaller stores. In that
case overall retail employment need not increase and could even decline despite retail sales (and tax revenue) rising.
36
   In our data, Wal-Mart and Costco are sometimes classified as grocery stores. Because they sell many taxable
items we classified them as non-grocery stores.

                                                           21
spurious correlation between changes in sales tax rates and the building of larger stores (possibly driven

by changes in residential patterns), we might expect to find similar results for grocery stores as for big

box/anchor stores. As reported in Table 4D, we find no evidence that a higher sales tax rate increases

employment at grocery stores. The point estimates are near zero and statistically insignificant, bolstering

our interpretation of the results for big box/anchor stores as reflecting fiscal zoning.

         Table 4E reports the results of regressions explaining manufacturing employment. These

regressions test the prediction, captured in equation (10), that a higher sales tax rate will reduce

employment in manufacturing because local officials respond by zoning more land for retailing and less

for manufacturing. (As we noted, this prediction holds if there is a tradeoff between these two land uses,

or ∂Zm/∂Zr in the model is negative; if there is no tradeoff, or ∂Zm/∂Zr = 0, then the sales tax rate should

not affect manufacturing employment.) The estimated effects—including the contemporaneous effects in

columns (1) and (1’) and the summed effects in columns (2)-(3’)—are always negative, but never

significant. However, in these latter specifications, the lagged effect of the sales tax rate is always

significant at the 5% or 10% level. We therefore re-estimated the models with only a lagged effect. As

shown in the columns (4) and (4’) of the table, the estimated effect of the lagged sales tax rate is negative

and significant at the 10% level in the unweighted estimate, and negative and significant at the 5% level

in the weighted estimate. The point estimates suggest that when the sales tax rate rises by one percentage

point, employment in manufacturing falls by 7% to 9%. The implied elasticities are −0.5 to −0.6.37,38

         Finally, although our focus – and the discussion in the theory section – is on the use of land for

37
   Note that the evidence of negative effects of sales tax rates on manufacturing employment does not imply that
manufacturing plants close as a result of sales tax increases. First, the estimates are relative, so a negative effect can
simply mean that manufacturing employment grows more slowly in counties that raise sales tax rates. Second,
establishments frequently die, and are replaced by other establishments. Changes in use of particular sites may
reflect changes in land use after manufacturing facilities close.
38
   While our results suggest that manufacturing and retailing land uses are substitutable, the extent of substitutability
may vary. In particular, one possibility is that they may be less substitutable in urban than rural areas, since less land
in urban areas is suitable for manufacturing. On the other hand, the simple availability of undeveloped land in rural
areas could reduce the degree of substitutability in these areas. We explored this question in two ways. First, we split
our sample into urban versus rural counties, where counties were classified as rural if they met the U.S. Census
definition of rural (average population density less than 100 people per square mile) at any time during our sample
period. We reran our models separately on the urban and rural subsamples and found little difference in the results.
Second, using the full sample we introduced interactions between the sales tax variables and measures of either the
level or the log of population density. The estimated interaction terms were very small and statistically insignificant.
(Results are available from the authors upon request.)

                                                           22
retailing versus manufacturing, the predictions for manufacturing also apply to other industries that use

land intensively and produce untaxed services. Many services in Florida are taxed, but those of the

finance, insurance, and real estate (FIRE) sector are taxed quite lightly, and the revenues do not go to

localities.39 Also, the FIRE sector occupies office space on land that could be used for retailing. We

therefore estimate similar models for employment in FIRE and the results are in Table 4F. Similar to our

results for manufacturing, the effect of the sales tax on FIRE sector employment are negative. In our

view, this is further evidence that land use shifts to big box and anchor store retail employment in

response to a higher sales tax rate, and away from other uses that do not generate sales tax revenue.

         Since our results are sometimes sensitive to weighting (particularly the results for big box and

anchor store employment), they may be influenced by large employment changes from a small base in

sparsely-populated counties. We verified this by re-estimating the models for big box/anchor store and

manufacturing employment with additional terms that interact the sales tax rate and (linear and quadratic

terms in) the same measure of population that we used as weights. When we did this, the estimated

interactions confirmed that the key results in Tables 4B and 4E are in fact stronger in areas with smaller

baseline populations. Moreover, the results were less sensitive to whether or not we used weights, and the

qualitative conclusions were the same based on the weighted and the unweighted estimates.40

Threats to Identification

         The key identifying assumption for the specifications reported thus far is that local sales tax rates

are uncorrelated with the residuals in our equation (11) explaining retailing and manufacturing

employment. One potential source of correlation is other policies that could have changed over time at

different rates in different counties, yet influenced (or been associated with) both sales tax rates and retail

or manufacturing employment. The policy most likely to fit this description is the Florida Enterprise Zone

program, which offers tax credits against sales taxes to firms that locate within a zone and create new

jobs. An earlier program was terminated in 1994, and a new program was launched in 1995, beginning

39
   Taxes on sales in the FIRE sector include an insurance premium tax of 1.75% (with a tax credit for 10% of
salaries paid to Florida insurance company employees) and a 0.7% tax on real estate transfers. These taxes go to the
state. See Florida Senate Committee on Finance and Tax (2007).
40
   These results are not reported in the tables, but are available from the authors upon request.

                                                         23
with zones in 18 counties, and spreading to 43 counties by the end of our sample period.41 It is possible

that Enterprise Zones were established in areas that were losing manufacturing jobs and that they

generated new retailing jobs. Given the tax credit, Enterprise Zones would have been more valuable to

employers in areas with higher sales tax rates, hence potentially generating our results via a mechanism

different from the fiscal zoning hypothesis.42

         To test whether the effects of sales taxes are confounded with the effects of Enterprise Zones, we

coded a dummy variable equal to one in county-years in which an Enterprise Zone exists and we added

that variable to our models explaining employment in big box/anchor stores and in manufacturing. The

results are reported in Table 5A. The time period covered is 1996-2006,43 and because of the shorter

sample period, for each specification we first report the baseline estimates for this shorter sample period

without including the Enterprise Zone control (the columns without primes), which change a bit from

Tables 4B and 4E. The key question is the sensitivity of the estimates to including the Enterprise Zone

control. The table makes clear that there is no evidence that Enterprise Zones account for the effects of

sales taxes on big box/anchor store employment or manufacturing employment. For both types of

employment, the estimated effects of sales taxes with and without the Enterprise Zone control are

virtually identical.

         A second policy that could confound other tax variation with sales tax variation is the use of tax

increment financing (TIF), which dedicates future tax revenues in an area to pay for infrastructure

improvements within the area. In Florida, TIFs can only be used in Community Redevelopment Areas

(CRAs), which are areas designated for economic redevelopment.44 We obtained information from the

Florida Department of Economic Opportunity on which county-years during our sample had CRAs and

41
   Data on enterprise zones by county comes from the Florida Department of Economic Opportunity (personal
communication with Burt C. Von Hoff, January 22, 2012) and Executive Office of the Governor (2007). To the best
of our knowledge, there are no other subsidies targeted to retailers in Florida.
42
   On the other hand, there could be a bias in the opposite direction. Because the Florida Enterprise Zone program
allows the hiring credit to be taken against the sales tax that a business owes, an enterprise zone could reduce the
attractiveness of a retail business to a county (at least from the perspective of sales tax revenue). In this scenario, if
Enterprise Zones are created where sales tax rates are high, the estimated effects of sales taxes on retail employment
could be biased toward zero, which would strengthen our findings.
43
   Although the new Enterprise Zones went into effect in 1995, we start our analysis in 1996 because we include
one-year lags of sales tax rates.
44
   1977 amendment (Section 163.387 Fla. Stat. Section 163.387) to the 1969 Community Redevelopment Area Act.

                                                           24
added a dummy variable to our specification that equals one for county-years in which one or more CRAs

were in operation. The results are reported in Table 5B; they are comparable to those in the last two

columns of Table 4B (for big box/anchors stores) and the last two columns of Table 4E (for

manufacturing). A comparison of the estimates shows that adding the CRA variable has essentially no

effect on our estimated effects of sales taxes.

        A second threat to identification is the possibility that local sales tax rates could respond to

changes in retailing or manufacturing employment. For example, an exogenous increase in retail sales

might cause counties to raise their local sales tax rates in order to capture more revenue. In this case,

endogeneity would generate a positive bias in the estimated relationship between sales tax rates and retail

(or big box/anchor store) employment. However, the bias could alternately go in the opposite direction,

because an exogenous decrease in retail sales might cause counties to raise their local sales tax rates in

order to maintain tax revenues at the past level. These possibilities could bias our results by generating

spurious evidence that could be either consistent with or contrary to the fiscal zoning hypothesis.

        As noted earlier, we included county-specific time trends in the specifications in Tables 4A-4F to

capture the possibility that sales tax rates might have changed endogenously in response to underlying

changes in employment. When we re-estimate the models in Table 4A without county-specific time

trends, the effect of sales tax rates on total retail employment remains small, slightly positive, and

insignificant; these results suggest that for overall retail employment there is not an endogeneity problem.

When the models for big box/anchor store employment in Table 4B are re-estimated without county-

specific trends, the effect of sales tax rates remains positive, but becomes smaller and insignificant. This

is the opposite of what we would expect if trend growth in employment led to the adoption of higher sales

tax rates, and instead is consistent with a slight tendency for tax rates to increase when trend growth is

negative. The findings for big box/anchor retail employment imply that it is important to include the

county-specific time trends as a partial control for endogeneity. More substantively, they suggest that the

positive effects of sales tax rates on big box/anchor retail employment that we find are not driven by

endogeneity.


                                                      25
         We also did a more direct analysis of whether local sales tax rates are endogenous, by testing

whether lagged changes in employment are related to changes in county-level sales tax rates. In these

regressions, the dependent variable is the change in the local sales tax rate and the independent variables

are the first, second, and third lags of the change in total retail employment, big box/anchor employment,

or manufacturing employment; other control variables are the same as in the preceding county-level

analyses.45 As reported in Table 5C, we found no evidence that lagged changes in any of the employment

measures predict changes in local sales tax rates: the estimated coefficients of the lagged employment

variables were small and always individually and jointly insignificant. These results provide additional

evidence that local sales tax rates are not endogenously determined by changes in employment; in other

words, counties do not change their sales tax rates in response to increases in total retail sales or big

box/anchor store sales. Overall, these additional analyses indicate that the county-level results are driven

by exogenous changes in sales taxes.

         Another potential identification issue is whether the key assumption underlying the difference-in-

differences approach holds. Namely, this approach assumes that the policy change affects the area where

the policy is implemented, but does not affect the “control” areas. If this assumption is violated and there

are important cross-border effects, then the estimated sales tax coefficient could be biased; for example, if

an increase in one county’s local sales tax rate reduces sales in that county but increases sales in

neighboring counties, then any negative effect of the sales tax rate would be overstated. In the preceding

tables we found effects of neighboring counties’ tax rates that are near zero and statistically insignificant,

suggesting that these cross-border effects do not exist. However, we return to this issue in Section VII

when we discuss the effects of sales taxes in border versus interior regions of counties.

Dynamics

         The results for big box and anchor store employment and for manufacturing employment, in

Tables 4B and 4E, sometimes point to evidence that the effects of sales taxes arise with a one-year lag.


45
  Since the baseline models have county fixed effects and county-specific linear time trends, in the first-differenced
model the original county fixed effects drop out, and the county-specific time trends become county dummy
variables.

                                                          26
We would not expect the effects of sales tax changes to be instantaneous, so the evidence of some lag in

the effect is plausible; on the other hand, we might also expect some anticipation effects, as behavior

begins to respond to future sales tax changes that are already enacted.

         The standard within-group estimator may not pin down the dynamics of the effects of sales taxes

very well, because the estimator uses deviations from means over all years for each county. For example,

even if all of the effect occurs, say, two years after the sales tax changes, if the two-year lag is omitted

one will still find an apparent “effect” of the contemporaneous sales tax rate, because its coefficient is

identified from the partial correlation between the deviation of big box employment (for example) from

its sample average for the county, and the deviation of the sales tax rate from its sample average for the

county. To better pin down the dynamics, we also estimated first-difference models with additional lags.

We estimate these models using one-year first differences, which are standard, but also using two-year

first differences, which may be less noisy.46 The results are reported in Panel A of Table 6 for big

box/anchor retail employment and for manufacturing employment. The results are robust, and point to

effects that are not instantaneous, but that emerge over two to three years. For manufacturing, the

cumulative effects of the lagged sales tax variables are larger than the estimates in Table 4E, although the

sample is a bit smaller because we have to drop some observations.

         Table 6, Panel B, reports specifications where we add one- or two-year leads to the model. We

report the lead effect, the sum of the contemporaneous and lagged effects, and the sum of all the effects

including the lead. We also report, for comparison, the sum of the contemporaneous and lagged effects

using the same sample but omitting the lead. There is sometimes evidence of a lead effect, which is not

unanticipated. But the contemporaneous and lagged effects are robust to the inclusion of this lead. Thus,

the combined results indicate that there is some anticipation effect of sales taxes, but most of the effect

unfolds over two to three years after sales taxes increase.

         A different perspective on dynamics concerns how the changes in big box and anchor store


46
   Taking first differences induces serial correlation in the errors. (This is also a problem, although less severe, in
standard within-group estimation.) However, clustered standard errors take account of this non-independence among
observations for a county.

                                                          27
employment come about. If the effects on sales taxes arise through fiscal zoning and other efforts by local

government officials to attract retail stores, then we should find that higher local sales taxes are associated

with more creation or relocation of new businesses. The NETS data are nicely suited to this question,

since we can identify when an establishment first has positive employment in a county; see Neumark et

al. (2007) for details. To verify that employment growth is generated by new establishments rather than

growth of existing establishments, we measure the employment change created by new establishments in

a county, and we estimate similar models as those in Table 4B. Here the dependent variables are in levels

rather than logs, since there are many zeros.

           The results for new establishments, defined over both one-year and two-year windows, are

reported in Table 7. The estimates always indicate positive effects of sales tax increases, which are

statistically significant in three out of the four cases shown in the table. Moreover, the magnitude of the

estimates suggests that a one-percentage point increase in the sales tax rate leads to the opening of one or

two big box or anchor stores (108-170 employees).47 We also estimated these models for changes in retail

employment at non-big box/anchor stores.48 The estimates were uniformly negative, pointing to adverse

effects on retail employment growth in small stores, presumably because local officials do not encourage

establishment of new small stores. However, the latter estimates were very imprecise and never

statistically significant.

VII. Border-Interior Specifications and Results

           Local government officials’ incentives to encourage retailing may differ in interior versus border

regions of counties, and evidence of such differences can help confirm and refine the fiscal zoning

hypothesis. Since sales tax rates may differ on either side of county borders, consumers have an incentive

to shift their shopping to the lower-tax side. This means that the price elasticity of demand will tend to be

higher near county borders than in county interiors, which undermines the effectiveness of fiscal zoning

in border areas. We therefore predict that the relationship between local sales tax rates and retail

employment will be less positive/more negative near county borders than in county interiors, taking

47
     Descriptive statistics indicate that new big box or anchor stores have about 87-90 employees.
48
     Results available upon request.

                                                           28
account of cross-border sales tax differentials.

         To construct border versus interior regions, we use ArcGIS software to determine whether each

establishment in the NETS is within 1 mile of a county border, and we assign each establishment to the

county’s interior versus its border. We further subdivide each county’s border into separate regions for

each neighboring county and we identify the neighboring county for each region. Parts of the border that

are within one mile of more than one neighboring county are deleted, so that each border region has a

unique cross-border county (which may be in a different state).49 Border regions along the coast are

combined with county interiors. Finally, we aggregate each type of employment within each border and

interior region. This procedure increases the sample size from 67 counties to 277 border or interior

regions. For each border region, the neighboring sales tax rate is now the actual sales tax rate across the

border, while for interior regions, the neighboring sales tax rate is set equal to the own sales tax rate.

Table 3, Panel B, gives summary statistics for the border-interior sample.

         In the border-interior regression models, employment by sub-county region-year replaces

employment by county region-year as the dependent variable, fixed effects for sub-county regions replace

county fixed effects in equation (11), and we still include interactions between a time trend and county

dummies. We also create a dummy variable that equals one for border regions and we add interactions

between the border dummy and the sales tax rate. These interaction terms allow us to estimate (and test

for) differences between border versus interior regions in the effects of sales tax rates on employment. We

report only unweighted estimates for the border-interior regressions. Because the sub-county regions tend

to be small, many individuals live and work in different regions. Thus population-based weights are less

accurate in representing employment levels and weighted regressions are therefore less informative.

Standard errors are clustered at the sub-county region level.

         The results of the border-interior regressions explaining total retail employment are shown in


49
  To illustrate our procedure, suppose a county is shaped like a square with sides of 10 miles in length, and has one
neighboring county on each side. Our procedure divides the county into nine sub-county regions: one square interior
region having sides of length 8 miles, four rectangular border regions that are each one mile by 8 miles, and four
square corner regions that are each one mile square. The corner regions are dropped because they border more than
one neighboring county.

                                                         29
Table 8A. Columns (1)-(3) repeat the earlier specifications at the sub-county region level, without

interactions between the sales tax rate and border dummies. As in Table 4A, none of the sales tax rate

coefficients or their sums are significant. In columns (4)-(6) we add the border dummy-sales tax rate

interactions. The estimated interaction coefficients capture the difference between the effects of sales tax

rates on retail employment in border versus interior regions. The estimated interaction terms are small and

insignificant, whether looking at individual coefficient estimates or summed current and lagged effects.

Thus they indicate no detectable difference between border versus interior regions in the effect of sales

tax rates on overall retail employment.

           However when we turn to employment in big box/anchor stores, in Table 8B, we find pronounced

differences between border versus interior regions. Columns (4)-(6) show the key results. In column (4),

the effect of the current sales tax rate on big box/anchor store employment in interior regions is positive

and significant at the 5% level (the 0.406 estimate); while in columns (5) and (6), the combined effect of

the current and lagged sales tax rate is positive and significant at the 10% or 5% level (the estimates of

0.400 and 0.480). In contrast, the results for border regions show that an increase in the current and

lagged sales tax rate causes big box/anchor employment to fall; the estimated effect in columns (4)-(6) is

around −0.15 and significant at the 5% level (the estimates of −0.151, −0.169 and −0.149).

            Thus, our results show that a one percentage-point increase in the sales tax rate leads big

box/anchor store employment to rise by 40-48% in interior regions and to fall by 15-17% in border

regions. The implied elasticities are around 3.0 and −1.1, respectively. The fact that our estimates in

interior regions are positive is contrary to the general literature on the effects of sales taxes, which almost

uniformly finds that they have negative effects on economic activity.50 While our point estimates are

perhaps implausibly large, we also found rather large point estimates when we did not use weights in the

county-level analysis of big box/anchor employment (Table 4B). Thus, although our point estimates are

high, we have confidence in our qualitative conclusions.

           These estimates suggest that local officials concentrate their fiscal zoning efforts on attracting big


50
     See Wasylenko (1997) for a survey and Thompson and Rohlin (2012) for a recent contribution.

                                                         30
box stores and shopping centers and that their efforts are successful in interior regions, where there is

little competition from across the border. But in border regions, fiscal zoning is either counter-productive

or it cannot overcome the negative effect of tax-induced price increases in the presence of cross-border

competition.51,52

         Table 8C reports results of the border-interior analysis for manufacturing. Interestingly, the

results are the opposite of those we found for retail employment at big box/anchor stores. Columns (4)-

(6) show that the estimated interaction between the sales tax rate and the border dummy is positive and,

for the current tax rate, significant. Computing the implied effects in border and interior regions, we find

that an increase in the sales tax rate has a significant negative effect on manufacturing employment in

interior regions and a positive effect in border regions. The estimated effects in border regions are never

significant, but the differences between border and interior regions are strongly significant. Although this

evidence is statistically weaker than the evidence for big box/anchor store employment, it is consistent

with the existence of tradeoffs between employment in big box/anchor stores and employment in

manufacturing. Thus, fiscal zoning leads to both increased big box/anchor store employment and reduced

manufacturing employment in interior regions. These results presumably reflect the fact that land in

interior regions is more valuable for generating sales tax revenue, since there is less competition from

stores across the border.53



51
   We also estimated the border-interior model for grocery stores as a falsification test. Again, the estimates pointed
to no effect of a higher sales tax rate on grocery store employment in either interior or border regions. (Results
available upon request.)
52
   We also explored whether these effects at the border depend on characteristics of the bordering county. We
measured population density on each border, and included an interaction of density with the sales tax rate-border
interaction, thus allowing the effect in border regions to vary with population density in neighboring counties.
(Population density, which we measure by county and year, was defined in different ways: a dummy variable for
density being in the top five percent of the distribution in the universe of border neighbors; the level of population
density; and the log of population density). The evidence indicated that the negative effect of the sales tax rate on
big box and anchor store retail sales in border areas was a bit less negative when the neighboring county was dense.
If county residents were simply crossing the border to shop when their sales tax rose, one might expect more of this
when the opposite county is dense because there is more retail. On the other hand, an increase in the sales tax rate
might spur retail construction across the border by more when the neighboring county is less dense. Regardless, the
main conclusions in Table 8B were unaffected by this extension of the specification.
53
   Endogeneity is less of a concern for the border-interior analysis, because these smaller regions clearly have less
influence over sales tax rates. Consistent with this expectation, when we estimated the key specifications excluding
the county time trends, the qualitative conclusions were unchanged, although the significance of some of the
estimates changed.

                                                          31
         The 1-mile width that we used to define border areas is somewhat arbitrary; our idea was to

isolate areas very close to county borders where nearby residents would not regard cross-county travel as

costly. In order to explore the sensitivity of our results to how we defined the borders, we re-estimated the

same specifications as in Tables 8B and 8D, but redefined the border regions to be 2 miles wide. The

resulting estimates were qualitatively similar, although statistically weaker.

         Finally, we revisited the question of dynamics, using the one- and two-year first-difference

specifications to estimate similar models for big box and anchor retail employment and for manufacturing

employment, paralleling what we did in the county-level analysis in Table 6. The estimates were

qualitatively similar to those in Tables 8B and 8C. For manufacturing, there is statistically significant

evidence of negative effects in the county interior, again developing over a few years, although in this

case (and the sample period is shorter) the contrast between the border and interior regions is not as clear.

For big box/anchor store employment, there are positive effects in the county interior that evolve over

three years (significant in the two-year first difference) and negative effects in border regions that

similarly evolve over time.54

VIII. Conclusion

         We have three main findings. First, total retail employment is not significantly affected by local

sales tax rates. Second, however, local sales tax rates have a strong positive effect on employment in big

box stores and department stores that anchor shopping centers. And third, local sales tax rates have a

negative effect on manufacturing employment, although this evidence is weaker statistically.

         Our results provide evidence that local officials engage in fiscal zoning and, more specifically,

the evidence suggests that local officials concentrate their fiscal zoning efforts on attracting large stores

and shopping centers. This is presumably because these stores generate high sales tax revenues, both

directly and indirectly by attracting small stores. These stores also require large sites, which means that


   For this border-interior analyses, the results for FIRE did not hew as closely to those for manufacturing. (Results
available upon request.) As a result, we are inclined to believe that the tradeoffs between land use for retail and
manufacturing are sharper, perhaps because office employment can be concentrated in a fairly small geographic
footprint, given the absence of either sales inventory in the retail sector or equipment and materials in the
manufacturing sector, and more severe transportation demands in both sectors.
54
   Results are available upon request.

                                                          32
they need the types of zoning changes or other assistance that local officials can provide. In contrast,

stores in neighborhood shopping centers and stores that occupy downtown or “main street” locations are

less likely to require zoning changes or other assistance from local officials.

           We also find that the effects of fiscal zoning on employment in big box/anchor stores differ

substantially in border versus interior regions of counties. Fiscal zoning has strong positive effects in

interior regions, but not in border regions. This may be because shoppers in interior regions are captive,

making it easier for local officials to attract retail development despite higher sales tax rates. But in border

regions, tax competition appears to be more important, making local officials’ efforts less productive.

           In some ways manufacturing employment provides a cleaner test of the effects of fiscal zoning,

because local officials have little incentive to use zoning to attract manufacturing since it generates little

sales tax revenue and because manufacturing does not have the contaminating direct price effect that pulls

in the opposite direction. We therefore expect manufacturing employment to be lower in jurisdictions that

have higher local sales tax rates, assuming that manufacturing and retailing are substitute land uses. Our

results suggest that sales taxes in fact have the opposite effects on manufacturing employment as on big

box/anchor store employment, so that local officials’ efforts to attract shopping centers crowd out

manufacturing.

           There is more research that could be done to test the effects of fiscal zoning. Our test is indirect,

since we examine the implications of our zoning model for employment levels, rather than examining the

implications of the model for land use and related policy decisions. Information concerning land use,

while very difficult to assemble, would be highly complementary to the type of evidence we present in

this paper.

           Our evidence feeds into a larger debate about the effects of using different types of taxes to fund

local government. Over the past several decades, many states have moved to limit local governments’

reliance on property taxes—their traditional funding source—and to substitute other sources of revenue,

including local sales taxes. Florida is among the states that have done so.55 But while property taxes give


55
     See Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations (1995) for information on property tax limitation

                                                         33
local governments an incentive to encourage all non-residential land uses (because non-residential land

uses do not increase the number of children in schools), local sales taxes give them an incentive to favor

retail stores in particular. Our results provide empirical evidence that when sales tax rates are higher, local

governments use fiscal zoning to encourage retailing and discourage manufacturing. Using the elasticities

from the weighted estimates discussed above,56 our basic results predict that a one percentage point

increase in the local sales tax rate in a county leads to approximately 258 additional jobs in big

box/anchor stores (plus possibly some additional employment in small stores), but approximately 838

fewer manufacturing jobs. Thus, our results suggest that fiscal zoning causes both a large substitution of

jobs in retailing for jobs in manufacturing and a substitution of lower-wage jobs for higher-wage jobs.

        Finally, it should be noted that if a local value-added tax were substituted for the local sales tax,

the results for land use would be less distorting: local officials engaged in fiscal zoning would have

incentives to zone additional land for non-residential uses, but would no longer have an incentive to favor

retailing over manufacturing and services.




measures in all U.S. states.
56
   See the discussion of Tables 4B and 4E.

                                                      34
                                               References

Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations. 1995. Tax and Expenditure Limits on Local
         Governments. M-194 (March).
Alabama Department of Revenue. n.d. Sales, Use, Lodging and Rental Tax Rates - Detail Report,
         https://www.revenue.alabama.gov/salestax/sales/index.cfm (viewed January 25, 2011).
Burchell, Robert W., David Listokin, and William R. Dolphin. 1985. The New Practitioners Guide to
         Fiscal Impact Analysis, New Brunswick, NJ: Center for Urban Policy Research.
Epple, Dennis, Thomas Romer, and Holger Sieg, 2001. Interjurisdictional Sorting and Majority Rule: An
         Empirical Analysis. Econometrica 69:6, 1437-1465.
Executive Office of the Governor. 2007. Florida Enterprise Zone Program Annual Report, October 1,
         2005 – September 30, 2006, Office of Tourism, Trade & Economic Development,
         http://www.hillsboroughcounty.org/econdev/resources/publications/enterprise/annualreport.pdf
         (viewed January 23, 2012).
Fischel, William A. 1992. Property Taxation and the Tiebout Model: Evidence for the Benefit View of
         Zoning and Voting, Journal of Economic Literature 31:1, 171-177.
Fischel, William A. 2001. Homevoters, Municipal Corporate Governance, and the Benefit View of the
         Property Tax. National Tax Journal 54:1, 157-174.
Florida Department of Economic Opportunity Division of Community Development Special District
         Information Program. Official List of Special Districts Online. CRA District Functions.
         http://dca.deo.myflorida.com/fhcd/sdip/OfficialListdeo/ (viewed September 20, 2012).
Florida Department of Revenue. 2010a. History of Local Sales Taxes and Current Rates,
         https://taxlaw.state.fl.us/wordfiles/SUT%20TRC%20HISTORY.pdf (viewed September 16,
         2010).
Florida Department of Revenue. 2010b. Florida Sales and Use Tax Manufacturers Standard Industry
         Guide. http://dor/myflorida/com/dor/taxes/sigs/manufacturers_external.pdf (viewed August 27,
         2012).
Florida Department of Revenue. 2010c. Florida Sales and Use Tax Retailer and Wholesaler Standard
         Industry Guide. http://dor/myflorida/com/dor/taxes/sigs/retailer_wholesaler_external.pdf (viewed
         August 27, 2012).
Florida Legislative Committee on Intergovernmental Relations. 2009. 2009 Local Government Financial
         Information Handbook, www.floridalcir.gov/UserContent/docs/File/reports/lgfih09.pdf (viewed
         September 8, 2010).
Florida Legislative Committee on Intergovernmental Relations. 2003. 2003 Local Government Financial
         Information Handbook, http://www.floridalcir.gov/UserContent/docs/File/reports/lgfih03.pdf
         (viewed March 31, 2010).
Florida Senate Committee on Finance and Tax, 2007. An Overview of Florida’s Insurance Premium Tax,
         report number 2007-122.
         http://archive.flsenate.gov/data/Publications/2007/Senate/reports/interim_reports/pdf/200
         7-122ftlong.prn (viewed Oct. 4, 2012).
Fulton, W. 1998. Twenty Years of Proposition 13; Tax-Cutting Initiative Shaped Planning and
         Development in State, California Planning and Development Report, 13:6, http://www.cp-
         dr.com/node/1606 (viewed September 8, 2010).
Georgia Department of Revenue. 2011. Sales and Use Tax - Historical Chart,
         https://etax.dor.ga.gov/salestax/salestaxrates/LGS_2011_Jan_Rate_Chart_Historical.pdf (viewed
         January 25, 2011).
Goolsbee, Austan, and Jonathan Zitran. 1999. Evaluating the Costs and Benefits of Taxing Internet
         Commerce, National Tax Journal 52:3, 413-428.
Gordon, Roger, and Wei Li. 2012. Provincial and Local Governments in China: Fiscal Institutions and
         Government Behavior, in Capitalizing China, J. Fan and R. Morck, eds., NBER and the
         University of Chicago Press.
Hamilton, Bruce. 1975. Zoning and Property Taxation in a System of Local Governments, Urban Studies
        12:2, 205-211 (June).
Hawkins, Richard, and Matthew N. Murray. 2004. Explaining Interjurisdictional Variations in Local
        Sales Tax Yield, Public Finance Review 32:1, 82-104.
King, Dale M. 2010. Three Areas Eyed for Annexation to Boca Would Net City $2.5 Million, Says
        Consultant, The Boca Raton Tribune, June 16, http://www.bocaratontribune.com/three-areas-
        eyed-for-annexation-to-boca-would-net-city-2-5-million-says-consultant/ (viewed March 30,
        2011).
Kolko, Jed, and David Neumark. 2007. Business Location Decisions and Employment Dynamics in
        California, San Francisco, CA: Public Policy Institute of California.
LeRoy, Greg. 2005. The Great American Jobs Scam, San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler Publishers, Inc.
Lewis, Paul G., 2001. Retail Politics: Local Sales Taxes and the Fiscalization of Land Use, Economic
        Development Quarterly 15:1, 21-35.
Lewis, Paul G., and Elisa Barbour. 1999. California Cities and the Local Sales Tax, San Francisco, CA:
        Public Policy Institute of California.
Mark, Stephen T., Teresa McGuire, and Leslie Papke. 2000. The Influences of Taxes on Employment and
        Population Growth: Evidence from the Washington, D.C. Metropolitan Area, National Tax
        Journal 53:1, 105-24.
Mazzolari, Francesca, and David Neumark. 2012. Immigration and Product Diversity, Journal of
        Population Economics, 25:3, 1107-37.
Mieszkowski, Peter, and George R. Zodrow. 1989. Taxation and The Tiebout Model: The Differential
        Effects of Head Taxes, Taxes on Land Rents, and Property Taxes. Journal of Economic
        Literature 27:3, 1098-1146
Misczynski, Dean J. 1986. The Fiscalization of Land Use, in California Policy Choices, vol. 3, J.J. Kirlin
        and D.R. Winkler, eds., Sacramento, CA: School of Public Administration, University of
        Southern California, 127-50.
Neumark, David, Junfu Zhang, and Brandon Wall. 2007. Employment Dynamics and Business
        Relocation: New Evidence from the National Establishment Time Series, Research in Labor
        Economics 26, 39-84.
Ohls, James C., Richard Chadbourn Weisberg, and Michelle J. White. 1974. The Effect of Zoning on
        Land Value, Journal of Urban Economics 1:4, 428-44.
Oyston, Joyce. 2007. Largest Shopping Malls in the U.S., http://www.sutie101.com/content/largest-
        shopping-malls-in-the-us-a27524 (viewed September 16, 2010).
Ring, Raymond J. 1989. Consumers’ Share and Producers’ Share of the General Sales Tax, National Tax
        Journal, 52, 79-90.
Schrag, Peter. 1998. Paradise Lost: California’s Experience, America’s Future, Berkeley, CA: University
        of California Press.
Shoer Roth, Daniel. 2010. Annexation Opponents Destined to Repeat Pleas, Miami Herald, April 6,
        http://www.miamiherald.com/2010/04/06/1564987/annexation-opponents-destined.html (viewed
        March 30, 2011).
Sonstelie, John C., and Paul R. Portney. 1978. Profit Maximizing Communities and the Theory of Local
        Public Expenditure, Journal of Urban Economics 5:2, 263-277.
The Florida Legislature’s Office of Economic and Demographic Research. 2011. 2011 Local Government
        Information Handbook, http://edr.state.fl.us/content/local-government/reports/lgfih11.pdf (viewed
        October 25, 2012).
Thompson, Jeffrey P., and Shawn M. Rohlin. 2012. The Effect of Sales Taxes on Employment: New
        Evidence from Cross-Border Panel Data Analysis. National Tax Journal 65:4, 1023-1042.
Tiebout, Charles M. 1956. A Pure Theory of Local Expenditure. Journal of Political Economy 64:5, 416-
        424.
Traeger, Kenneth, and H. Frank Williams. 1997. A Treatment of Intermediate Transactions and Supply
        Elasticities in the Incidence of Sales Taxes, in Matthew N. Murray and William F. Fox, The Sales
        Tax in the 21st Century, Westport, CT: Praeger.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2007. Census of Governments,
       http://www.census.gov/govs/estimate/historical_data_2007.html#state_local (viewed January 23,
       2012).
U.S. Census Bureau. 1992. Census of Governments, http://www.census.gov/govs/estimate/92sl10fl.html
       (viewed January 23, 2012).
U.S. Census Bureau. 1992. Annual Surveys of State and Local Government,
       www2.census.gov/govs/estimate/ (viewed September 14, 2010).
Wassmer, Robert W. 2002. Fiscalisation of Land Use, Urban Growth Boundaries and Non-central Retail
       Sprawl in the Western United States, Urban Studies 39:8, 1307-1327.
Wasylenko, Michael. 1997. Taxation and Economic Development: The State of the Economic Literature,
       New England Economic Review March/April, 37-52.
White, Michelle J. 1975. Suburban Zoning in Fragmented Metropolitan Areas, in Fiscal Zoning and Land
       Use Controls, E.S. Mills and W.E. Oates, eds., Lexington, MA: D. C. Heath, 31-100.
Zodrow, George R. 2001. The Property Tax as a Capital Tax: A Room with Three Views. National Tax
       Journal 54:1, 139-156.
                   Table 1A: Number of Florida Counties Imposing Local Sales Taxes
                                                                                                     Charter
                                          Infrastructure or     School          Indigent Care,       County
                          All Local        Small County         Capital        Trauma Center,        Transit
        Year             Sales Taxes           Surtax          Outlay Tax      or Hospital Tax     System Tax
        1992             35      (.87)      32      (.91)      0       (0)     2      (.50)       1     (.50)
        1993             37      (.93)      34      (.97)      0       (0)     2      (.50)       1     (.50)
        1994             42      (.94)      39      (.97)      0       (0)     2      (.50)       1     (.50)
        1995             47      (.91)      44      (.94)      0       (0)     2      (.50)       1     (.50)
        1996             50      (.96)      46      (.98)      3      (.42)    2      (.50)       1     (.50)
        1997             51      (.95)      47      (.97)      4      (.44)    2      (.50)       1     (.50)
        1998             50      (.98)      46      (.97)      7      (.45)    2      (.38)       1     (.50)
        1999             52      (.95)      46      (.96)      8      (.50)    2      (.38)       1     (.50)
        2000             50      (.97)      44      (.98)      8      (.50)    2      (.38)       1     (.50)
        2001             50      (.97)      45      (.96)      8      (.50)    2      (.41)       1     (.50)
        2002             51      (.97)      45      (.97)      9      (.50)    2      (.50)       1     (.50)
        2003             54      (.97)      46      (.96)      13     (.50)    2      (.50)       2     (.50)
        2004             54      (.96)      45      (.97)      13     (.50)    2      (.50)       2     (.50)
        2005             58      (.94)      45      (.97)      16     (.50)    4      (.44)       2     (.50)
        2006              58      (.94)    46       (.96)     16      (.50) 4        (.44)        2      (.50)
Notes: There are 67 counties in Florida. Figures in parentheses are the average local sales tax rate for counties
that impose each local sales tax.
Sources: State of Florida Department of Revenue (2010), and Florida Legislative Committee on
Intergovernmental Relations (2009).
                                    Table 1B: Local Sales Tax Rate Changes in Florida, 1993-2006
                             Total number of counties changing their tax rates
                                                                                            Charter
                       Aggregate       Infrastructure      School          Indigent Care,   County      Total number Total number
                       Local Sales     Tax or Small        Capital        Trauma Center,    Transit      of sales tax     of sales tax
      Year              Tax Rate        County Tax       Outlay Tax       or Hospital Tax System Tax      increases        decreases
      1993                 9                  9               0                  0             0              7                2
      1994                 7                  7               0                  0             0              7                0
      1995                 9                  9               0                  0             0              7                2
      1996                 8                  6               3                  0             0              8                0
      1997                 4                  2               2                  0             0              3                1
      1998                 6                  2               4                  1             0              3                3
      1999                 5                  4               2                  0             0              2                3
      2000                 2                  2               0                  0             0              0                2
      2001                 3                  2               0                  1             0              2                1
      2002                 5                  3               1                  1             0              4                1
      2003                 7                  4               4                  0             1              6                1
      2004                 3                  1               2                  0             0              1                2
      2005                 6                  2               3                  2             0              5                1
      2006                 1                  1               0                  0             0              1                0
Sources: State of Florida Department of Revenue (2010), and Florida Legislative Committee on Intergovernmental Relations (2009).
                      Table 2: Florida Local Sales Tax Rates and Changes, 1992-2006
  County       1992 rate            Changes                County      1992 rate            Changes
Alachua           0        1% in 2002, 0 in 2003, .25%   Lee              0
                           in 2005
Baker              0       1% in 1994                    Leon             1%       1.5% in 2003
Bay             0.50%      1% in 1994, .5% in 1995,      Levy           0.25%      1% in 1993
                           1% in 1998, .5% in 2004
Bradford         1%                                      Liberty          0        1% in 1993
Brevard           0                                      Madison         1%
Broward           0                                      Manatee         1%        0 in 1993, .5% in 1994, 1%
                                                                                   in 1995, .5% in 1999, 0 in
                                                                                   2000, .5 in 2003
Calhoun           0        1% in 1993                    Marion           0        1% in 2003, .5% in 2005
Charlotte         0        .75% in 1995, 1% in 2006      Martin           0        .583 % in 1996, .417% in
                                                                                   1997, 0 in 1998, 1% in
                                                                                   1999, 0 in 2002
Citrus            0                                      Miami-Dade     0.50%      1% in 2003
Clay             1%                                      Monroe          1%        1.5% in 1996
Collier           0                                      Nassau            0       .5% in 1994, 0 in 1995, 1%
                                                                                   in 1996
Columbia          0        1% in 1994                    Okaloosa         0        .42% in 1995, 1% in 1996,
                                                                                   .58% in 1999, 0 in 2000
Desoto           1%                                      Okeechobee       0        .25% in 1995, 1% in 1996
Dixie             1%                                     Orange           0        .5% in 2003
Duval           0.50%      1% in 2001                    Osceola         1%
Escambia        0.58%      1% in 1993,1.5% in 1998       Palm Beach       0        .5% in 2005
Flagler           1%                                     Pasco            0        1% in 2005
Franklin           0                                     Pinellas        1%
Gadsden           1%                                     Polk             0        .5% in 2004, 1% in 2005
Gilchrist       0.25%      1% in 1993                    Putnam           0        1% in 2003
Glades           1%                                      Saint Johns      0
Gulf               0       .25% in 1997, .5% in 1998,    Saint Lucie      0        .5% in 1996
                           1% in 2006
Hamilton         1%                                      Santa Rosa       0        .33% in 1993, 1% in 1994,
                                                                                   .79% in 1998, .5% in 1999
Hardee           1%                                      Sarasota        1%
Hendry           1%                                      Seminole        1%        .75% in 2001, 1% in 2002
Hernando          0        .5% in 1999, 0 in 2004, .5%   Sumter          1%
                           in 2005
Highlands         1%                                     Suwannee        1%
Hillsborough    0.50%      .94% in 1997, .75% in 1998,   Taylor          1%
                           .81% in 2001, 1% in 2002
Holmes             0       1% in 1995                    Union            0        1% in 1993
Indian River      1%                                     Volusia          0        .5% in 2002
Jackson          0.5%      0 in 1993, .58% in 1995,      Wakulla         1%
                           1.25% in 1996, 1.5% in
                           1997
Jefferson        1%                                      Walton           0        1% in 1995
Lafayette        1%                                      Washington       0        1% in 1994
Lake             1%
Sources: State of Florida Department of Revenue (various years).
                                  Table 3: Summary Statistics
                                        A. County-Level
Variable                                     Mean       Std. Dev.      Min.          Max.
Sales tax rate, local plus state,             6.70          0.46        6.0            7.5
current
Sales tax rate, local plus state,             6.69          0.46        6.0            7.5
lagged
Neighboring sales tax rate, current           6.65          0.30        5.69          7.27
Neighboring local sales tax rate,             6.64          0.31        5.66          7.27
lagged
Total retail share of employment            18.17%        4.41%       4.17%         29.30%
Big box/anchor retail share of               1.31%        1.10%       0.00%          6.91%
employment
Manufacturing share of                       9.08%        6.22%       1.55%         47.29%
employment
Total retail employment                     22,670        38,744         81        240,868
Big box/anchor retail employment             1,678         2,720         0          16,975
Manufacturing employment                     9,913        18,805         25        111,510
                                      B. Interior Regions
Total retail employment share               18.88%        4.48%       2.49%         35.61%
Big box/anchor retail employment              1.36%       1.29%       0.00%           9.31%
share
Manufacturing employment share                8.47%       6.43%       0.73%         50.98%
Total retail employment                     19,603        35,197         16        219,529
Big box/anchor retail employment             1,472         2,504         0          14,928
Manufacturing employment                     8,563        17,410         10        109,190
                                       C. Border Regions
Neighboring sales tax rate, current           6.62         0.524        5.0            7.5
Neighboring sales tax rate, lagged            6.61         0.526        5.0            7.5
Total retail employment share               19.05%        16.67%      0.03%        100.00%
Big box/anchor retail employment             0.42%         1.51%      0.00%          14.66%
share
Manufacturing employment share               7.17%        15.65%      0.00%          99.03%
Total retail employment                       524          1,647         0          16,002
Big box/anchor retail employment               35           153          0           2,600
Manufacturing employment                      187           664          0           9,194
Notes: In Panel A, there are 1,005 county-year observations (15 years of data for 67
counties) on the contemporaneous variables, and 938 county-year observations (14 years
of data for 67 counties) on the lagged variables. In Panel B, there are 1,005 county
interior-year observations (15 years of data for 67 county interior regions). In Panel C,
there are 2,863 locality-year observations with positive overall employment in the border
regions. Border regions extend one mile inward from county borders; their construction is
explained in Section VII.
            Table 4A: Regression Results Explaining Total Retail Employment,
                                     County-Level Analysis
                                (1)        (1’)        (2)        (2’)         (3)         (3’)
Explanatory variables
                             Unwgt.        Wgt.     Unwgt.        Wgt.      Unwgt.         Wgt.
Sales tax rate, current       0.016       0.002     -0.014       -0.017     -0.013        -0.005
                             (0.017)     (0.016)    (0.015)     (0.012)     (0.020)      (0.013)
Sales tax rate, lagged                               0.030       0.019       0.028        0.014
                                 -           -
                                                    (0.021)     (0.013)     (0.021)      (0.012)
Neighboring sales tax                                                       -0.010      -0.059**
                                 -           -          -           -
rate, current                                                               (0.056)      (0.020)
Neighboring sales tax                                                        0.011       0.023*
                                 -           -          -           -
rate, lagged                                                                (0.023)      (0.014)
Effect of a unit increase in current plus lagged     0.016       0.002       0.015        0.009
sales tax rate                                      (0.024)     (0.019)     (0.023)      (0.020)
R2                             0.99        0.99       0.99        0.99        0.99         0.99
Notes: The dependent variable is the log of total retail employment. The sample period
covers 1992-2006. There are 1,005 observations for the contemporaneous specifications, and
938 observations for the specifications with lags. The sales tax rate variable is the sum of the
local sales tax plus the 6% general Florida sales tax, measured in units of 0-100. All
specifications include county and year fixed effects, and county-time trend interactions.
Standard errors are clustered at the county level. 1992 population levels are used as weights
in the columns labeled “Wgt.” ** indicates statistical significance at the 5% level, and * at
the 10% level.
                Table 4B: Regression Results Explaining Retail Employment
                    at Big Box and Anchor Stores, County-Level Analysis
                               (1)         (1’)        (2)        (2’)        (3)      (3’)
Explanatory variables        Unwgt.        Wgt.    Unwgt.        Wgt.     Unwgt.       Wgt.
Sales tax rate, current      0.208*     0.134**      0.047       0.080     -0.004     0.074
                             (0.113)     (0.056)   (0.090)      (0.049)    (0.177)   (0.053)
Sales tax rate, lagged                               0.256      0.085*      0.313     0.076
                                -            -
                                                   (0.224)      (0.044)    (0.233)   (0.048)
Neighboring sales tax                                                       0.293     0.029
                                -            -          -           -
rate, current                                                              (0.534)   (0.102)
Neighboring sales tax                                                      -0.288     0.033
                                -            -          -           -
rate, lagged                                                               (0.225)   (0.072)
Effect of a unit increase in current plus lagged     0.303     0.166** 0.309**       0.150**
local sales tax rate                               (0.192)      (0.064)    (0.135)   (0.063)
R2                            0.98         0.98       0.98        0.98       0.98      0.99
Notes: The dependent variable is the log of the sum of big box and anchor store
employment. See the text for a list of stores. Other notes to Table 4A apply here.
            Table 4C: Regression Results Explaining Total Retail Employment
                  Excluding Big Box and Anchor Store Retail Employment,
                                     County-Level Analysis
                                (1)        (1’)       (2)        (2’)       (3)       (3’)
Explanatory variables
                             Unwgt.        Wgt.    Unwgt.        Wgt.    Unwgt.       Wgt.
Sales tax rate, current      -0.0006     -0.008    -0.022     -0.025**   -0.016      -0.012
                             (0.014)     (0.014)   (0.014)     (0.011)   (0.015)    (0.011)
Sales tax rate, lagged                              0.014       0.015     0.011      0.010
                                 -           -
                                                   (0.014)     (0.014)   (0.015)    (0.012)
Neighboring sales tax                                                    -0.032    -0.064**
                                 -           -         -           -
rate, current                                                            (0.032)    (0.019)
Neighboring sales tax                                                     0.022     0.022*
                                 -           -         -           -
rate, lagged                                                             (0.021)    (0.013)
Effect of a unit increase in current plus lagged   -0.008       -0.010   -0.005      -0.002
sales tax rate                                     (0.018)     (0.018)   (0.019)    (0.019)
R2                             0.99        0.99      0.99        0.99      0.99       0.99
Notes: The dependent variable is the log of total retail employment excluding big box and
anchor store retail employment. Other notes to Table 4A apply here.
Table 4D: Regression Results Explaining Retail Employment at Regular Grocery Stores,
                           Falsification Test, County-Level Analysis
                                (1)        (1’)      (2)        (2’)        (3)          (3’)
Explanatory variables
                             Unwgt.        Wgt.    Unwgt.      Wgt.      Unwgt.         Wgt.
Sales tax rate, current       0.011       0.015    -0.050     -0.009      -0.053       -0.005
                             (0.032)     (0.029)   (0.031)   (0.020)     (0.038)      (0.021)
Sales tax rate, lagged                              0.044     0.015        0.028        0.015
                                 -           -
                                                   (0.034)   (0.016)     (0.034)      (0.018)
Neighboring sales tax                                                     -0.004       -0.020
                                 -           -        -           -
rate, current                                                            (0.085)      (0.048)
Neighboring sales tax                                                      0.058        0.001
                                 -           -        -           -
rate, lagged                                                             (0.045)      (0.048)
Effect of a unit increase in current plus lagged   -0.006     0.005       -0.025        0.009
sales tax rate                                     (0.034)   (0.029)     (0.034)      (0.027)
R2                             0.99       0.997     0.996      0.997       0.996        0.997
Notes: The dependent variable is the log of retail employment at grocery stores; Wal-Mart
and Costco were excluded because they are classified as grocery stores but sell many non-
grocery items that are taxed. Other notes to Table 4A apply here.
                      Table 4E: Regression Results Explaining Manufacturing Employment,
                                              County-Level Analysis
Explanatory                  (1)        (1’)       (2)      (2’)       (3)         (3’)        (4)        (4’)
variables                 Unwgt.        Wgt.   Unwgt.      Wgt.     Unwgt.        Wgt.      Unwgt.       Wgt.
Sales tax rate,            -0.037      -0.023    0.025     0.008     0.034       -0.003
                                                                                                -           -
current                   (0.041)     (0.029)  (0.032)    (0.023)   (0.042)     (0.025)
Sales tax rate,                                -0.084* -0.051** -0.102** -0.068** -0.089* -0.070**
                              -           -
lagged                                         (0.046)    (0.024)   (0.048)     (0.026)     (0.052)    (0.033)
Neighboring sales                                                   -0.060       0.043      -0.037      0.041
                              -           -         -        -
tax rate, current                                                   (0.111)     (0.041)     (0.098)    (0.036)
Neighboring sales                                                    0.081       0.065       0.075      0.066
                              -           -         -        -
tax rate, lagged                                                    (0.079)     (0.045)     (0.082)    (0.047)
Effect of a unit increase in current plus       -0.059    -0.043    -0.068      -0.071*
                                                                                                -           -
lagged local sales tax rate                    (0.058)    (0.037)   (0.068)     (0.042)
R-Squared                    0.99        0.99     0.99     0.99       0.99        0.99        0.99        0.99
Notes: The dependent variable is the log of manufacturing employment. Other notes to Table 4A apply here.
 Table 4F: Regression Results Explaining FIRE Employment, County-Level Analysis
Explanatory                  (1)        (1’)      (2)        (2’)        (3)          (3’)
variables                 Unwgt.        Wgt.   Unwgt.       Wgt.      Unwgt.         Wgt.
                                                              -
Sales tax rate,
                         -0.052*      -0.035* -0.033** 0.033**         -0.029       -0.029
current
                          (0.032)     (0.019)  (0.016)    (0.014)     (0.021)      (0.018)
Sales tax rate,                                 -0.041     -0.021      -0.048       -0.026
                              -           -
lagged                                         (0.036)    (0.023)     (0.039)      (0.024)
Neighboring sales                                                      -0.027       -0.021
                              -           -        -           -
tax rate, current                                                     (0.060)      (0.037)
Neighboring sales                                                       0.030       0.019
                              -           -        -           -
tax rate, lagged                                                      (0.055)      (0.037)
Effect of a unit increase in current plus      -0.075*    -0.054*      -0.077     -0.055*
lagged local sales tax rate                    (0.044)    (0.029)     (0.052)      (0.033)
R-Squared                   0.997       0.998    0.997      0.999       0.997        0.999
Notes: The dependent variable is the log of employment in finance, insurance, and real estate
(FIRE). Other notes to Table 4A apply here.
 Table 5A: Regression Results Explaining Big Box and Anchor Store Retail Employment and Manufacturing
                 Employment with Enterprise Zone Dummies, County-Level Analysis, 1996-2006
                                Big box and anchor store retail                           Manufacturing
Explanatory                 (1)         (1’)        (2)          (2’)       (3)           (3’)        (4)         (4’)
variables                Unwgt.      Unwgt.        Wgt.         Wgt.      Unwgt.      Unwgt.         Wgt.        Wgt.
Sales tax rate,           0.156       0.154        0.078        0.077        -             -           -           -
current                  (0.099)     (0.099)     (0.052)       (0.051)
Sales tax rate,            0.014       0.015      -0.008       -0.010     -0.091        -0.092      -0.055      -0.051
lagged                   (0.052)     (0.052)     (0.037)       (0.037)    (0.057)      (0.057)    (0.0349)     (0.033)
Neighboring sales         -0.051      -0.051      -0.039       -0.040     -0.003        -0.005      -0.029      -0.026
tax rate, current        (0.138)     (0.139)     (0.093)       (0.093)    (0.145)      (0.144)     (0.044)     (0.045)
Neighboring sales         -0.064      -0.062      -0.028       -0.028     -0.009        -0.007       0.008       0.008
tax rate, lagged         (0.102)     (0.100)     (0.063)       (0.063)    (0.114)      (0.114)     (0.056)     (0.056)
Enterprise Zone              -         0.048         -         -0.030        -           0.042         -       0.034**
                                     (0.150)                   (0.034)                 (0.036)                 (0.014)
Effect of a unit
increase in current
plus lagged local         0.171*       0.169       0.071        0.066
sales tax rate           (0.104)     (0.104)     (0.066)       (0.064)       -             -           -           -
Notes: The columns without primes report specifications like those in Tables 4B and 4D, excluding the enterprise
zone control, for the subperiod for which enterprise zone information is available, accounting for the inclusion of
the lagged sales tax variable (1996-2006). The columns with primes include the enterprise zone control, which is
equal to one if there was an enterprise zone in effect in the county and year. There are 737 observations. All
specifications include county and year fixed effects, and county-time trend interactions. Standard errors are
clustered at the county level. 1992 population levels are used as weights in the columns labeled “Wgt.” Other notes
to Table 4A apply here.
  Table 5B: Regression Results Explaining Big Box and Anchor
    Store Retail Employment and Manufacturing Employment
          with Community Redevelopment Area Dummies,
                  County-Level Analysis, 1992-2006
                          Big box and anchor
                               store retail          Manufacturing
Explanatory                  (1)          (2)       (3)         (4)
variables                 Unwgt.         Wgt.    Unwgt.        Wgt.
Sales tax rate,            -0.011        0.072       -           -
current                   (0.175)       (0.052)
Sales tax rate, lagged      0.306        0.080   -0.086*     -0.072**
                          (0.233)       (0.049)  (0.051)      (0.033)
Neighboring sales           0.287        0.021    -0.033       0.049
tax rate, current         (0.537)       (0.103)  (0.098)      (0.037)
Neighboring sales          -0.287        0.032     0.074       0.066
tax rate, lagged          (0.223)       (0.072)  (0.081)      (0.047)
Community                  -0.078       -0.010     0.028       0.009
Redevelopment Area        (0.065)       (0.010)  (0.024)      (0.007)
Effect of a unit          0.296**      0.152**       -           -
increase in current       (0.130)       (0.065)
plus lagged local
sales tax rate
Notes: The specifications correspond to columns (3) and (3’) from
Table 4B and columns (4) and (4’) from Table 4E. The only
difference is the addition of a dummy variable for the presence of a
Community Redevelopment Area in the county-year cell. Details
from notes to those tables apply here.
    Table 5C: Regression Results Exploring Pre-Treatment Trends in Determination of
                   Changes in Sales Tax Rate, County-Level Analysis
                               All Retailing      BB/anchor store      Manufacturing
                                  (1)        (1’)         (2)       (2’)        (3)        (3’)
Explanatory variables
                               Unwgt.        Wgt.      Unwgt.      Wgt.      Unwgt.        Wgt.
∆log employment, lagged         0.003       0.157       0.009      0.039      0.007       0.080
one year                       (0.073)     (0.351)     (0.008)    (0.025)    (0.019)     (0.090)
∆log employment, lagged         0.012       -0.224      0.004     -0.021     -0.017       -0.101
two years                      (0.093)     (0.245)     (0.005)    (0.020)    (0.017)     (0.067)
∆log employment, lagged        -0.036       0.018       0.001      0.013      0.021       0.118
three years                    (0.073)     (0.209)     (0.003)    (0.022)    (0.022)     (0.092)
Sum of lagged changes in       -0.021       -0.048      0.015      0.031      0.011       -0.062
log employment                 (0.142)     (0.407)     (0.011)    (0.040)    (0.042)     (0.153)
R2                               0.07        0.10        0.07       0.10       0.07        0.10
Notes: The dependent variable is the change in the local sales tax rate. There are 737 county-year
observations. All specifications include year fixed effects and county-time trend interactions.
Standard errors are clustered at the county level. 1992 population levels are used as weights in
columns (1’), (2’), and (3’).
  Table 6: Regression Results Explaining Changes in Big Box and Anchor Store Retail Employment and Manufacturing Employment, First
                                               Difference and Variable Lag Specifications
                                                                    Retail big box and anchor stores                                   Manufacturing
                                                              One-year first               Two-year first                                            Two-year first
                                                                differences                  differences           One-year first differences          differences
                                                            (1)            (1’)           (2)           (2’)          (3)             (3’)          (4)           (4’)
Explanatory variables, first differences                   Unwgt.          Wgt.         Unwgt.         Wgt.         Unwgt.           Wgt.          Unwgt.        Wgt.
A. Specification with current and lagged sales tax
rates
Sales tax rate, current                                     0.053         0.061          0.082        0.130**           -              -               -             -
                                                           (0.081)       (0.043)        (0.115)       (0.050)
Sales tax rate, lagged one year                             0.242         0.030          0.073         -0.030        -0.057*       -0.048**         -0.056        -0.022
                                                           (0.246)       (0.040)        (0.178)       (0.037)        (0.030)        (0.023)        (0.037)       (0.025)
Sales tax rate, lagged two years                            0.011         0.025          0.176        0.109**         -0.034         -0.001         -0.052       -0.036*
                                                           (0.060)       (0.031)        (0.109)       (0.044)        (0.027)        (0.015)        (0.033)       (0.022)
Sales tax rate, lagged three years                            -             -              -              -          -0.047*        -0.027*        -0.051*        -0.001
                                                                                                                     (0.026)        (0.017)        (0.031)       (0.027)
Sum of sales tax coefficients (cumulative effect)           0.306        0.116*         0.331*        0.209**       -0.139**       -0.077**       -0.159**       -0.059*
                                                           (0.269)       (0.067)        (0.169)       (0.068)        (0.065)        (0.035)        (0.071)       (0.034)
R2                                                          0.076         0.102          0.127         0.167          0.088          0.143          0.164         0.232
N                                                            804           804            737           737            737            737            670           670
B. Subsample with leads
Sales tax rate, one- or two- year lead                      0.121**       0.079**         0.174         0.059          -0.025        -0.040*         -0.036        -0.034
                                                             (0.060)      (0.031)        (0.119)       (0.043)        (0.027)        (0.024)        (0.031)       (0.028)
Sum of current and lagged sales tax coefficients,             0.369       0.176**         0.304*       0.239**       -0.142**       -0.094**       -0.188**      -0.105**
specification including lead                                 (0.295)      (0.068)        (0.167)       (0.074)        (0.063)        (0.037)        (0.074)       (0.044)
Sum of lead, current, and lagged sales tax                    0.489       0.255**         0.478*       0.298**       -0.166**       -0.134**       -0.224**      -0.139**
coefficients, specification including lead                   (0.306)      (0.079)        (0.249)       (0.090)        (0.070)        (0.051)        (0.086)       (0.062)
Sum of current and lagged sales tax coefficients,             0.335       0.146**         0.351*       0.254**       -0.136**       -0.078**       -0.173**      -0.083**
specification excluding lead                                 (0.294)      (0.071)        (0.185)       (0.076)        (0.063)        (0.034)        (0.074)       (0.039)
N                                                              737          737            670            670           670            670            603           603
Notes: Aside from the additional lags and using short first differences rather than within-group estimation, notes from Tables, 4A, 4B, and 4D apply here. The first
differences of the explanatory variables are computed over one year or two years, as indicated in the column heading. All specifications include county and year fixed
effects; the county-trend interactions drop out because of the differencing. In Panel B, the one-year or two-year first-differenced lead is included, corresponding to the
specification. Standard errors are clustered at the county level. 1992 population levels are used as weights in the columns labeled “Wgt.”
  Table 7: Regression Results Explaining Changes in Retail Employment at
                         New Big Box and Anchor Stores,
                               County-Level Analysis
                                        Retail big box and anchor stores
                             Change in employment at Change in employment at
                                     new stores,                  new stores,
                                 one-year window              two-year window
Explanatory variables,           (1)             (1’)         (2)            (2’)
first differences              Unwgt.           Wgt.        Unwgt.          Wgt.
Sales tax rate, current        68.16**          99.79       48.15*         67.159
                               (34.10)        (69.21)       (27.90)        (66.07)
Sales tax rate, lagged         64.25**          95.00        18.59          45.00
one year                       (29.00)        (57.11)       (20.88)        (73.46)
Sales tax rate, lagged          23.68          -34.32      41.63**          57.87
two years                      (20.51)       (133.14)       (18.17)        (64.18)
Sum of sales tax             156.09***        160.47      108.38***      170.04**
coefficients (cumulative       (54.84)       (134.64)       (38.86)        (82.78)
effect)
R2                              0.527           0.591        0.510          0.544
N                                804             804          737            737
Notes: The dependent variable is employment created by births or move-ins of
stores. For the one-year window, births or move-ins are identified as stores that
had zero employment in the county in period t−1, but positive employment in the
county in period t. The change in employment is then employment in period t,
which measures the employment created by the birth or move-in. (Almost all of
the variation is from births.) For the two-year window, new establishments are
identified between periods t−2 and t. The unweighted means are 90.92 for the
one-year window, and 87.35 for the two-year window. The first differences of
the explanatory variables are computed over one year in columns (1) and (1’) and
over two years in columns (2) and (2’). All specifications include county and
year fixed effects; the county-trend interactions drop out because of the
differencing. Standard errors are clustered at the county level. 1992 population
levels are used as weights in the columns labeled “Wgt.” Notes from Tables 4A,
4B, 4D, and 6 apply here.
                   Table 8A: Regression Results Explaining Total Retail Employment,
                                        Border-Interior Analysis
Explanatory variables                  (1)        (2)        (3)          (4)      (5)                  (6)
Sales tax rate, current              -0.033     -0.046     -0.037     0.020      -0.042               -0.013
                                    (0.049)    (0.047)     (0.056)   (0.078)    (0.061)              (0.093)
Sales tax rate, lagged                  -       0.024       0.035          -     0.034                0.061
                                               (0.047)     (0.057)              (0.064)              (0.094)
Sales tax rate, current, x border       -          -          -         -0.069   -0.005               -0.029
dummy                                                                  (0.093)  (0.078)              (0.089)
Sales tax rate, lagged, x border        -          -          -            -     -0.012               -0.031
dummy                                                                           (0.082)              (0.094)
Neighboring sales tax rate, current     -          -       -0.026          -        -                 -0.030
                                                           (0.060)                                   (0.066)
Neighboring sales tax rate, lagged      -          -       -0.027          -        -                 -0.032
                                                           (0.060)                                   (0.066)
Effect of a unit increase in current plus             -0.021       0.002        -        -0.009       0.048
lagged sales tax rate (in columns (2’) and           (0.069)      (0.084)               (0.096)      (0.133)
(3’), results are for interior regions)
Effect of a unit increase in current sales tax rate on employment in         -0.049         -           -
border regions (main effect plus interaction)                               (0.057)
Effect of a unit increase in current plus lagged sales tax rate on employment in         -0.025       -0.012
border regions (main effects plus interactions)                                         (0.080)      (0.086)
Difference in effect of current plus lagged sales tax rate between border and            -0.017       -0.060
interior regions (sum of border interactions)                                           (0.111)      (0.122)
R2                                       0.99        0.99         0.99         0.99        0.99         0.99
The dependent variable is the log of total retail employment. There are 4,155 observations for the
contemporaneous specifications, and 3,878 observations for the specifications with lags. The sales tax rate
variable is the sum of the local sales tax plus the 6% general Florida sales tax, measured in units of 0-100.
The classification of border and interior regions is based on 1-mile border zones. All regressions include
fixed effects for each sub-county area (each unique border area and county interior), year fixed effects, and
county-time trend interactions. Standard errors are clustered at the sub-county region level. Estimates are
not weighted.
        Table 8B: Regression Results Explaining Big Box and Anchor Store Retail Employment,
                                        Border-Interior Analysis
Explanatory variables                 (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)          (5)     (6)
Sales tax rate, current             -0.022     -0.030     -0.024    0.406**       -0.011   0.017
                                    (0.058)   (0.042)     (0.037)   (0.179)      (0.150)  (0.153)
Sales tax rate, lagged                 -       -0.008     -0.020        -         0.410   0.463*
                                              (0.070)     (0.064)                (0.261)  (0.270)
Sales tax rate, current, x border      -          -          -    -0.557***       -0.023  -0.045
dummy                                                               (0.189)      (0.165)  (0.169)
Sales tax rate, lagged, x border       -          -          -          -       -0.545** -0.585**
dummy                                                                            (0.269)  (0.275)
Neighboring sales tax rate, current    -          -       -0.027        -            -    -0.029
                                                          (0.053)                         (0.047)
Neighboring sales tax rate, lagged     -          -        0.040        -            -    -0.060
                                                          (0.062)                         (0.054)
Effect of a unit increase in current plus             -0.039    -0.044             -     0.400*      0.480**
lagged sales tax rate (interior in columns (2’)      (0.080)   (0.078)                   (0.226)     (0.240)
and (3’))
Effect of a unit increase in current sales tax rate on employment in       -0.151***        -            -
border regions (main effect plus interaction)                               (0.056)
Effect of a unit increase in current plus lagged sales tax rate on employment in         -0.169**    -0.149**
border regions (main effects plus interactions)                                           (0.070)     (0.069)
Difference in effect of current plus lagged sales tax rate between border and interior   -0.568**   -0.629***
regions (sum of border interactions)                                                      (0.226)    (0.237)
R2                                      0.96        0.96          0.96          0.96        0.96         0.96
The dependent variable is the log of the sum of big box and anchor store retail employment. All regressions
include fixed effects for each sub-county area (each unique border area and county interior), year fixed
effects, and county-time trend interactions. Standard errors are clustered at the sub-county region level.
Estimates are not weighted. Other details from notes to Table 8A apply here.
                  Table 8C: Regression Results Explaining Manufacturing Employment,
                                        Border-Interior Analysis
Explanatory variables                  (1)         (2)       (3)         (4)      (5)                    (6)
Sales tax rate, current               0.073      0.080      0.066      -0.185   -0.154               -0.270**
                                     (0.078)    (0.075)    (0.080)    (0.123)  (0.099)                (0.134)
Sales tax rate, lagged                  -        -0.030    -0.032         -     -0.103                 -0.104
                                                (0.063)    (0.071)             (0.106)                (0.144)
Sales tax rate, current, x border       -           -         -      0.335**   0.302**               0.407**
dummy                                                                 (0.157)  (0.134)                (0.163)
Sales tax rate, lagged, x border        -           -         -           -     0.095                  0.081
dummy                                                                          (0.136)                (0.163)
Neighboring sales tax rate, current     -           -       0.052         -        -                   0.119
                                                           (0.105)                                    (0.117)
Neighboring sales tax rate, lagged      -           -      -0.005         -        -                   0.007
                                                           (0.065)                                    (0.074)
Effect of a unit increase in current plus             0.050     0.033           -        -0.257*     -0.374**
lagged sales tax rate (interior in columns (2’)      (0.107)   (0.118)                   (0.154)      (0.174)
and (3’))
Effect of a unit increase in current sales tax rate on employment in         0.150          -            -
border regions (main effect plus interaction)                               (0.095)
Effect of a unit increase in current plus lagged sales tax rate on employment in          0.140       0.114
border regions (main effects plus interactions)                                          (0.127)     (0.131)
Difference in effect of current plus lagged sales tax rate between border and           0.397**      0.489**
interior regions (sum of border interactions)                                           (0.189)      (0.196)
R2                                       0.97         0.97        0.97         0.97        0.97         0.97
The dependent variable is the log of manufacturing employment. All regressions include fixed effects for
each sub-county area (each unique border area and county interior), year fixed effects, and county-time
trend interactions. Standard errors are clustered at the sub-county region level. Estimates are not weighted.
Other details from notes to Table 8A apply here.
