                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 EDUCATION AS LIBERATION?

                                           Willa Friedman
                                           Michael Kremer
                                           Edward Miguel
                                          Rebecca Thornton

                                        Working Paper 16939
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16939


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2011




We thank seminar audiences at Stanford University, the Berkeley Working Group for African Political
Economy meeting, the JICA Conference on Ethnic Diversity and Economic Instability in Kenya, the
Oxford Centre for the Study of African Economies Conference, and University of Virginia for helpful
comments. We appreciate helpful comments from Marcel Fafchamps, Ray Fisman, Nahomi Ichino,
and Dan Posner. Kenny Ajayi, Blastus Bwire, Lorenzo Casaburi, Garret Christensen, Joan Hamory
Hicks and Owen Ozier provided excellent research assistance. We are grateful to the National Institutes
of Health, National Science Foundation and Social Science Research Council for generous research
support. The usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Willa Friedman, Michael Kremer, Edward Miguel, and Rebecca Thornton. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Education as Liberation?
Willa Friedman, Michael Kremer, Edward Miguel, and Rebecca Thornton
NBER Working Paper No. 16939
April 2011, Revised December 2011
JEL No. I20,O15,P16

                                              ABSTRACT

Scholars have long speculated about education’s political impacts, variously arguing that it promotes
modern or pro-democratic attitudes; that it instills acceptance of existing authority; and that it empowers
the disadvantaged to challenge authority. To avoid endogeneity bias, if schooling requires some willingness
to accept authority, we assess the political and social impacts of a randomized girls’ merit scholarship
incentive program in Kenya that raised test scores and secondary schooling. We find little evidence
for modernization theory. Consistent with the empowerment view, young women in program schools
were less likely to accept domestic violence. Moreover, the program increased objective political knowledge,
and reduced acceptance of political authority. However, this rejection of the status quo did not translate
into greater perceived political efficacy, community participation, or voting intentions. Instead, the
perceived legitimacy of political violence increased. Reverse causality may help account for the view
that education instills greater acceptance of authority.


Willa Friedman                                       Edward Miguel
Department of Economics                              Department of Economics
University of California at Berkeley                 University of California, Berkeley
508-1 Evans Hall #3880                               530 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                              Berkeley, CA 94720
willa@econ.berkeley.edu                              and NBER
                                                     emiguel@econ.berkeley.edu
Michael Kremer
Harvard University                                   Rebecca Thornton
Department of Economics                              University of Michigan
Littauer Center M20                                  611 Tappan St.
Cambridge, MA 02138                                  Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER                                             rebeccal@umich.edu
mkremer@fas.harvard.edu
1. Introduction

Education policies have often been motivated by views on their political impacts. Several U.S.

states historically restricted the education of slaves for fear that it would encourage revolt

(Woodson 1915), and Belgian colonial authorities in Africa enacted similarly restrictive

education policies (Hochschild 1999). Post-independence authorities in Africa expanded

education with a goal of promoting national identity and integration (Nyerere 1973), as it had

earlier been used in Europe (Weber 1976). The view that expanding girls’ educational access is

a key to speeding the rise of female politicians and women’s empowerment was a factor in the

adoption of the third United Nations Millennium Development Goal (Herz and Sperling 2004;

Levine et al. 2008, Lloyd 2009). Girls’ scholarship programs in particular have been used to

move towards this goal. Officials in Bangladesh cite women’s empowerment as a main objective

of their scholarship program (Rynor and Wesson 2006; Khandker et al 2003). There are also

large programs in Egypt (Save the Children 2005, Iqbal and Riad 2004), Cambodia, Pakistan and

India (Filmer and Schady 2008; Chaudhury and Parajuli 2006; India edunews.net 2010).

       This paper exploits a randomized merit scholarship competition for adolescent girls in

Kenyan schools to estimate the political and social impacts of these programs and shed light on

education’s impact more generally. Other research demonstrated that the incentives created by

the program led to higher academic test scores (Kremer, Miguel, and Thornton 2009). In the

current paper we analyze data from a follow-up survey collected four to five years after the

scholarship competition, when the young women were 17 to 21 years of age.

       Less developed regions have experienced massive increases in both education and

democracy over the past half century, as illustrated by Kenya (appendix figure A1), and there has

been extensive debate on how these trends might be interrelated. A widespread claim is that the



                                                                                                  1
recent democratic transitions in North Africa and the Middle East – the world’s least democratic

region, together with sub-Saharan Africa – have been propelled by increasingly well-educated

youth populations, notably including young women (Saunders 2011). Scholars have long

speculated about education’s political impacts. Modernization theorists argued that education

weakens traditional ascriptive attachments based on gender, hereditary position, ethnicity and

religion, in favor of merit (Levy 1966). Lipset (1959) argues that education promotes

democratization. Dahl (1971) similarly asserts that socioeconomic development increases the

potential for successful democracy, as a literate populace engages in the types of participation

necessary to maintain representative government, and Huntington (1991) claims education

contributed to the “Third Wave of Democratization” in the 1970s and 1980s. The modernization

view has been influential, from post-colonial leaders seeking to use education as a nation

building tool, to journalists arguing that it weakens support for violent extremism (Kristof 2010),

to contemporary scholars studying the relationship between education and democracy (see

Acemoglu et al. 2005, 2008, Barro and Lee 2001, Boix and Stokes 2003, Boix 2009, Epstein et

al. 2006, Papaioannou and Siourounis 2005, Przeworski and Limongi 1997, among others).

       Another view argues that education serves as a tool of cultural indoctrination and social

control, instilling obedience to authority (Lott 1999, Pritchett 2003, Kremer and Sarychev 2008).

Bowles and Gintis (1976) claim that U.S. education reinforces the class structure by training

citizens to obey authority within the hierarchical modern corporation. Gramsci (1971) and other

social theorists (Freire 1972, Fanon 2005) advance related points on its central role in bolstering

the cultural hegemony of ruling elites, while simultaneously emphasizing that alternative forms

education could be instruments for social change favoring the “liberation” of the oppressed.




                                                                                                      2
           A third school of thought views education as promoting individual autonomy and

empowerment. In observational studies, education is correlated with greater individual political

knowledge (Almond and Verba 1963, Verba and Nie 1972, Hanushek 2002, Bratton et al. 2005,

Mattes and Bratton 2007); interest in obtaining political information (Dee 2004); greater

dissatisfaction with existing institutions, and more support for women’s rights (Weakliem

2002).1 While correlations have been documented between education and political interest,

participation and voting among individuals in wealthy countries (Verba and Nie 1972, Wolfinger

and Rosenstone 1980, Inglehart et al 1998, Weakliem 2002, Dee 2004, Milligan et al 2004,

Glaeser et al 2007), Galston (2001) notes that historical increases in U.S. education have not

been followed by higher aggregate voter turnout or political knowledge. Moreover, the evidence

in less developed countries is mixed. While Logan and Bratton (2006) find a positive correlation

between education and political participation using AfroBarometer data from 15 countries,

Blaydes (2006) finds a negative association between voting and education in Egypt, and argues

that this result is due primarily to vote-buying. Education is seen as politically empowering for

women in particular. Basu and King (2001) find that educated Bangladeshi women are more

likely to participate in political meetings and to speak up.

           Political empowerment need not be benign. Davies’ (1974) “J-curve theory” posits that

rapid expansions in opportunities build up expectations which, if unmet, can lead to frustration

and violence. This theory was used to explain the relatively high schooling levels among

participants in U.S. urban social unrest during the 1960s and 1970s (Miller et al 1977, Mason

and Murtagh 1985). Krueger and Maleckova (2003) find that education predicts greater

participation in Hezbollah activities in Lebanon.



1
    Lochner (2011) and Oreopoulos and Salvanes (2011) survey this literature.

                                                                                                    3
        A major difficulty in estimating the impact of education on individual attitudes and

behavior is the possibility of reverse causality. For example, if those who are less willing to

accept authority are less likely to stay in school, cross-sectional correlations between education

and acceptance of authority will confound the causal impact of education on willingness to

accept authority with the impact of acceptance of authority on education. Most existing studies

estimate correlations between education, attitudes and behaviors in ways that are potentially

vulnerable to this critique.2 One strategy for addressing this problem, which we adopt in this

paper, is to exploit randomized variation in education to separately measure the impact of such

education on acceptance of authority. The use of experimental designs in comparative politics is

growing (e.g., Wantchekon 2003, Humphreys et al 2006, Gugerty and Kremer 2008, Paluck and

Green 2009, Habyarimana et al 2009, Olken, 2010, Vicente and Wantchekon 2010). A limitation

of this micro-experimental approach is that we measure the impact of education induced by a

particular policy in a single population Yet insofar as similar policies oriented at boosting girls’

education have been widely advocated and implemented in low-income countries, creating

evidence on the impact of these programs is itself an important objective and can complement

existing non-experimental analyses.

        This paper takes advantage of the experimental Girls Scholarship Program (GSP) in

Kenyan primary schools, which persistently boosted academic test scores and increased

secondary school enrollment among girls from treatment schools.3 We find that exposure to the

program reduces young women’s acceptance of the right of men to beat their wives and children


2
  There are exceptions. Exploiting compulsory schooling laws, Milligan et al (2004) find impacts on political
knowledge and voting in the U.S., with weaker effects in the U.K. Dee (2004) uses variation in community college
availability and child labor laws in the U.S., and finds that education leads to higher voter turnout. Smith et al.
(2009) use school supply variation to show that education increases autonomy over spousal choice for Vietnamese
women.
3
  In another study, Jakiela et al (2010) exploit the random assignment of the GSP program to estimate the impact of
education on respect for earned property rights using lab experiment data.

                                                                                                                  4
and there is evidence it reduces the likelihood that parents are involved in choosing their

daughter’s spouse. These findings are broadly consistent with both modernization theory as well

as the view that education promotes a desire for autonomy and empowerment, but are harder to

reconcile with the claim that education tends to reinforce existing patterns of authority.

       The evidence on attitudes beyond the household is not consistent with a modernization

perspective but is more readily explained by the empowerment view of education. In particular,

there is no evidence that the human capital created by the GSP leads to more pro-democratic or

secular attitudes, or weakened ethnic identification. In fact, there is suggestive evidence that

ethnic identity grows stronger among program beneficiaries, despite the Kenyan school

curriculum’s stated aim of promoting feelings of national unity.

       Consistent with the view that education leads to a greater desire for autonomy, GSP

participants are more likely to read newspapers and better able to identify a favorite news source.

They possess more objective knowledge about politics and express less satisfaction with Kenya’s

democracy and current economic conditions. However, these impacts do not translate into

greater perceived political efficacy or involvement as measured by voting intentions or

participation in community groups. Instead, the young women express greater willingness to

accept the legitimacy of the use of violence in politics. The increased acceptance of violence may

not be surprising given the limited scope for our study participants to affect change in Kenya’s

fledgling democracy; their greater dissatisfaction with, but no greater participation in (or belief

in) democracy; and the finding that ethnic identification does not diminish with education. It also

resonates with the fact that violence has been a central feature of political change in Kenya, from

the anti-colonial Mau Mau uprising in the 1950s to the contested 2007 presidential election.




                                                                                                      5
       Going back to the theoretical perspectives outlined above, our findings appear equally

inconsistent with the view that education promotes “modern” attitudes and with the claim that

education instills acceptance of existing authorities. Rather the results suggest that education

promotes a desire for personal autonomy among the marginalized young rural women that we

study, but that this desire is not necessarily expressed through democratic means. In the political

realm we see evidence of greater knowledge and raised expectations, but not of actual political

involvement, and perhaps as a result, we document greater frustration and acceptance of political

violence. This suggests that while young women may be less willing to accept violence directed

against them by others, this does not stem from an abstract rejection of violence, and that indeed

they may be more willing to accept political violence as necessary in some circumstances.

       Methodologically, it is useful to know whether a non-experimental analysis would yield

similar results. We find large differences between experimental IV estimates derived from the

randomized design and non-experimental correlations, suggesting that non-experimental

correlations cannot be interpreted as causal impacts of education. Under a simple model of bi-

directional causality, our findings can be interpreted as suggesting that those who are less willing

to accept authority are likely to accumulate considerably less human capital in Kenya.

       To further get at the channels of impact, and in particular at whether these effects are

directly due to receiving additional education through the merit-based scholarship competition,

or to the money or prestige garnered by winning a scholarship itself, we examine a subset of girls

who had very low ex ante odds of winning the scholarship based on their baseline test scores. As

shown in Kremer et al. (2009) these girls also experience test score gains through the program.

The main impacts on social and political variables also hold in this subsample, supporting the

view that the effects are due to human capital gains rather than winning an award per se.



                                                                                                   6
       The paper is organized as follows: section 2 provides background on the setting; section 3

summarizes the data and empirical methods, and program impacts on human capital; section 4

reports results on household autonomy; Section 5 reports political attitude impacts; Section 6

develops a framework for analyzing the interaction between the willingness to accept authority

and education, and compares experimental to non-experimental estimates; Section 7 examines

channels of impact, and the final section concludes.



2. Background

2.1 The Study Setting

The Kenyan girls in the setting we study are socially marginalized and politically disempowered.

They are female and young in a society where older males hold authority; residents of a rural

backwater; and overwhelmingly from the quite politically weak Luhya and Teso ethnic groups.

Women are also disadvantaged in Kenyan society more broadly. Female participation in

parliament is low, at just 10% (Gathigah 2010). Spousal violence is also widespread, with 75%

of women claiming abuse in recent reports (FIDA 2008). In the household realm, Kenyan girls

are generally subject to their parents’ – and in particular their father’s – authority until they leave

the household, and then are often subject to their husband’s authority. Traditionally, parents

played a central role in selecting husbands for their daughters and received bridewealth from the

groom in the form of livestock (Government of Kenya 1986). However, while this system

remains normative in some sense, in practice it has largely broken down in favor of a system in

which young people “elope” with partners of their choice, and bridewealth is either never paid or

is paid later (if the groom accumulates sufficient resources). In rural areas, unmarried women,

unlike men, are not permitted to build their own separate house on a family compound and are



                                                                                                      7
thus more directly subject to parental authority. Many young women therefore marry at an early

age, at least in part to escape parental control.

        Our study area is Busia, a district in western Kenya with below average income levels.4

Ethnic Luhyas comprise roughly 80% of the sample, with some Luos and Tesos (Table 1).

Although Luhyas are among Kenya’s most numerous groups, Luhya politicians have been

unsuccessful in the competition for the presidency. Kenya’s first President was Jomo Kenyatta,

from the Kikuyu ethnic group, its second (Daniel arap Moi) was a Kalenjin, and the third, Mwai

Kibaki, a Kikuyu. There is a widespread perception in Busia that these presidents’ ethnic groups

wielded disproportionate power during their rule, to the detriment of western Kenya.

        Like many African countries, Kenya became a de facto single-party state shortly after

independence in the 1960s and underwent democratic reforms in the early 1990s at the end of the

Cold War (Barkan 1994). The Kenyan African National Union retained power until 2002, when

a multi-ethnic coalition led by Mwai Kibaki defeated Moi’s handpicked candidate. When Kibaki

in 2005 proposed a new constitution seen as preserving a strong “imperial” presidency and

favoring Kikuyu elites, voters overwhelmingly rejected it, including voters in our study area.

Thus during 2005-2007 when our survey data collection took place, Kenya had an imperfect but

reasonably competitive multi-party democracy. This is reflected in its Freedom House score of 3

during the period (on a scale of 1 to 7, with 1 being most democratic, appendix figure A1).

        Yet the fragility of this democracy was starkly demonstrated in late 2007 and early 2008

(after the end of surveying). The incumbent was widely seen as having stolen the presidential

election (Gibson and Long 2009). Individuals living in the study area overwhelmingly supported


4
 62% of Busia households fall below the poverty line compared to 41% nationally. As Kenyan per capita income is
somewhat higher than the sub-Saharan African average (if South Africa is excluded), the fact that Busia is
somewhat poorer than the Kenyan average arguably makes the district more representative of rural Africa as a
whole.

                                                                                                             8
the challenger Raila Odinga. Protests against the incumbent’s declaration of victory became

violent, ethnic clashes broke out across the country, and some observers believed Kenya was on

the verge of civil war. Due to a combination of internal and external pressure, the incumbent

eventually acceded to a power-sharing agreement with the challenger.

           Since independence from Britain in 1963, Kenya has experienced massive increases in

education, with adult literacy rising from just 32% in 1970 to 87% today (UNDP 1993, 2010).

Although there are, huge gender disparities in other areas of Kenyan society, census data indicate

that girls’ enrollment has increased at a faster rate than boys’ at lower levels of education

(appendix figure A1), and there is now gender parity in primary school enrollment (UNDP

2009). Kenya’s increase in education is dramatic, but many other low-income countries have

also seen similar gains. To illustrate, in 1960 the average working-age person in low-income

countries had 1.8 years of education, while by 2000 they had over five (Barro and Lee 2001).

           As background, the Kenyan school system is quite authoritarian. Corporal punishment is

commonplace (Human Rights Watch 1999), and challenges to teacher authority are not tolerated.

Student prefects help teachers maintain classroom control, students wear uniforms, learning is by

rote, and creativity and critical thinking in the classroom are not highly prized. It is unlikely that

Kenyan schools would be viewed as instruments of liberation in the sense of Freire (1972).

           Despite this emphasis on discipline and rote learning, the Kenyan school curriculum

officially attempts to promote democratic values, and a national Kenyan - as opposed to ethnic -

identity.5 For example, two chapters of “History and Government”, a first year (Form 1) high

school text approved by the Ministry of Education, are entitled “Citizenship” and “National

Integration”. It states: “Citizens have the responsibility of participating in the democratic process

through which our leaders are elected.” Under “Elements of Good Citizenship” it lists
5
    We focus on Form 1 since the GSP increased secondary school participation, as shown below.

                                                                                                         9
nationalism, explaining, “a nationalist works for one’s country and devotes oneself to serving the

nation and the unity of his/her nation. Thus a Kenyan nationalist is devoted to Kenya and seeks

to unite fellow countrymen above interests of race, tribe, religion or parochialism.”

        Primary school in Kenya runs through grade 8, after which students take a national exam

and those with sufficiently high scores continue on to secondary school. Historically, attending

secondary school has been associated with higher social status, since secondary schools are

selective, much more expensive than primary school, and many are boarding institutions.



2.2 The Girls Scholarship Program (GSP)

In March 2001, ICS, a Dutch non-profit organization, introduced a merit scholarship competition

in 34 primary schools in the western Kenya district of Busia, with 35 other schools serving as the

control group. This Girls Scholarship Program (GSP) provided an award to grade 6 girls in

treatment schools whose performance on the government’s standardized end-of-year exam

placed them in the top 15% (among all girls in the treatment schools). The award included a

grant of 500 KSh (or roughly US$6.40 at the time) paid to the girl’s school to cover school fees,

and a cash grant of 1000 KSh (or US$12.80) paid to the girl’s family to pay for other school

expenses, in each of the two years following the competition, covering the last two years of

primary school. Thus the total award for winners was valued at nearly US$38 over two years, an

amount comparable to the large-scale girls’ scholarship programs in other less developed

countries mentioned above. For comparison, Kenya’s annual per capita income was roughly

US$400 in 2001. The awards were presented at local community assemblies.6




6
 Although primary school fees were eliminated in 2003, certain expenses remained, and Duflo et al. (2006) and
Evans et al. (2010) find that these remained an important barrier to participation.

                                                                                                                10
         The randomization into treatment and control schools was carried out using a computer

random number generator, after first stratifying by administrative division and participation in a

previous NGO program (that distributed flip-charts as classroom learning aids) also carried out

by ICS. All 34 schools invited to participate chose to take part in the project. GSP treatment and

control schools in Busia are similar on observable baseline characteristics (Table 1, Panel A),

indicating that the randomization worked in generating similar groups; the first column in Table

1 presents the mean (and s.d.) in the control group, and the second column presents the

coefficient estimate on the treatment indictor variable. The NGO did not conduct other activities

at these schools during the study so we can attribute impacts to the GSP. There was a parallel

evaluation in neighboring Teso district that is discussed in Kremer et al (2009). However, since

the Teso sample was far smaller, had considerable attrition during the original study, and did not

experience an obvious increase inhuman capital as a result of the program, the follow-up surveys

were only conducted in Busia district and we thus focus on the Busia program in this paper.

         The Kenyan school year runs on the calendar year, from January to December (Appendix

figure A2). The program was publicly announced early in 2001. The competition was carried out

a second time in treatment schools in 2002 among students in grade 6 in that year (and eligibility

was restricted to those girls who had been initially enrolled in grade 5 in the same schools in

2001, to eliminate the possibility of selective transfers into treatment schools). There were thus

two cohorts in the program, those in grade 6 in 2001 and those in grade 6 in 2002.

         The average 2001-2002 treatment effect of GSP incentives in Busia district was nearly

0.3 standard deviations, and the 2001-2002 estimated effect in our follow-up subsample was 0.34

standard deviations (Table 1, Panel B; Kremer et al 2009)7. These are considered large gains in


7
  The effect size in the follow-up sample is similar to that in the original sample, but it is slightly less statistically
significant in the follow-up sample because of the reduced sample size.

                                                                                                                             11
the education literature. As is standard, test scores are normalized such that the control group

distribution has a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one8. Importantly, the program

generated higher test scores in treatment schools both for those who were most likely to benefit

from the scholarship – girls with high baseline scores – but also for those who were unlikely to

win, and the hypothesis that treatment effects were the same throughout the baseline test score

distribution cannot be rejected. The explanation for the gains among low-performing girls

offered in Kremer et al. (2009) is that the incentives led to improved teacher performance and

student effort that generated positive classroom externalities (including for boys, who also show

moderate gains despite being ineligible for the scholarship). This is supported by the substantial

increases in both pupil and teacher attendance in treatment schools (Table 1, Panel B).



3. Data Collection, Estimation Strategy, and Program Impact on Human Capital

3.1 Follow-up Data Collection (2005-2007)

To assess the persistence of these academic gains and other long-term impacts of the program, a

follow-up survey was undertaken from October 2005 through February 2007, approximately four

to five years after the GSP competitions, when sample individuals were young women between

17 and 21 years of age. This involved tracking down the two cohorts of girls from both treatment

and control schools. Because the original intervention was aimed at girls, and the research budget

was limited, the follow-up data collection sample was limited to females.

         Respondents were followed by the survey team wherever they moved in Kenya or

Uganda using an approach similar to Baird et al. (2011). Overall, 84.0% of respondents were

effectively located by the field team, with 81.6% surveyed while 2.4% were either deceased,


8
  While it is also possible to normalize separately within cohorts, here we normalized the entire sample together, and
include cohort controls in all regressions, to simplify the exposition.

                                                                                                                   12
refused to participate, or were found but were unable to be surveyed (Table 2, Panel A).9 The

effective survey rate among those still alive is 81.6%. These are quite high rates for a mobile

young adult population, and one that places this project among the more successful longitudinal

survey efforts in a low-income country (Thomas et al, 2001, 2010). The final analysis sample

with baseline survey data, 2001 or 2002 test scores, and follow-up data includes 1,387 girls.

         There are no statistically significant differences in follow-up survey attrition across the

treatment and control groups (Table 2, Panel A). We also do not find that survey attrition over

time is significantly related to the baseline 2000 test score, the presence of a toilet, iron roof, or

mosquito net in the home compound, time spent on chores and schoolwork, schooling attitudes,

and number of siblings, nor are these characteristics significant predictors of survey attrition

when interacted with the treatment indicator (not shown), evidence that differential survey

attrition across the treatment and control groups does not appear to be a leading concern. As with

the baseline survey data, the follow-up subsample is balanced along observed baseline individual

and household characteristics across the treatment versus control samples (Table 1, Panel A).

         Once respondents were located, enumerators administered short tests on English

vocabulary, Swahili vocabulary, arithmetic, reading, and spatial reasoning (using a Raven’s

matrix module). The survey also included questions on schooling, marriage, fertility, migration,

and social and political attitudes. To the extent possible, these latter questions were adapted from

questions in the World Values Survey and Afrobarometer Surveys, building on Bratton et al.

(2005), Logan and Bratton (2006), and Weakliem (2002), while some new questions were


9
  During an initial phase, all individuals were tracked. In early 2007, a random subsample containing one fifth of the
remaining unfound respondents was drawn to be tracked “intensively” (in time and travel costs). We re-weight the
“intensive” sample to maintain representativeness. As a result, all figures are “effective” tracking rates (ETR),
calculated as a fraction of those found, or not found but searched for during intensive tracking, with appropriate
weights. The ETR is a function of the regular phase tracking rate (RTR) and intensive tracking rate (ITR), ETR =
RTR + (1 – RTR)*ITR, where RTR is 47.5% and ITR is 65.2%. This is related to the approach in the U.S. Moving
to Opportunity study (Kling et al. 2007, Orr et al. 2003).

                                                                                                                   13
developed specifically for the Kenyan context. In the tables, we denote questions drawn from the

World Value Survey with “WVS” and Afrobarometer with “AFB”. Indicator variables are

denoted “0-1”. Questions asked on a four- or five-point scale were rescaled so the lowest

(highest) answer takes on a value of zero (one), and these are denoted “0 to 1” in the tables.



3.2 Estimation Strategy

We first estimate the impact of the Girls Scholarship Program on outcomes (POLIT) in a reduced

form specification, by regressing POLIT on the indicator variable for GSP treatment schools

(TREAT). We also include some additional control variables (denoted X) – an indicator for

student cohort, age at time of the survey, the mean pre-program (2000) school test score, parent

educational attainment, and month of the survey – to address any minor baseline differences

between the treatment and controls schools that exist despite the randomization. Since the

randomization successfully produced treatment and control groups balanced along most

characteristics (Table 1), the inclusion of controls does not meaningfully alter treatment effect

estimates but sometimes improve statistical precision. Equation 1 presents the reduced form:

(eqn. 1)               POLITis =  +  TREATs + Xis + is

where individual i is in school s. The coefficient of interest is . Disturbance terms are clustered

by school. We employ OLS for both continuous and limited dependent variables in part to

facilitate the use of the mean effects approach (described below), but results for indicator

variable outcomes are nearly unchanged in probit specifications (not shown).

       The GSP program could potentially affect political attitudes through human capital or

through other impacts of winning a scholarship, such as the cash transfers and public recognition

received by winners. Recall that girls in the top 15% in the treatment schools won scholarships.


                                                                                                    14
We find that girls with normalized baseline test scores less than +2 standard deviations have just

an 8% chance of winning the scholarship, as compared to a 58% likelihood among girls with

baseline scores above +2 s.d.10 These treatment school girls with low baseline scores are thus

unlikely to receive the prize and recognition, but as shown in Kremer et al (2009), they

nonetheless attended school more often and have test score gains. As we discuss in section 6

below, estimating treatment effects in this subgroup sheds light on the relative importance of the

“public recognition” and “human capital” channels, suggesting that the human capital channel is

much more important.

           To convey a sense of the magnitude of the human capital effects, and to allow

comparison of our experimental estimates with non-experimental estimates, we report IV

estimates of the impact of human capital on political attitudes by using the follow-up test score

measure as the endogenous variable, denoted H. We view the test score as an attractive summary

measure of human capital. We focus on the normalized average test score across all subjects

(arithmetic, English, Swahili, reading, spatial reasoning) as our best measure of overall skills and

human capital, where the normalized variable is mean zero with a standard deviation of one (the

common approach in the education literature). The first stage equation is:

(eqn. 2)                    His = a1 + b1TREATs + Xisc1 + e1,is .

The predicted values from this regression allow us to estimate human capital impacts in an

instrumental variable two-stage least squares (IV-2SLS) specification, where the second stage is:

(eqn. 3)                    POLITis = a2 + b2His + Xisc2 + e2,is      .


For comparison with observational studies, we also provide similar estimates but running the

second stage equation (equation 3) using the actual test score rather than the predicted score,


10
     Approximately 2% score more than 2 s.d. above the mean of the normalized distribution.

                                                                                                    15
while restricting attention to the control group to isolate non-experimental variation. For each set

of outcomes, we then compare the analogous OLS and IV coefficient estimates, and compute the

statistical significance of the difference between them using the method in Hausman (1978).

       For various categories of outcomes, we estimate the “mean effect” of either GSP

treatment or human capital on each set of outcomes following Kling et al. (2007). The groupings

of related outcome variables are denoted by Yk, k = 1, ..., K. We standardize each outcome by

subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation of the outcome variable among the

GSP control group, such that the control group mean (s.d.) is zero (one). The standardized

variables are denoted Yk*. With these, we form Y* = k Yk* / K, a single index of outcomes, and

regress this index on TREAT (as in equation 1) or on H (equation 3). The resulting coefficient

estimate is called the mean effect size and, due to the normalization, it captures the average

impact in terms of standard deviations of the outcome variables. This normalization facilitates

comparison of impact magnitudes across outcomes, as well as possibly across studies.



3.3 Impacts on Human Capital

We first discuss the program’s impact on human capital. The human capital gains that occurred

as girls competed for scholarships persisted, with significant test score gains in treatment schools

relative to the control group (Table 2, Panel B). In specifications analogous to the first stage

regression (equation 2), test scores improved in all five subjects in the 2005-2007 follow-up

survey, with statistically significant gains in four subjects. The mean effect across all tests is

0.208 standard deviations (s.e. 0.092), which is significant at 95% confidence.

       Test score impacts are nearly unchanged among two subgroups with relatively low

chances of actually winning a GSP award, namely those with baseline normalized test scores less


                                                                                                     16
than +2 s.d., at 0.145 s.d. (s.e. 0.082), and among those in schools predicted to have five or fewer

GSP winners, at 0.177 s.d. (s.e. 0.081). The predicted number of GSP winners is estimated in

treatment schools by regressing the actual number of winners on quantiles of the baseline test

score distribution (among students in that school); the predicted number of winners is then

assigned to both treatment and control schools. The persistent human capital gains we document

thus appear to be driven by competing for a scholarship rather than winning.

       Beyond test scores, several other education measures also improved in the treatment

group: they were 8.7 percentage points (s.e. 4.1) more likely to have attended at least some

secondary school, an increase of nearly a third on the control rate of 30%. GSP treatment

individuals were also 7.9 percentage points more likely to be enrolled in school, an increase of

15 percent relative to the control group, where 52% were enrolled. Since more than half the

sample is still in school, the attainment data is severely censored, and perhaps in part as a result,

the program is estimated to have a positive but not significant impact on educational attainment.



4. Impact on Autonomy within the Household

As noted in the introduction, many argue that education will empower young women to address

broader gender inequalities (Lloyd 2009). Others have argued that women in most societies face

relatively less disadvantage in education than other spheres, and that efforts to reduce gender

imbalances could be more productive elsewhere (World Economic Forum 2010). Modernization

theory would also imply that education should erode support for traditional gender roles.

       We do not find significant changes in views regarding equal rights for women versus

traditional gender roles (Table 3). Most respondents already strongly support gender equality,

with average support for traditional roles (namely, the statement that “Women have always been



                                                                                                   17
subject to traditional laws and customs and should remain so”, as opposed to “Women should

have equal rights and receive the same treatment as men do”) at only 0.17 on a normalized zero

to one scale. Treatment reduces this by 0.01 but the effect is not significant.

       In contrast, treatment produces changes on two concrete issues limiting female autonomy

that are likely to be personally relevant for many respondents: domestic violence and arranged

marriages. Again on a zero to one scale, treatment leads to a 0.068 reduction (s.e. 0.024) in

support for the claim that “Men can beat their wives and children if they misbehave” as opposed

to the statement that “No one has the right to use physical violence against anyone else” (Table

3), a reduction of roughly one quarter on average support of 0.25 in the control group.

       We next consider marriage patterns, and divide marriages into “arranged marriages”,

where parents played a role in spouse choice, and “elopements”, where they did not. Roughly

20% of respondents were married by the follow-up survey, with three quarters being elopements

in the control group, and one quarter, or 4.2%, arranged. However, this latter figure falls by more

than half, or 2.4 percentage points (s.e. 1.3) in the treatment group (Table 3), and this effect is

significant at 90% confidence. In contrast, we find no change in the likelihood of elopement,

suggesting that the reduction in marriages with family involvement does not reflect a broader

trend in marriage rates but rather a shift in power from parents to their daughters. When we use

a mean effects approach to look at a summary measure of lack of autonomy combining the two

measures of support for traditional gender norms with the measure of arranged marriage we find

a significant reduction of -0.181 standard deviations (s.e. 0.077).

       There are no significant GSP program impacts on fertility, or on knowledge of

contraception, age of marriage, or basic spouse characteristics (not shown) although statistical

power was limited in some cases given the limited proportion of married women in the sample.



                                                                                                      18
       The results on young women’s greater control over marriage patterns and stated

opposition to domestic violence are relevant not only from a policy perspective but also shed

light on the theories described in the introduction. They are inconsistent with the idea that

education simply instills greater acceptance of authority, but are compatible with both

modernization theory and with the view that education can empower disadvantaged groups.

While these results are inconsistent with the simplest version of the theory that education is a

tool for entrenching existing power structures, they are arguably consistent with a more nuanced

view, in which Kenya’s education system is controlled not by traditional village elites, but rather

by a state seeking to instill certain “modern” values that weaken pre-capitalist “fetters” on female

labor. To distinguish between these two perspectives, we next consider impacts on political and

social attitudes beyond the household.



5. Impacts on Political and Social Attitudes

In subsection 5.1, we first find little support for a direct impact of education in promoting

“modern” values. Subsection 5.2 reports evidence that runs counter to the view that education

simply instills acceptance of existing authority, but is consistent with the notion that education

promotes an awakening of political consciousness that is arguably the first step to actual

empowerment, specifically through changes in media consumption, increased political

knowledge and dissatisfaction with authority. However, subsection 5.3 suggests that rather than

translating into increased participation in politics or community affairs, or in social capital, these

shifts generate greater expressed willingness to accept the use of violence in politics.



5.1 Impact on “Modern” Attitudes



                                                                                                     19
Impact on Ethnic and Religious Attitudes

From a theoretical perspective, the impact of schooling on feelings of ethnic and religious

identity is unclear. Modernization theory predicts education will reduce particularistic ethnic

attachments and promote secularism. Yet other scholars argue that in pre-colonial times the most

important groups were local “sub-ethnic” kinship groups, with ethnic boundaries fairly fluid

(Shetler 2010) and thus see contemporary notions of tribal identity (among groups such as the

Luhya in our sample) as essentially modern. In this second view, education could potentially

promote political mobilization along ethnic lines, although recall from the background section

that the Kenyan curriculum seeks to promote nationalism. The standard Kenyan school

curriculum also includes Christian and Islamic religious education, and schools often sponsor

religious youth groups, so education could also potentially strengthen, rather than weaken,

religious attachment.

       We find no evidence that increased schooling weakened ethnic attachments, and if

anything the program may have strengthened them. In general, respondents were strongly

attached to their own ethnic group, with only 11% of the control group not reporting ethnicity as

“very important” to them. GSP treatment reduced this by 3.3 percentage points, or approximately

30 percent, although the difference is not significant (Table 4, Panel A).

        We next exploit the fact that ethnic identification is more salient closer to contested

democratic elections in Africa (Eifert et al. 2010), likely because ethnic electoral appeals are

widespread. We find that among the 43 respondents surveyed in early 2007 – a national election

year – all but one stated that their ethnic affiliation was “very important” to them, far above the

average among those surveyed earlier; this “censoring” of responses suggests that our survey

instrument was insufficiently sensitive to finer distinctions in the degree of ethnic feeling during



                                                                                                   20
election periods. We next focus on respondents surveyed in 2005-2006, before the lead-up to the

election, and find that treatment reduced the proportion who did not report ethnicity as “very

important” by a significant 4.2 percentage points (s.e. 2.1, Table 4), a 40 percent drop. In other

words, in non-election years the program appears to heighten feelings of ethnic identification.

           A related set of questions on ethnicity ask whether respondents trust members of their

own ethnic group (tribe) as well as members of other groups. Point estimates suggest treatment

slightly increased trust in co-ethnics and reduced trust in members of other ethnic groups, but the

effects were not significant at traditional confidence levels (not shown). We similarly find no

program impacts on migration out of the local area, which might have brought people into closer

contact with other ethnic groups thus leading to more inclusive ethnic attitudes, and which might

itself be taken as reflecting more inclusive attitudes (not shown).

           We also find no evidence for the modernization theory hypothesis that education leads to

secularization as measured by changes in the reported importance of religion (Table 4, Panel A),

although strong religiosity is nearly universal, complicating inference. There is more variation in

participation in prayer groups, but there, too, impacts are small and not statistically significant.11



Impact on Democratic Attitudes

Respondents were asked whether they agreed with a series of statements about the ideal

organization of government and society, where responses were given on a scale from 1 to 5,

ranging from “strongly disagree” to “strongly agree”, and these were then normalized to range

from zero to one, as above. To illustrate, respondents were asked whether they agreed with: “We

should choose our leaders in this country through regular, open and honest elections”, and

“Democracy is preferable to any other kind of government”, among others.
11
     Glaeser and Sacerdote (2001) show that U.S. religious attendance rises with education.

                                                                                                     21
       There are no significant GSP program impacts on any of the seven measures of

democratic attitudes (Table 4, Panel B), and even combining all of these effects together in a

single index, the mean effect is small and not statistically significant, at 0.058 standard

deviations (s.e. 0.089). These results are particularly interesting in light of the positive cross-

sectional correlations between individual schooling and democratic attitudes documented in the

existing literature, including several African studies (Bratton et al. 2005, Logan and Bratton

2006, Mattes and Bratton 2007). While some have argued that investments in education may be

an effective way to promote democracy and reduce political extremism, our results suggest that,

if there is any such causal relationship, it may not be a direct one.

       Overall, we find no support for the hypothesis that education promotes “modern”

attitudes including weakening of ethnic attachments, secularization, or greater belief in

democracy. These findings partially alleviate concerns that more educated Kenyans are simply

providing the “right” survey answers due to social desirability bias. In particular, to the extent

that support for democratic institutions is the “politically correct” response in Kenya, we might

have expected to find a strongly positive relationship between human capital and support for

democracy, but we find no such relationship in our data. We next examine whether education

promotes empowerment in the political realm, consistent with the household autonomy results.



5.2 Impact on Political Knowledge and Satisfaction

The first hint that the program affected political outcomes is its impact on media consumption.

Individuals in treatment schools report significantly less time listening to radio – which in Kenya

has largely music and entertainment content – and more days reading newspapers, which report

extensively on national politics (Table 5, Panel A). Respondents were also much more likely to



                                                                                                      22
identify a favorite newspaper, with an increase of 9.6 percentage points (s.e. 3.7) on a base of

66.6% in the control, and in particular, there was a large increase of 10.5 points (s.e. 3.5) in

choosing the Daily Nation, arguably Kenya’s most authoritative English language daily, as the

favorite news source on a base of 30.5%. The increased affinity for the Daily Nation almost

certainly in part reflects the treatment group’s improved English skills, but may also proxy for

changing partisan or ideological tastes and affect the quality of political information consumed.

       Indeed, the program had a large impact on objective political knowledge. Respondents

were asked to name Kenya’s President, Vice President, Education Minister, and Health Minister

and Uganda’s President. Virtually all respondents could name the President, but the program

increased the likelihood that respondents could name other officials, and the impacts are

significant for naming the Health minister and the President of Uganda (not shown). The mean

effect across all five questions is 0.203 s.d. and significant at 95% confidence (Table 5, Panel B).

       Turning to measures of satisfaction with political authorities, the GSP treatment group

shows less deference to authority in the abstract and expresses less satisfaction with Kenya’s

government, economy, democracy, and current authorities (Table 5, Panel C). In particular,

respondents were significantly less likely to agree with the statement “We should show more

respect for authority” and more likely to support the statement “As citizens, we should be more

active in questioning the actions of our leaders”, with a change of 0.076 in the normalized index,

relative to a control group mean of 0.53. When asked whether the quality of government and the

economy were better than two years ago, treatment reduced positive assessments by 5.4 and 5.8

percentage points, respectively, both significant at 90%. This despite the fact that Kenya’s

performance was good relative to historical benchmarks, with GDP growth of 6% in 2006-2007

and reasonably democratic politics. In control schools, satisfaction with Kenyan democracy was



                                                                                                   23
0.74 (on a normalized 0 to 1 index), and treatment decreased this by 0.048 (s.e. 0.017). Taken

together, expressed satisfaction falls in the treatment group by 0.239 standard deviations

(significant at 99%). This sharp reduction in satisfaction with political authority parallels the

rejection of male and parental authority in the household (Table 3).

       There is no evidence that the program affected overall personal happiness, as captured by

agreement with “taking everything together, the respondent is very happy” (Table 5, Panel C),

and thus the political dissatisfaction questions do not simply reflect broader life dissatisfaction.

Note that there is little consensus on the empirical relationship between education and happiness

using OECD data (Frey and Stutzer 2002, Clark and Oswald 1996).



5.3 Empowered for What? Perceived Political Efficacy, Participation, and Violence

The increased knowledge and reduced satisfaction with authority generated by the program does

not seem to translate into greater perceived political efficacy or more participation in politics or

community affairs. Instead, there is increased acceptance of the use of violence in politics.

Impact on Perceived Political Efficacy

A large majority of respondents agreed with the statements “Politics and government sometimes

seem so complicated that you can’t really understand what’s going on” and “This world is run by

a few people in power, and there is not much that someone like me can do about it”, and GSP

treatment does not lead to a significant change from the low levels of perceived political efficacy

in the control group (Table 6, Panel A). Indeed, Kenyan politics at the time of the survey was

characterized by Byzantine backroom deal-making among ethnically-based political leaders,

many of whom were the sons of an earlier generation of leaders. While treatment made the




                                                                                                    24
young women in the sample less satisfied with the political situation (Table 5), it apparently did

not lead to any illusions about their personal ability to change the situation.



Impact on Political and Community Participation

The GSP did not increase interest or participation in politics or community affairs. In particular,

26% of control group respondents reported being interested in public affairs, versus 23% in

treatment, although this difference is not significant (Table 6, Panel A). Similarly, treatment

respondents of voting age were slightly less likely to report intending to vote in the next

presidential election (-2.6 percentage points, s.e. 4.5), but the effect is not significant.

        While some argue that education enhances civic participation (e.g., Glaeser et al. 2002),

we do not find evidence for this. The survey gathered information on membership in 10 common

types of community groups (women’s groups, credit groups, etc.), with average membership in

1.41 groups in the control. There is no treatment effect on membership (Table 6, Panel B). The

program also had no impact on trust, in the standard question “Generally speaking, would you

say that most people can be trusted or that you need to be very careful in dealing with people?”.



Attitudes Toward the Use of Violence in Politics

Although Kenya has never experienced a civil war, it has a long record of ethnic violence around

elections, going back to the first multi-party polls in 1992. As noted above, some observers have

argued that education tends to reduce political violence while others see it as raising expectations

that, if unmet, could increase individuals’ propensity towards violence (Davies 1974).

        We find that the GSP program led to greater expressed tolerance for political violence.

Treatment individuals are significantly more likely to think violence is sometimes justified in



                                                                                                  25
politics (estimate 0.030, s.e. 0.012 in Table 6, panel C), off a base of 0.47 in the control group. It

seems plausible that education increases acceptance of violence because it increases respondents’

political knowledge and reduces satisfaction with the status quo (as shown above), while

apparently not simultaneously increasing their faith in their ability to achieve change through

democratic means. Since they are no more committed to democratic values as a result of

education and, if anything, more ethnically identified – the key dimension of social conflict in

Kenya – it may not be surprising that education increases support for political violence.

       From one perspective, there appears to be a tension between the estimated impacts of

education on views about the legitimacy of political violence and on domestic violence in our

sample. However, both findings are consistent with the view that education reduces the knee-jerk

acceptance of existing authorities, both at home and in the broader national political arena.



6. Estimating the bi-directional relationship between schooling and attitudes

As discussed in the introduction, some argue that education indoctrinates people to accept

existing authority whereas others argue that it can empower people to challenge authority. Our

results, taking advantage of experimental variation, provide considerable support for the

hypothesis that education reduces willingness to accept authority. In this section, we argue that

out data are consistent with a bi-directional relationship between education and willingness to

accept authority – in which those who are to accept authority are more likely to withdraw from

education but education itself leads to questioning of authority – and that such a relationship

could lead non-experimental analyses to understate the extent to which education leads to less

acceptance of authority.




                                                                                                    26
       In Section 6.1 we present a simple model in which there is a bi-directional relationship

between education and willingness to accept authority, and show that in this model standard

approaches to estimate the impact of education on acceptance of authority using regressions in

non-experimental data will yield biased estimates if – as is particularly plausible in schooling

systems such as those of Kenya, which do not allow much room for student autonomy – those

who are less willing to accept authority, are more likely to drop out of school. In section 6.2, we

use the non-experimental variation in our data to estimate the extent of reverse causality, in

which willingness to accept authority allows people to obtain more education, and the resulting

bias that would be created in non-experimental estimates in our context.



6.1 A Model of the Relationship between Schooling and Willingness to Accept Authority

We consider a framework in which education can affect willingness to accept authority, and

willingness to accept authority can affect schooling decisions. Suppose that:

(eqn. 4)               R1 = R0 + γH,

where R1 is the willingness to accept authority as an adult and R0 is willingness to accept

authority as a child. H is a measure of human capital investment.  is thus the causal impact of

education on willingness to accept authority. Suppose household i chooses human capital to trade

off the benefits versus the net utility and financial cost of education:

(eqn. 5)               Ui = B(Hi) – C(Hi).

We assume that being in a school that has the merit scholarship program raises the benefit of

human capital (B), because those who score well on the exam will receive financial benefits. We

also assume that individuals may differ in the benefit of education, for example, due to

differences in the non-pecuniary benefit of education or differences among children in aptitude


                                                                                                   27
or attitudes toward school. One component of this may be difference in willingness to accept

authority, and we allow for the possibility that R0 may also affect the cost of education. Recall

that in our context, being in school requires acceptance of a great deal of authority, including

acceptance of the right of teachers to impose work (such as cleaning the classroom or carrying

items for the teachers), orders from student prefects, and corporal punishment. Students who are

unwilling to accept the fairly rigid discipline associated with Kenyan education often have to

leave school, with perhaps the most notable example for non-Kenyans being Barack Obama Sr.,

who, despite his stellar grades, was expelled from an elite secondary school for what was

deemed “disrespectful” behavior towards his teachers (Jacobs 2011).

       For simplicity, we take the benefits to be linear in the amount of education (H) and the

cost of education to be quadratic in H. Thus, we specialize to the case in which for household i:

(eqn. 6)               Ui = Hi (B0,i+β1R0,i+β2Mi) – Hi2,

where R0,i indicates a child’s willingness to accept authority, Mi is an indicator for attending a

merit scholarship program school, and B0 indicates an individual’s other benefits of education

(per year of schooling). We assume that child willingness to accept authority is distributed

normally with mean R0 and variance  2R and that the benefits are distributed normally with

mean B0 and variance  B2 . These are distributed independently for simplicity (although this

could easily be weakened). The optimal level of human capital investment for household i, Hi* is

determined by the first order condition:
                         ∗                            ⁄2.
(eqn. 7)                         ,         ,


This implies that, ceteris paribus, for each increase of one unit in a child’s willingness to accept

authority, there is an increase of 1/2 in the human capital investment optimally chosen.




                                                                                                     28
       It is straightforward to see that a regression of willingness to accept authority on

education will not yield a causal estimate of the impact of education in this environment with

bidirectional causality. In the case where there is no merit scholarship, an OLS regression of

willingness to accept authority on human capital will yield the following coefficient (see the

model appendix for the algebraic details):

                                           ,   , ∗
(eqn. 8)                                       ∗




In this case, the term           represents the bias in the OLS estimate, and from equation 8, we

can see that the OLS estimator is biased upward, leading to an erroneous view that education

leads to a more positive impact on the willingness to accept authority than is actually the case.

       Now consider the case in which a merit scholarship program is introduced in a randomly

chosen subset of schools. By construction Mi is orthogonal to R0,i and B0,i. Using the merit

scholarship as an instrument for human capital, Hi, would generate an unbiased estimates of the

causal impact since merit scholarships are independent of initial willingness to accept authority

and of other determinants of returns to education:

                                     , ,
(eqn. 9)                             ∗,




Taking the difference between the OLS and IV estimates allows us to solve for 1 in terms of

known parameters (algebraic details are once again in the appendix):

(eqn. 10)                    1

As shown in equation 10, we can solve for 1 using estimates found in our data.



6.2 Comparing the Experimental and Non-experimental Relationships


                                                                                                    29
To empirically compare experimental and non-experimental results, the extent to which willingness to

accept authority affects education, and the extent to which education affects acceptance of authority,

we first reproduce the main reduced form impacts (from Tables 3-6) in column 1 of Table 7, then

present IV estimates in column 2 and non-experimental OLS estimates (for the control group) in

column 3. Column 4 presents p-values on the Hausman test of equality of the IV and OLS estimates.

       For the lack of autonomy index, the IV coefficient estimate implies that a one standard

deviation increase in the normalized test score (in the 2005-2007 survey) is associated with an

effect of -0.872 s.d. (s.e. 0.493), a large effect. To put this in context, a one standard deviation

test score increase in this population is more than the gain observed (in the cross-section) by

advancing by one primary school grade. This contrasts with a non-experimental OLS estimate of

just -0.286, and thus the IV estimate is nearly three times as large as OLS. We reject equality of

the experimental and non-experimental estimates at nearly 90% confidence (p-value=0.11).

       The IV estimate for the impact of education on satisfaction with authority index is large

and negative (-1.115, s.e. 0.493) and significant at 95% confidence, while the OLS estimate is

just -0.177, and the difference between the two is significant at 99% confidence. This divergence

mirrors the findings above for the lack of autonomy index: both of these measures capture

opposition to existing authorities, one in the home and the other in the broader political arena.

The difference between the IV and OLS estimates is substantively large: while both have the

same sign, the IV estimate is six times larger in magnitude and leads to different conclusions

about the relationship between education and the willingness to accept authority.

       Under the model sketched above it is possible to solve for the impact of willingness to

accept authority on education. Since both test scores and the satisfaction of authority index are

normalized so that the variance is 1:



                                                                                                       30
                                                          .
             1                            1                                 1.115        1.015. Thus in
                                                   .           .


equilibrium individuals who are 1 s.d. more willing to accept authority accumulate 1/2 or 0.507

s.d. more human capital as measured by tests.

       This suggests that, all else equal, those pupils who are unwilling to accept authority are

likely to invest less in education, consistent with a growing literature on the importance of

individual personality traits as determinants of educational, labor market and other life outcomes

(Heckman et al. 2006)

       In our data, an analysis that does not allow for the bi-directional effect or account for

selection – namely, the OLS estimates in the control group – does not imply that education

increases the willingness to accept authority (Table 7), but we argue that the magnitude of the

effect of education in reducing acceptance of authority is biased greatly towards zero in this case.

However, as can be seen from equation 8, the model suggests that in other environments where

baseline variation in willingness to accept authority (       ) is greater, or other sources of variation

in returns to education (   ) are smaller, the bias in non-experimental estimates would be greater,

potentially leading to the erroneous conclusion that education increases willingness to accept

authority. Perhaps one of the reasons that some scholars have believed that education promotes

acceptance of authority is that they have simply compared individuals with different levels of

education without taking selection into account.

       The above point estimate of the impact of willingness to accept authority on education is

specific to the particular assumptions of the model, for example, to our specification of the

functional form of the relationship between willingness to accept authority as a child and a

young adult, and of the cost function for education. However, the findings that education reduces

the willingness to accept authority by much more than would be thought based on regression

                                                                                                        31
analysis in non-experimental data; that the willingness to accept authority increases educational

attainment; and that in situations with more baseline variation in willingness to accept authority a

naïve cross-sectional analysis could lead to the “wrong sign”, namely the erroneous conclusion

that education increases the willingness to accept authority, are all more general.

       Other differences in OLS and IV estimates are consistent with the model above. There is

a significant difference in IV and OLS estimates of the impact of human capital on willingness to

support political violence (p-value=0.02), where OLS estimates are again biased towards zero.

       There is no evidence that attitudes toward ethnicity, religion, or democracy affect

education. In particular, there are no statistically significant differences between the IV and OLS

estimates for ethnic, religious, or democratic attitudes (with p-values of 0.11, 0.43, and 0.82,

respectively), although note that the OLS relationship between human capital and democratic

attitudes is significant at 99% confidence, consistent with many other observational studies

discussed earlier. The measures of newspaper reading and political knowledge are positive and

significant in both the IV and OLS cases although IV estimates are larger in magnitude, and the

difference between IV and OLS is significant at 90% for the political knowledge index. The

perceived political efficacy index and the participation in politics index are near zero and not

statistically significant for either the IV or OLS specifications, and there are no significant

differences between them (with p-values of 0.31 and 0.56, respectively).

       Taken together, we reject the hypothesis that the IV and OLS estimates are equal for

three of the ten dependent variables in Table 7 at 90% confidence (with two other p-values equal

to 0.11), far more often than would be generated by chance alone under the null hypotheses that

both were measuring the same underlying parameters. These large differences between non-

experimental and experimental estimates suggest that it is important to carefully distinguish



                                                                                                   32
treatment versus selection effects in assessing whether education instills greater willingness to

accept authority, or changes in other political attitudes and behaviors, and point to the

importance of research strategies that exploit experimental or quasi-experimental designs.



7. Understanding the Channels of Impact

One could entertain several hypotheses about the channels of impact. Beyond the leading

explanation of a human capital effect, scholarship winners were also honored in a public

ceremony that could have affected their self-image and confidence, and also received a cash

prize. To distinguish between these effects, in this section we test whether subsamples who were

very unlikely to win a scholarship also exhibited effects similar to those documented above.

        The main results are similar when we restrict attention to those individuals with baseline

2000 test scores below +2 standard deviations (Table 8), suggesting that the findings are not

being driven by scholarship winners, although note that standard errors do inevitably rise with

the reduced sample size. We focus on our main outcome measures in this table. The lack of

autonomy mean effect result is almost identical in this restricted subsample at -0.176 (s.e. 0.091).

The satisfaction with authority mean effect is also similar (-0.147, s.e. 0.088), and we cannot

reject that it is equal to the full sample estimate. As in the full sample, there are no significant

impacts on “modern” ethnic, religious or democratic attitudes, nor on individuals’ perceived

political efficacy or participation in civic affairs. The estimated program impact on measures of

newspaper reading, political knowledge, and attitudes towards political violence remain positive

but are somewhat smaller in magnitude and not significant in the restricted subsample. When we




                                                                                                       33
examine estimates across the two samples (namely, all those with baseline test scores vs. those

with scores less than +2 s.d.), in no case is the difference significant at even 90% confidence.12

        Another hypothesis is that the impacts are due in part to school-wide changes in attitudes

associated with the implementation of a scholarship program, if the experience of observing

other girls being publicly recognized for their achievements changed norms. We cannot

completely rule this out. However, there is no strong evidence in favor of this alternative view..

While one could perhaps tell a story where having a program that provided scholarships to girls

led to more progressive gender attitudes (and thus could account for some of the autonomy

findings in Table 3), it is harder to imagine why this would generate some of the other findings,

for instance, in terms of newspaper reading, objective political knowledge, expressed satisfaction

with political authority, or violence in politics.

        Moreover, it seems reasonable to conjecture that any school-wide effects of the program

on gender attitudes would depend on the number of girls who were publicly recognized for their

academic achievement. Because scholarships were awarded to girls scoring in the top 15% in the

district and there is considerable school-to-school variation in test scores, there are large

differences in the number of winners across schools (for instance, 16 of the 34 treatment schools

had no winners in 2001). As above, we create a measure of predicted GSP winners in both

treatment and control schools. We find no compelling evidence of differences in the magnitude

of program impacts across schools with different numbers of predicted winners (Table 9). In

particular, the interaction terms between treatment and predicted winners are significant for just

two of the ten outcomes, while for the other eight variables the t-statistic is less than one. These



12
  While impacts appear to be mostly driven by human capital, it is impossible to decompose this effect into the
separate channels of primary school attendance (Table 1), secondary enrolment, and skills measured in tests (Table
2), since we lack separate instruments for these channels.

                                                                                                                34
generally small and not significant estimates suggest that non-human capital channels are driving

the results, although we cannot completely rule this out.



8. Conclusion

We examine the impact of increased human capital on political and social attitudes among young

Kenyan women. Our experimental results contribute to a vast and mostly non-experimental

literature on the relationship between education and political and social attitudes, a relationship

that is of particular interest in less developed societies like Kenya that have experienced rapid

educational gains in recent decades. The program leads young women to reject the legitimacy of

domestic violence and reduces their propensity to enter into marriages arranged by their parents.

In findings that go against some claims in modernization theory, the program does not weaken

ethnic attachment, promote secularization, or increase stated support for democracy.

       Consistent with the view that education can potentially enhance political consciousness

and contrary to theories suggesting that education merely instills acceptance of existing

authority, program participation leads to greater objective political knowledge and newspaper

readership, less willingness to defer to authority, and reduced satisfaction with Kenya’s political

and economic situation. However, this does not translate into greater perceived political

efficacy, higher rates of voting, or other forms of civic participation. This combination of

heightened political awareness and reduced acceptance of the legitimacy of existing political

structures, in an environment where respondents perceive little ability to effect change through

Kenya’s nascent democratic institutions, may help explain why the increase in education was

also associated with greater acceptance of the legitimacy of political violence. .




                                                                                                    35
       One possible interpretation is that education allowed young Kenyans to hold more

realistic views about their political system. As noted above, less than one year after our surveys

were collected, Kenya held a national presidential election in which independent observers

argued that the main opposition candidate – who received the vast majority of votes in our study

area – won more votes but the incumbent claimed victory after vote rigging (Gibson and Long

2009). After months of violent protests and bloody ethnic clashes a power-sharing deal was

reached under which the incumbent remained president and the challenger became prime

minister. As individuals in our sample received more education, their declining satisfaction with

the status quo and growing acceptance of political violence arguably reflects their growing

awareness of the role that violence often plays in Kenyan politics.

       Experimental and non-experimental estimates of the impact of education on acceptance

of authority differ considerably, suggesting that observational cross-sectional correlations are

biased. To make sense of these differences, we hypothesize that one’s ability to stay in school is

closely related to her willingness to accept authority, which leads to omitted variable bias in non-

experimental estimates that could lead observers to erroneously conclude that education instills

greater acceptance of authority. In the context of a simple model, we assess the extent of reverse

causality, which appears to be considerable. Somewhat ironically, it appears that only those who

are sufficiently willing to accept a loss of autonomy when young (to succeed in school) actually

have the opportunity to experience the gains in autonomy that education generates later in life.

       Estimating these causal effects of education is, we believe, a meaningful step towards

understanding the positive cross-country empirical association between education and

democracy. While interpretation of that relationship remains controversial, the results suggest

that if education does lead societies to be more democratic, it is not necessarily through growing



                                                                                                   36
pro-democratic attitudes. Rather the presence of an educated, well-informed and critical

citizenry could lead democracies to function more successfully. Recent research argues that,

regardless of individuals’ support for democracy per se, a necessary foundation for a successful

democratic system is the existence of politically knowledgeable and engaged citizens willing to

actively participate in political life and challenge political authorities (Moehler 2008; Glaeser et

al. 2007). Alternatively, the higher levels of political dissatisfaction and tolerance of political

violence generated by rising education could hasten the replacement of non-democratic regimes.

       As with all micro-studies conducted in a given context – here, among young Kenyan

women – caution is requiring in generalizing the results to other populations, most notably for

males and older adults, for whom we lack data. Our results can be taken as relevant for rural

Kenyan females at the margin of transitioning from primary schools – which are very much part

of the fabric of village life – to secondary schools, which offer a much broader perspective of

Kenya and the world. To what extent should we expect our results to generalize? The effects of

education could surely change as individuals’ age. It is impossible to know for certain without

further work, but a natural conjecture is that the education of disadvantaged social groups – such

as the rural women from politically marginalized ethnic groups in our sample – will induce

greater awareness of politics, increase the desire for autonomy, and reduce tendencies to simply

accept their powerlessness as a natural, immutable fact about the world. In our context, there is

some indication that this translates into increased ethnic attachment and greater acceptance of the

use of violence in politics. Yet it is plausible that in other contexts where there is greater scope

for meaningful engagement in democratic politics, the heightened political consciousness and

reduced acceptance of authority might instead lead to greater civic involvement, potentially

contributing to a more vibrant democracy.



                                                                                                       37
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, James A Robinson, and Pierre Yared (2005), “From
       Education to Democracy?” American Economic Review. 95 (2), 44-49.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, James A Robinson, and Pierre Yared (2008), “Income and
       Democracy” American Economic Review. 98(3), 808-42.
Almond, Gabriel and Sidney Verba. (1963). The Civic Culture: Political Attitudes and
       Democracy in Five Nations, Sage Publications, London.
Baird, Sarah, Joan Hamory Hicks, Michael Kremer and Edward Miguel. (2011). “Worms at
       Work: Long-Run Impacts of Child Health Gains”, unpublished working paper.
Barkan, Joel D., (1994). Beyond Capitalism versus Socialism in Kenya and Tanzania. Lynne
       Reinner: Boulder CO.
Barro, Robert and J.W. Lee (2001), “International Data on Educational Attainment: Updates and
       Implications,” Oxford Economic Papers 53.
Basu, Ananya, and Elizabeth M. King. 2001. "Does Education Promote Growth and Democracy?
       Some Evidence from East Asia and Latin America." Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
Blaydes, Lisa (2006), “Who Votes in Authoritarian Elections and Why? Determinants of Voting
       in Contemporary Egypt,” unpublished.
Boix, Carles (2009) "Development and Democratization", unpublished working paper.
Boix, Carles, and Susan Stokes (2003), “Endogenous Democratization,” World Politics 55.
Bowles, Samuel and Herbert Gintis. (1976). Schooling in Capitalist America: Educational
       Reform and the Contradictions of Economic Life. Basic Books: New York.
Bratton, Michael, Robert Mattes and E. Gyimah-Boadi. (2005). Public Opinion in Africa:
       Learning About Democracy and Market Reform. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ,.Press.
Chaudhury, Nazmul and Parajuli, Dilip, (2006). “Conditional Cash Transfers and Female
       Schooling: The Impact of the Female School Stipend Program on Public School
       Enrollments in Punjab, Pakistan”. World Bank Impact Evaluation Series No. 9.
Cooksey, B., D. Court, and B. Makau. (1994). “Education for Self-reliance and Harambee”, in
       Beyond Capitalism vs. Socialism in Kenya vs. Tanzania, ed. J. D. Barkan, Lynne Rienner.
Davies, James (1974), "The J-Curve and Power Struggle Theories of Collective Violence,"
       American Sociological Review, 39(4).


                                                                                              38
Dee, Thomas (2004), “Are there Civic Returns to Education?” Journal of Public Economics 88.
Duflo, Esther, Pascaline Dupas, Michael Kremer, Samuel Sinei (2006) “Education and
       HIV/AIDS Prevention: Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation in Western Kenya”.
Eifert, Benn, Edward Miguel, Daniel Posner (2010) “Political Sources of Ethnic Identification in
       Africa”, American Journal of Political Science.
Epstein, David, Robert Bates, Jack Goldstone, Ida Kirstensen, and Sharyn O’Halloran, (2006)
       “Democratic Transitions” American Journal of Political Science, 50(3).
Evans, David, Michael Kremer, Muthoni Ngatia (2010) “The Impact of Distributing School
       Uniforms on Children’s Education in Kenya”, working paper.
Fanon, Frantz. (2005). The Wretched of the Earth. Grove Press: New York.
FIDA. (2008). Domestic Violence in Kenya. Federation of Women Lawyers of Kenya: Nairobi.
Filmer, D. and N. Schady. (2008). “Getting girls into school: Evidence from a scholarship
       program in Cambodia.” Economic Development and Cultural Change, 56: 581-617.
Freire, Paulo. (1972). Pedagogy of the Oppressed. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Galston, William A. (2001) “Political Knowledge, Political Engagement and Civic Education”
       Annual Review of Political Science 4.
Gathigah, Miriam (2010) “Politics: Women Still a Parliamentary Minority in Kenya,” Inter Press
       Service. December 21, 2010.
Gibson, Clark and James Long. (2009). “The 2007 Kenyan Election”, Electoral Studies.
Glaeser, Edward L, and Bruce Sacerdote. (2001). “Education and Religion”, NBER WP #8080.
Glaeser, Edward L., David Laibson, and Bruce Sacerdote. (2002). “An Economic Approach to
       Social Capital”, Economic Journal, 112(483), F437-F458.
Glaeser, Edward L., Giacomo Ponzetto, and Andrei Shleifer (2007) “Why Does Democracy
       Need Education?” Journal of Economic Growth.
Government of Kenya. (1986). Kenya Socio-Cultural Profiles: Busia District, ed. Gideon Were,
       Nairobi: Ministry of Planning and National Development.
Gramsci, Antonio. (1971). Selections from the Prison Notebooks, ed. G.N. Smith. International
       Publishers Co.: New York.
Gugerty, Mary Kay, and Michael Kremer (2008), “Outside Funding and the Dynamics of
       Participation in Community Associations,” American Journal of Political Science, 52 (3).



                                                                                              39
Habyarimana, James, Macartan Humphreys, Dan Posner, and Jeremy Weinstein (2009),
       Coethnicity: Diversity and the Dilemmas of Collective Action. Russell Sage Foundation.
Hausman, Jerry. (1978) “Specification Tests in Econometrics,” Econometrica.
Heckman, J., J. Stixrud, and S. Urzua. (2006). “The Effects of Cognitive and Noncognitive
       Abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social Behavior”, Journal of Labor Economics.
Herz, Barbara, and Gene B. Sperling. (2004). What Works in Girls’ Education: Evidence and
       Policies from the Developing World. Council on Foreign Relations: New York.
Hochschild, Adam. (1999). King Leopold’s Ghost: A Story of Greed, Terror and Heroism in
       Colonial Africa. Mariner Books.
Human Rights Watch. (1999). Spare the Child: Corporal Punishment in Kenyan Schools.
Humphreys, M., W. A. Masters, and M. E. Sandbu (2006), “Democratic Deliberations: Results
       from a Field Experiment in Sao Tome and Principe,” World Politics, 58.
Huntington, Samuel (1991), The Third Wave: Democratization in the Late Twentieth Century.
       Norman and London: University of Oklahoma Press
Indiaedunews.net. (2010). “West Bengal to give scholarships to girl students”, January 27, 2010.
       http://www.indiaedunews.net/. Accessed September 8, 2010.
Inglehart, R., M. Basanez, and A. Moreno. (1998). Human Values and Beliefs: A Cross-Cultural
       Sourcebook: Political, Religious, Sexual, and Economic Norms in 43 Societies: Findings
       from the 1990-1993 World Values Survey. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Iqbal, F. and Riad, N. (2004), “Increasing Girls’ School Enrollment in the Arab Republic of
       Egypt’, in Reducing Poverty, Sustaining Growth: What Works, What Doesn’t, and Why.
       Washington: World Bank.
Jacobs, Sally H. (2011). The Other Barack: Bold and Reckless Life of President Obama’s
       Father. Public Affairs Press.
Jakiela, Pamela, Edward Miguel, and Vera te Velde. (2010). “You’ve Earned It: Combining
       Field and Lab Experiments to Estimate the Impact of Human Capital on Social
       Preferences”, NBER Working Paper #16449.
Khandker, Shahidur; Pitt, Mark and Fuwa, Nobuhiko. (2003) “Subsidy to Promote Girls'
       Secondary Education: The Female Stipend Program in Bangladesh”, working paper.
Kling, Jeffrey, Jeffrey Liebman, and Lawrence Katz. (2007), “Experimental Analysis of
       Neighborhood Effects,” Econometrica.

                                                                                              40
Krueger, Alan, and Jitka Maleckova (2003), “Education, Poverty, and Terrorism: Is there a
       Causal Connection?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 17.
Kremer, Michael, Edward Miguel, and Rebecca Thornton. (2009) “Incentives to Learn”, Review
       of Economics and Statistics, 91.
Kremer Michael, Sarychev A. (2008). Why do governments operate schools? Working Paper.
Levine, Ruth, Cynthia Lloyd, Margaret Greene, and Caren Grown, (2008) “Girls Count: A
       Global Investment and Action Agenda”. Washington: Center for Global Development.
Levy, M. (1966). Modernization and the Structure of Society. Princeton University Press.
Lloyd, Cynthia. (2009). New Lessons: The Power of Educating Adolescent Girls. Population
       Council: New York.
Lipset, Seymour Martin, (1959) “Some Social Requisites of Democracy: Economic
       Development and Political Legitimacy,” American Political Science Review 53.
Lochner, Lance. (2011). “Non-production benefits of education: Crime, health, and good
       citizenship”, NBER Working Paper #16722.
Logan, Carolyn and Michael Bratton (2006), “The Political Gender Gap in Africa: Similar
       Attitudes, Different Behaviors,” Afrobarometer Working Paper No. 58.
Lott, Jr., John. (1999) “Public Schooling, Indoctrination and Totalitarianism,” Journal of
       Political Economy, 107(6), 127-157.
Mason, T. David and Jerry Murtagh (1985), “Who Riots? An Empirical Examination of the New
       Urban Black Versus the Social Marginality Hypothesis,” Political Behavior.
Mattes, Robert and Michael Bratton (2007), “Learning about Democracy in Africa: Awareness,
       Performance, and Experience,” American Journal of Political Science, 51(1).
Miller, A., L. Bolce, and M. Halligan (1977) “The J-Curve Theory and Black Urban Riots: An
       Empirical Test of Progressive Relative Deprivation Theory,” APSR, 71(3).
Milligan, Kevin, Enrico Moretti, and Philip Oreopoulous (2004), “Does Education Improve
       Citizenship? Evidence from the US and the UK,” Journal of Public Economics, 88.
Moehler, Devra. (2007) “Participation in Transition: Mobilizing Ugandans in Constitution
       Making.” Studies in Comparative International Development, 42(2): 164-90.
Moehler, Devra. (2008) Distrusting Democrats: Outcomes of Participatory Constitution Making.
       University of Michigan Press.
Nyerere, Julius. (1973). Freedom and Development, Government Printer, Dar-es-Salaam.

                                                                                             41
Olken, Ben (2010), “Direct Democracy and Local Public Goods: Evidence from a Field
       Experiment in Indonesia,” American Political Science Review 104 (2).
Oreopoulos, Philip and Kjell G. Salvanes. (2011). "Priceless: The Nonpecuniary Benefits of
       Schooling", Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25(1), 159-184.
Orr, L., et al. (2003). Moving to Opportunity: Interim Impacts Evaluation. Washington: HUD.
Paluck, Elizabeth Levy, and Donald P. Green. (2009). “Deference, Dissent, and Dispute
       Resolution: An Experimental Intervention Using Mass Media to Change Norms and
       Behavior in Rwanda,” American Political Science Review, 103(4), 622-644.
Papaioannou, Elias, and Gregorios Siourounis, (2008) “Economic and Social Factors Driving the
       Third Wave of Democratization,” Comparative Economics.
Pritchett, Lant. (2003). "When Will They Ever Learn?: Why All Governments Produce
       Schooling.” BREAD Working Paper #53.
Przeworski, Adam and Fernando Limongi (1997) “Modernization: Theories and Facts” World
       Politics, Vol. 49, No. 2.
Rynor, Janet and Kate Wesson, (2006). "The Girl's Stipend Program in Bangladesh". Journal of
       Education in International Development. Vol. 2, No. 2.
Saunders, Doug. (2011). “A self-taught democracy emerges from Tunisia’s classrooms”, The
       Globe and Mail, February 28, 2011.
Save the Children. (2005). State of the World's Mothers Report: The Power and Promise of
       Girls' Education.
Shetler, Jan Bender. (2010). "Historical memory as a foundation for peace: Network formation
       and ethnic identity in North Mara, Tanzania", Journal of Peace Research, 47(5), 639-50.
Smith, S.C., M.S. Emran, and F. Maret. (2009). “Education and Freedom of Choice: Evidence
       from Arranged Marriages in Vietnam”, working paper, George Washington University.
Thomas, Duncan, Elizabeth Frankenberg and James P. Smith (2001). "Lost But Not Forgotten:
       Attrition and Follow-up in the Indonesia Family Life Survey." J. of Human Resources.
Thomas, Duncan, et al. (2010). “Cutting the costs of attrition: Results from the Indonesia Family
       Life Survey”, forthcoming, Journal of Development Economics.
United Nations Development Program. (1993). Human Development Report 1993. New York.
United Nations Development Program. (2009). Human Development Report 2009. New York.
United Nations Development Program. (2010). Human Development Report 2010. New York.

                                                                                               42
Verba, S., Nie, N.H., 1972. Participation in America: Political Democracy and Social Equality.
       Harper and Row, New York.
Vicente, Pedro and Leonard Wantchekon (2010) “Clientelism and Vote Buying: Lessons from
       Field Experiments in West Africa,” Oxford Review of Economic Policy.
Wantchekon, Leonard (2003) “Clientelism and Voting Behavior: Evidence from a Field
       Experiment in Benin,” World Politics, 55(3), 399-422.
Weakliem, David (2002) “The Effects of Education on Political Opinions: An International
       Study,” International Journal of Public Opinion Research 13.
Weber, Eugen. (1976). Peasants into Frenchmen: The Modernization of Rural France, 1870-
       1914. Stanford University Press.
Wolfinger, R.E., Rosenstone, S.J., 1980. Who Votes? Yale Univ. Press, New Haven
Woodson, C.G. (1915). The Education of the Negro Prior to 1861: A History of the Education of
       the Colored People of the United States from the Beginning of Slavery to the Civil War.
       New York: G.P. Putnam's Sons.
World Bank. (2010). www.worldbank.org/education/girls. Accessed September 8, 2010.




                                                                                             43
 Table 1: Girls Scholarship Program (GSP) Baseline Characteristics and Short-run Impacts (2001-2002)
                                                                          Comparison           Coefficient
                                                                         group variable     estimate (s.e.) on
    Dependent variable:                                                   mean (s.d.)       program indicator
    Panel A: Baseline characteristics (2001-2002 surveys)
    Student age (2001)                                                         13.3                -0.14
                                                                              (1.44)              (0.15)
    Iron roof ownership                                                        0.82              -0.048
                                                                              (0.38)             (0.038)
    Mother years of schooling                                                  8.71                0.79*
                                                                              (4.18)              (0.40)
    Father years of schooling                                                 10.47                0.55
                                                                              (3.99)              (0.49)
    Proportion ethnic Luhya                                                    0.79               0.067
                                                                              (0.41)             (0.056)
    Proportion ethnic Luo                                                     0.104               -0.054
                                                                              (0.31)             (0.038)
    Proportion ethnic Teso                                                    0.055               0.018
                                                                              (0.23)             (0.033)
    Test score pre-program, all subjects (normalized)                          0.00                0.12
                                                                              (1.00)              (0.20)
    Panel B: Short-run Impacts (2001-2002)
    Test score post-program, all subjects (normalized)                         0.00               0.34*
                                                                              (1.00)              (0.20)
    Student school attendance                                                 0.788               0.060*
                                                                              (0.36)             (0.032)
    Teacher school attendance                                                 0.822              0.069***
                                                                             (0.262)             (0.025)

Notes: Each row is from a separate OLS regression. Significant at 90% (*), 95% (**), 99% (***) confidence. The
outcome variable is regressed on the GSP program (treatment) indicator. Standard errors are clustered by school.
The sample size in Panel A ranges from 789 to 1387 observations depending on the dependent variable. The sample
consists of female students in the Girls Scholarship Program schools in Busia who were interviewed in the long-run
follow-up and will be included in subsequent analysis. The academic subjects tested included English,
geography/history/civics, mathematics, science, and Swahili. The attendance data for both pupils and teachers was
collected during unannounced visits to schools in 2001 and 2002. The sample size in Panel B is 993 students in the
test score regressions, and 1351 students and 666 teachers in the attendance regressions, respectively.




                                                                                                                 44
                      Table 2: Educational Outcomes in Follow-up survey (2005-2007)
                                                                              Comparison            Coefficient
                                                                             group variable      estimate (s.e.) on
 Dependent variable:                                                          mean (s.d.)        program indicator
 Panel A: Sample attrition
 Surveyed in follow-up round (2005-2007)                                          0.816                -0.007
                                                                                 (0.388)              (0.035)
 Panel B: Test Scores
 Arithmetic test (normalized)                                                      0.00                0.135
                                                                                  (1.00)              (0.102)
 English vocabulary test (normalized)                                              0.00                0.162*
                                                                                  (1.00)              (0.092)
 Raven’s matrix test (normalized)                                                  0.00               0.182**
                                                                                  (1.00)              (0.075)
 Reading test (normalized)                                                         0.00                0.124*
                                                                                  (1.00)              (0.071)
 Swahili vocabulary test (normalized)                                              0.00               0.218**
                                                                                  (1.00)              (0.088)
 Test score mean effect                                                            0.00               0.208**
                                                                                  (1.00)              (0.092)
 Test score mean effect, among those with baseline scores < +2 s.d.                0.06                0.145*
                                                                                  (0.96)              (0.082)
 Test score mean effect, among schools with 5 predicted GSP winners               -0.06              0.177**
                                                                                  (1.01)              (0.081)
 Panel C: Schooling outcomes
 Attended at least some secondary school (0-1)                                        0.30               0.087**
                                                                                     (0.46)              (0.041)
 Still in school, at time of survey (0-1)                                             0.52                0.079*
                                                                                     (0.50)              (0.044)
 Grades of school completed                                                            7.8                0.088
                                                                                      (1.2)              (0.103)
Notes: Each row is from a separate OLS regression. Significant at 90% (*), 95% (**), 99% (***) confidence. In
Panels B-C the outcome variable is regressed on the GSP program (treatment) indicator, an indicator for student
cohort, student age at time of the survey, the mean pre-program (2000) school test score, educational attainment of
each parent, and timing of the follow-up survey (coefficient estimates not shown). There are no additional regression
controls in Panel A. Standard errors are clustered by school. The sample size is 1,387 observations in Panels B-C.
Details on the mean effect analysis are in the text. The test score mean effect in Panel B includes the arithmetic,
English, Raven’s matrix, reading, and Swahili test results.




                                                                                                                  45
                                     Table 3: Autonomy in Household Outcomes in Follow-up survey (2005-2007)
                                                                                                                   Comparison           Coefficient
                                                                                                                  group variable     estimate (s.e.) on
        Dependent variable:                                                                                        mean (s.d.)       program indicator
        “Women have always been subject to traditional laws and customs and should remain so.” (0 to 1)                0.17                -0.009
        (vs. “Women should have equal rights and receive the same treatment as men do.”) [AFB]                        (0.31)              (0.022)

        “Men can beat their wives and children if they misbehave.” (0 to 1)                                            0.25               -0.068***
        (vs. “No one has the right to use physical violence against anyone else.”) [AFB]                              (0.38)               (0.024)

        Ever married (0-1)                                                                                                0.21                -0.018
                                                                                                                         (0.41)              (0.034)
        Ever married, with family involvement in spouse choice (0-1)                                                     0.042               -0.024*
                                                                                                                        (0.201)              (0.013)
        Ever married, without family involvement in spouse choice (0-1)                                                  0.165                 0.005
                                                                                                                        (0.371)              (0.031)
        Total fertility                                                                                                  0.400                -0.030
                                                                                                                        (0.764)              (0.065)
        Lack of autonomy mean effect                                                                                      0.00               -0.181**
                                                                                                                         (1.00)              (0.077)
Notes: Each row is from a separate OLS regression. Significant at 90% (*), 95% (**), 99% (***) confidence. The outcome variable is regressed on the GSP
program (treatment) indicator, an indicator for student cohort, student age at time of the survey, the mean pre-program (2000) school test score, educational
attainment of each parent, and timing of the follow-up survey (coefficient estimates not shown). Standard errors are clustered by school. The sample is N=1,387.
Details on the mean effect analysis are in the text. The autonomy mean effect includes the two attitude questions and the “Ever married, with family involvement
in spouse choice” variables.




                                                                                                                                                             46
                         Table 4: Attitudes with Respect to Ethnicity, Religion and Democracy in Follow-up survey (2005-2007)
                                                                                                                                Comparison         Coefficient
                                                                                                                               group variable   estimate (s.e.) on
Dependent variable:                                                                                                             mean (s.d.)     program indicator
Panel A: Ethnic and Religious Attitudes
Ethnic identity is not “very important” to respondent (0-1)                                                                        0.110               -0.033
                                                                                                                                  (0.313)             (0.020)
Ethnic identity is not “very important” to respondent (0-1), among those surveyed in 2005 and 2006                                 0.126              -0.042*
                                                                                                                                  (0.332)             (0.021)
Migrated out of Busia and Teso districts                                                                                           0.257               0.006
                                                                                                                                  (0.437)             (0.036)
Religious identity is not “very important” to respondent (0-1)                                                                     0.014               0.005
                                                                                                                                  (0.116)             (0.006)
Member of a prayer group (0-1)                                                                                                     0.371               0.018
                                                                                                                                  (0.483)             (0.034)
Panel B: Democratic attitudes
Agree with: "We should choose our leaders in this country through regular, open and honest elections." (0 to 1)                       0.93                 0.001
                                                                                                                                     (0.19)              (0.014)
Agree with: “Democracy is preferable to any other kind of government” (0 to 1) [AFB, WVS]                                             0.69                -0.005
                                                                                                                                     (0.46)              (0.035)
Disagree with: “Only those who are sufficiently well educated should be allowed to choose our leaders.” (0 to 1) [AFB]                0.27                 0.022
                                                                                                                                     (0.38)              (0.030)
Disagree with: "Only one political party should be allowed to stand for election and hold office." (0 to 1) [AFB]                     0.35                 0.032
                                                                                                                                     (0.40)              (0.029)
Disagree with: "All decisions should be made by a council of elders." (0 to 1) [AFB]                                                  0.27                 0.023
                                                                                                                                     (0.36)              (0.026)
Disagree with: "The military should come in to govern the country." (0 to 1) [AFB]                                                    0.61                 0.002
                                                                                                                                     (0.41)              (0.033)
Disagree with: "Elections and the Parliament should be abolished so that the president can decide everything." (0 to 1) [AFB]         0.64                -0.006
                                                                                                                                     (0.41)              (0.032)
Democratic attitudes mean effect                                                                                                      0.00                0.058
                                                                                                                                     (1.00)              (0.089)
 Notes: Each row is from a separate OLS regression. Significant at 90% (*), 95% (**), 99% (***) confidence. The outcome variable is regressed on the GSP
 program (treatment) indicator, an indicator for student cohort, student age at time of the survey, the mean pre-program (2000) school test score, educational
 attainment of each parent, and timing of the follow-up survey (coefficient estimates not shown). Standard errors are clustered by school. The sample is N=1,387,
 except in the restricted sample for ethnic identity, where only those interviewed in 2005 and 2006 are included, in which case N=1,346. Details on the mean
 effect analysis are in the text. The mean effect at the bottom of Panel B includes all variables in that panel.



                                                                                                                                                                47
               Table 5: Media Consumption, Political Knowledge, and Satisfaction with Authority in Follow-up survey (2005-2007)
                                                                                                                  Comparison          Coefficient
                                                                                                                 group variable    estimate (s.e.) on
          Dependent variable:                                                                                     mean (s.d.)      program indicator
          Panel A: Media Consumption
          Days listened to the radio in last week (0 to 7)                                                            3.59              -0.642***
                                                                                                                     (2.87)              (0.198)
          Days read a newspaper in last week (0 to 7)                                                                0.439                0.134*
                                                                                                                    (1.010)              (0.074)
          Has a favorite newspaper                                                                                   0.666               0.096**
                                                                                                                    (0.472)              (0.037)
          Favorite newspaper is the Daily Nation                                                                     0.305              0.105***
                                                                                                                    (0.461)              (0.035)
          Panel B: Political Knowledge
          Political knowledge mean effect                                                                             0.00              0.203**
                                                                                                                     (1.00)             (0.085)
          Panel C: Satisfaction with Authority
          “We should show more respect for authority.” (0 to 1)                                                         0.53              -0.076***
          (vs. “As citizens, we should be more active in questioning the actions of our leaders.”) [AFB]               (0.46)              (0.026)
          Kenya’s quality of government is better than two years ago (0-1)                                              0.56               -0.054*
                                                                                                                       (0.50)              (0.031)
           Kenya’s economy is better than two years ago (0-1)                                                           0.50               -0.058*
                                                                                                                       (0.50)              (0.033)
           Satisfaction with Kenyan democracy (0 to 1) [WVS]                                                            0.74              -0.048***
                                                                                                                       (0.29)              (0.017)
           Satisfaction with authority mean effect                                                                      0.00              -0.239***
                                                                                                                       (1.00)              (0.061)
           Taking everything together, respondent is “very happy” (0-1) [WVS]                                           0.65                -0.027
                                                                                                                       (0.48)              (0.039)
Notes: Each row is from a separate OLS regression. Significant at 90% (*), 95% (**), 99% (***) confidence. The outcome variable is regressed on the GSP
program (treatment) indicator, an indicator for student cohort, student age at time of the survey, the mean pre-program (2000) school test score, educational
attainment of each parent, and timing of the follow-up survey (coefficient estimates not shown). Standard errors are clustered by school. The sample is N=1,387.
Details on the mean effect analysis are in the text. The mean effect in Panel B includes variables “Knows Kenyan President’s name (0-1)”, “Knows Kenyan Vice
President’s name (0-1)”, “Knows Kenyan Education Minister's name (0-1)”, “Knows Kenyan Health Minister's name (0-1)”, and “Knows Ugandan President's
name (0-1)”; the mean effect in Panel C includes the four variables listed above the mean effect row.




                                                                                                                                                             48
               Table 6: Perceived political efficacy, participation in politics and civic affairs, and attitudes towards violence in politics
                                                            in follow-up survey (2005-2007)
                                                                                                                                  Comparison           Coefficient
                                                                                                                                 group variable     estimate (s.e.) on
Dependent variable:                                                                                                                mean (s.d.)      program indicator
Panel A: Perceived Political Efficacy
Disagree with: "Politics and government sometimes seem so complicated that you can’t really understand what’s going                    0.16               0.009
on." (0 to 1) [AFB]                                                                                                                   (0.29)             (0.020)
Disagree with: "This world is run by a few people in power, and there is not much that someone like me can do about it."               0.30               0.019
(0 to 1)                                                                                                                              (0.37)             (0.027)
Perceived political efficacy mean effect                                                                                               0.00               0.055
                                                                                                                                      (1.00)             (0.066)
Panel B: Participation in Politics and Civic Affairs
Interested in public affairs (0-1) [AFB, WVS]                                                                                          0.26               -0.028
                                                                                                                                      (0.44)             (0.028)
Respondent intends to vote in the next presidential election (0-1)                                                                     0.48               -0.025
                                                                                                                                      (0.50)             (0.045)
Community group memberships                                                                                                            1.41               0.059
                                                                                                                                      (1.39)             (0.105)
Participation in politics and civic affairs mean effect                                                                                0.00               -0.038
                                                                                                                                      (1.00)             (0.073)
“Generally speaking, would you say that most people can be trusted or that you need to be very careful in dealing with                0.187               -0.018
people?” (0-1) [WVS]                                                                                                                 (0.390)             (0.025)
Panel C: Political Violence
“It is sometimes necessary to use violence in support of a just cause.” (0 to 1)                                                       0.47              0.030**
(vs. “The use of violence is never justified in politics.”) [AFB]                                                                     (0.18)             (0.012)

Notes: Each row is from a separate OLS regression. Significant at 90% (*), 95% (**), 99% (***) confidence. The outcome variable is regressed on the GSP
program (treatment) indicator, an indicator for student cohort, student age at time of the survey, the mean pre-program (2000) school test score, educational
attainment of each parent, and timing of the follow-up survey (coefficient estimates not shown). Standard errors are clustered by school. The sample is N=1,387.
Details on the mean effect analysis are in the text are in the text. The mean effect at the bottom of Panel A includes all variables in that panel, and the mean effect
in Panel B includes all variables except for the trust question. The sample size for the “intends to vote in the next presidential election” analysis falls to 963
because the question was only asked of those respondents old enough to vote in the next election. The types of community groups include: women’s groups;
farmer/agricultural groups; youth groups; water groups/well committees, credit, saving, or insurance groups; prayer or bible study groups; burial committees;
school committees or clubs; sports teams; other community group.




                                                                                                                                                                    49
                                            Table 7: Comparing experimental and non-experimental estimates
                                                                              Coefficient           Coefficient estimate Coefficient estimate       Hausman test
                                                                           estimate (s.e.) on       (s.e.) on normalized (s.e.) on normalized         p-value,
                                                                           program indicator        test score (2005-07) test score (2005-07)       H0:ßIV=ßOLS
                                                                                 OLS                       IV-2SLS                  OLS            (columns 2, 3)
                                                                                                       [Experimental]       [Non-experimental]
 Dependent variable:                                                                  (1)                      (2)                   (3)                 (4)
 Lack of autonomy index                                                           -0.181**                  -0.872*              -0.286***              0.11
                                                                                   (0.077)                  (0.493)               (0.078)
 Satisfaction with authority index                                                -0.239***                 -1.115**             -0.177***            <0.01***
                                                                                   (0.061)                  (0.494)               (0.055)
 “It is sometimes necessary to use violence in support of a just cause.”           0.030**                    0.146                -0.009              0.02**
 (0 to 1) (vs. “The use of violence is never justified in politics.”)              (0.012)                  (0.099)               (0.010)
 Ethnic identity is not “very important” (0-1)                                     -0.033                    -0.158                 0.001               0.11
                                                                                   (0.020)                  (0.105)               (0.013)
 Religious identity is not “very important” (0-1)                                   0.005                     0.023                -0.001               0.43
                                                                                   (0.006)                  (0.031)               (0.005)
 Democratic attitudes index                                                          0.058                    0.277               0.322***              0.82
                                                                                   (0.089)                  (0.355)               (0.051)
 Days read a newspaper in last week (0 to 7)                                        0.134*                   0.644*               0.258***              0.26
                                                                                   (0.074)                  (0.364)               (0.055)
 Political knowledge index                                                         0.203**                  0.975***              0.464***              0.08*
                                                                                   (0.085)                  (0.325)               (0.045)
 Perceived political efficacy index                                                 0.055                    0.265                 -0.033               0.31
                                                                                   (0.066)                  (0.346)               (0.050)
 Participation in politics and civic affairs index                                  -0.038                   -0.183                 0.017               0.56
                                                                                   (0.073)                  (0.363)               (0.068)
Notes: Each cell contains results from a separate regression. Significant at 90% (*), 95% (**), 99% (***) confidence. Details on the mean effect analysis are in
the text. Standard errors are clustered by school. The sample is N=1,387 for all dependent variables.
In column 1, the outcome variable is regressed on the GSP program (treatment) indicator, an indicator for student cohort, student age at time of the survey, the
mean pre-program (2000) school test score, educational attainment of each parent, and timing of the follow-up survey (coefficient estimates not shown). In
column 2, the outcome variable is regressed on the same explanatory variables except the GSP program indicator is replaced by the normalized test score (in
2005-2007) across all subjects, and the test score is instrumented by the GSP program indicator. In column 3, the normalized test score (in 2005-2007) across all
subjects is included as an explanatory variable but it is not instrumented, and the sample is restricted to the control group (N=664). Column 4 presents the
Hausman test results (p-value) on the hypothesis that the coefficient estimates are equal across columns 2 and 3 for each dependent variable.




                                                                                                                                                               50
                           Table 8: Comparing estimates in the full sample vs. among those with “low” baseline test scores
                                                                                                   Coefficient              Coefficient        Test of equality of
                                                                                                estimate (s.e.) on       estimate (s.e.) on   coefficient estimates
                                                                                                program indicator       program indicator,      in columns 1, 2
                                                                                                      OLS               baseline test score         (p-value)
                                                                                                                             < +2 s.d.
  Dependent variable:                                                                                      (1)                   (2)                   (3)
                                                                                                               **                    *
  Lack of autonomy mean effect                                                                         -0.204                 -0.176                  0.71
                                                                                                        (0.088)               (0.091)
  Ethnic identity is not “very important” (0-1)                                                          -0.024                -0.024                 0.99
                                                                                                        (0.024)               (0.025)
  Religious identity is not “very important” (0-1)                                                       -0.007                -0.005                 0.81
                                                                                                        (0.007)               (0.007)
  Democratic attitudes mean effect                                                                       -0.037                -0.062                 0.78
                                                                                                        (0.097)               (0.096)
  Days read a newspaper in last week (0 to 7)                                                             0.109                0.116                  0.95
                                                                                                        (0.097)               (0.105)
  Political knowledge mean effect                                                                         0.109                0.107                  0.90
                                                                                                        (0.094)               (0.097)
  Satisfaction with authority mean effect                                                              -0.181**                -0.147                 0.79
                                                                                                        (0.089)               (0.088)
  Perceived political efficacy mean effect                                                               0.083                 0.086                  0.92
                                                                                                        (0.077)               (0.081)
  Participation in politics and civic affairs mean effect                                               -0.144                 -0.138                 0.95
                                                                                                        (0.096)               (0.098)
  “It is sometimes necessary to use violence in support of a just cause.” (0 to 1)                       0.012                 0.006                  0.62
  (vs. “The use of violence is never justified in politics.”)                                           (0.013)               (0.013)
Notes: Each cell contains results from a separate regression. Significant at 90% (*), 95% (**), 99% (***) confidence. Details on the mean effect analysis are in
the text. Standard errors are clustered by school. The sample in column 1 consists of all individuals with baseline test score data (N=919). In column 2, the
sample is restricted to individuals with baseline normalized test scores less than +2 s.d. (N=881).
In columns 1 and 2, the outcome variable is regressed on the GSP program (treatment) indicator, an indicator for student cohort, student age at time of the survey,
the mean pre-program (2000) school test score, educational attainment of each parent, and timing of the follow-up survey (coefficient estimates not shown).
Column 3 presents the test results (p-value) on the hypothesis that the coefficient estimates are equal across columns 1 and 2 for each dependent variable. To
carry out this test, 1000 draws (with replacement) of sample size 899 were taken from the full baseline test score sample, and the regressions analogous to
column 2 were carried out. The p-values in column 3 correspond to the hypothesis that the coefficient estimates in column 2 are drawn from this distribution.




                                                                                                                                                               51
                                      Table 9: Effects in schools with different numbers of predicted GSP winners
                                                                                                       Coefficient              Coefficient estimate
                                                                                                    estimate (s.e.) on          (s.e.) on interaction
                                                                                                    program indicator          between the program
                                                                                                          OLS                 indicator and predicted
                                                                                                                                number of winners
                 Dependent variable:                                                                           (1)                         (2)
                 Lack of autonomy mean effect                                                               -0.194**                     0.005
                                                                                                            (0.096)                     (0.001)
                 Ethnic identity is not “very important” (0-1)                                              -0.039**                    0.005**
                                                                                                            (0.018)                     (0.002)
                 Religious identity is not “very important” (0-1)                                            -0.003                     -0.0004
                                                                                                            (0.007)                    (0.0006)
                 Democratic attitudes mean effect                                                             0.019                      -0.004
                                                                                                            (0.080)                     (0.010)
                 Days read a newspaper in last week (0 to 7)                                                  0.114                      -0.004
                                                                                                            (0.077)                     (0.007)
                 Political knowledge mean effect                                                             0.206**                     0.006
                                                                                                            (0.036)                     (0.009)
                 Satisfaction with authority mean effect                                                   -0.205***                     -0.001
                                                                                                            (0.063)                     (0.005)
                 Perceived political efficacy mean effect                                                     0.068                      0.002
                                                                                                            (0.069)                     (0.008)
                 Participation in politics and civic affairs mean effect                                     -0.024                      -0.008
                                                                                                            (0.074)                     (0.009)
                 “It is sometimes necessary to use violence in support of a just cause.” (0 to 1)            0.021**                   0.005***
                 (vs. “The use of violence is never justified in politics.”)                                (0.010)                     (0.001)
Notes: Each row contains results from a separate regression. Significant at 90% (*), 95% (**), 99% (***) confidence. Details on the mean effect analysis are in
the text. Standard errors are clustered by school. The sample is N=1,385 for all dependent variables.
The outcome variable is regressed on the GSP program (treatment) indicator, the GSP indicator interacted with the predicted number of GSP winners, an
indicator for student cohort, student age at time of the survey, the mean pre-program (2000) school test score, educational attainment of each parent, and timing
of the follow-up survey (coefficient estimates not shown). The predicted number of GSP winners is estimated in treatment group schools by regressing the actual
number of scholarship winners in the school on various quantiles of the baseline test score distribution for students in that school; the predicted number of
winners is then assigned to both treatment and control schools.




                                                                                                                                                              52
  UPPLEMEN
 SU      NTARY AP
                PPENDIX MATERIAL
                        M      LS [not inten
                                           nded for pu
                                                     ublication]

              Ap
               ppendix Figu
                          ure A1: Schoo
                                      oling and dem
                                                  mocracy trendds in Kenya

         Panel A:
                A Proportion of population
                                         n completing primary schoooling in Kennya,
      by birth co
                ohort and gend
                             der (1902-198
                                         80 birth cohoorts, source: 1999 Kenya C
                                                                               Census)




Paneel B: Freedom                          ndex in Kenyya and sub-Sahharan Africa (1973-2008),,
                m House Polittical Rights In
                              where “1” deenotes full deemocracy




                                                                                                  A1
 Appendix Figure A2: Girls Scholarship Program (GSP) Timeline (2000-2007)

  November 2000: Baseline academic tests for cohorts 1 and 2 in Busia District taken




January 2001: Schools invited to participate, lists of students enrolled in grades 5 and 6
            in all program schools compiled (Nschools=69, Nstudents=3292)




       March 2001: Randomization of schools into treatment and control groups
                   (using a computer random number generator)




                   Treatment                                        Control
          (Nschools=34, Nstudents=1640)                   (Nschools=35, Nstudents=1652)


 March 2001: Announcement of scholarship
       program in treatment schools;
  September and October 2001: Reminder
            meeting for parents
Ongoing student and teacher attendance checks



November 2001: Follow-up achievement tests for cohort 1 (Nschools=69, Nstudents=1211);
             winners announced and scholarship awards distributed




 May-July 2002: Background individual surveys collected for students in both cohorts




 November 2002: Follow up achievement tests for cohort 2 (Nschools=69, Nstudents=892);
              winners announced and scholarship awards distributed




   2005-2007: Follow up individual surveys collected (Nstudents=1756, and 1387 with
                   complete data matched to 2001 and 2002 data)




                                                                                             A2
Appendix B: Model appendix

This appendix contains some of the algebra and analysis underlying the discussion of the model

in section 7. Equation 7 implies that, in the absence of a merit scholarship program (as in our

control group), the variance of education will be equal to:

                                  B2   12 R2
(eqn. A1)                2H                            .
                                              4

This implies that the willingness to accept authority for person i at time 1 will be:

                                                         ,         ,
(eqn. A2)                 ,           ,                                    .

In the absence of a merit scholarship program, the variance of R1, (suppressing subscripts) is:
                                                                               ∗
(eqn. A3)                             ≡                       =

                                                                                       ∗                   ∗
                                                                                               2       ,
                                                              =

                                                              =                2           ,

                                                                               20                  ,
                                                              =

                                                              =        1

In the absence of a merit scholarship program, the covariance between H * and R1 will be:

                                          ∗
(eqn. A4)                         ,                 =                          ,

                                                    =              ,               ,


                                                    =

Taking the difference between equations 8 and 9 in section 7, allows us to estimate the bias, and

solve for 1 in terms of known parameters:

                                                     2 1 R2
(eqn. A5)               OLS   IV 
                                                   B2  12 R2

                                                                                                               A3
This implies 1 is

                                   2  OLS   IV var(H * )
(eqn. A6)                 1 
                                                 R2

It is possible to solve for 1 based on observed parameters. To do so, we first rewrite equation

A3 and then substitute the variance of R0 into equation A6:

                                    2R   2 H2
                           2R       1



(eqn. A7)                           1  1 

                               2  OLS   IV  H2
(eqn. A8)                 1 
                                   2R1   2 H2
                                          1  1 

                     2  OLS   IV  H2 
To simplify let z                         ,
                      R1    H 
                            2     2 2




(eqn. A9)                             1

Solving for 1 yields:

                                       1
                          1 
(eqn. A10)                         1      
                                      
                                     z

Re-writing yields equation 10 in the text.




                                                                                                   A4
