                              PAPER SERIES
              NBER WORKING




                    INTEREST AND CONSUMPTION
             REAL


                       Robert E.   Hall


                                          1694
                              Paper No.
                    Working




                                        RESEARCH
                            OF ECONOMIC
            NATIONAL BUREAU          Avenue
                  1050 Massachusetts
                                   02138
                     Cambridge, MA
                         August 1985




                                                          assistance
                                         for outstanding for hel pful
                          Valerie Ramey
I thank John
              Caskey arid     Hammond and Stephen   LeRoy
                                                  of the NBER's
             Grossman, Peter        here is part
and Sanford      research reported                  opinions expressed
comments. The                  Fluctuations. Any                  of
                   in Economic                   National  Bureau
                                   those of the
 research program author and not
 are those of the
Economic Research.
                                             NBER Working Paper 1694
                                             August 1985




                   Real Interest and Consumption



                                  ABSTRACT




   ()ie of the important determ1rnts of the    respcre of       savir and

corunpucn to the real Interest rate Is    the elasticity   of   Intertemporal
cLsUtutIcn4  1t elasticity can be measured by the respore d the rate
of thare of consunption to thares in the expected real interest rate4
A detailed study of data for the twentleth-centu-y United States         sf nc
stror evidence tft the elasticity of Intertemporal sist1tutlon is
positive. Earlier studies flrsz!lng sthstantialiy positive elasticities are
chew to sIfer from a bias related to the timing ofirtrinental
variables.

                                   Robert E. Hall
                                   Hoover Institution
                                   Stanford Univereity
                                   Stanford, CalifornIa 94305
Irro&c Ion


   A higher expected real Interest rate makes consumer's defer consumpt1on
everything else held constant.      The magnitude of this lntertemporal substitution
effect is one of the central questions of macroeconomics.         If consumers can be
induced to postpone consumption by modest increases    in Interest rates, then
    (1)   movements of interest rates will make consumption decline 'kenever other
components of aggregate demand rise--total output will not be much infknced by

changes In those components,
    (2) the dead-weight loss from the taxation of Interest is Important,
    (3) the burden of the national debt or unfuided social security Is relatively
unimportant,
    (4) consumption will   move along with real Interest rates over the business cycle


to name four of the many Issues that rest on the intertemporal substitutability of
consumption.
   This paper attempts to estimate parameters of the representative individual's
utility function, rather than parameters of the consumptIon function or savings
function, As Robert Lucas (1976) has pointed out, there may not be anything that
could properly be called a consumption or savings function—the relation between




                                                         1
consumption, Income, and interest rates depends on the wider macroeconomic
context and may not be stable over time, even thot.h consumers are alwa trying to
maximize the same utility function. The techniques of this paper are more rthcst
with respect to this kind of instability than are standard econometric models of

consumption and savings.
    The essential Idea of the paper Is the following: Consumers plan to change their
consumption from one year to the next by an amount that depends on their
expectations of real Interest rates. Actual movements of consumption differ from
plarned movements by a completely unpredictable random variable that Indexes all of
the information available next year that was not incorporated in the planning process
the year before. If expectations of real Interest rates shift, then there should be a
corresponding shift in the rate of change of consumption. The magnitude of the
response of consumption to a change In real Interest expectations measures the
lntertemporal elasticity of skst1tution.     All of this is set up In a formal
econometric model where the assumptions are formalized and the estimation
techniques rigorously Justified.
    Over the postwar period, there have been downward and upward shifts In the
expected real return from common stocks, Treasury bills, and savings accounts, the
Investments that presumably set the relevant real Interest rate for most consumers.
Over the same period, there has been only small shifts in the rate of growth of




                                                       2
consumption. Consequently, all of the estimates presented In this paper of the
interternporal elasticity of sstitut1on are small. Most of them are also quite
precise, siport1ng the strong conclusion that the elasticity Is unlikely to be much
above 0.1, and may well be zero.




1. Theory   of the consumer tider zcerta1n real Interest rates



    Finence theory has examined the role of the cor.surner In an economy with one or
more securities with stochastic returns. Douglas Breeden (1977,1979) was the
pioneer In what has become known as the consumption capital asset pr1c1r model.
Hansen and Sirgieton (1983) provIde an application of the model to macroeconomic
consumption data.    Mankiw, Rotemberg, and Suimers (1985) have extended the
model to Include labor supply. The litereture on consunption and stochastic asset
returns has suffered from a seriot. problem from the point of view of the
rnacroeccnomlst interested specifically In the issue of lntertemporal substitution.
In the lltereture, consumers are viewed as maximizing the expected value of an
lntertemporal utility ftrction,
(1.1)




                                                       3
The parameter a is identified as the coefficient of relative risk aversion. However,
from the theory of the consumer under certainty, it is clear that a controls
lntertemporal substitution as well. The Intertemporal elasticity of substitution, cr
is just the reciprocal of a. If consumers are highly risk averse, they must have low
Interternporal substitution as well.
    Larry Selden (1978) has argued that expected utility models are Inherently ill-
suited to the characterization of intertemporal choice uer uncertainty. The logic
of expected utility preclu:Ies the needed flexibility to describe a consumer's views
about uncertainty and about consumption in different time periods (or, for that
matter, about consumption of different commodities). Selden has proposed a more
general framework, based on what he calls the ordinal certainty equivalent (OCE)

representation hypothesis
    In essence, the OCE approach characterizes the consumer's views about
uncertainty through a one-period utility function, Vtc). The more concave is V, the
more risk averse is the consumer. But the curvature of V has no bearing on the
consumer's willingness to substitute consnpt1on from one period to another.
Rather, Its role Is to convert the stochastic c Into its certainty equivalent, c,.
Specifically,    Is defined by


(1.2)           V(c) = EtV(c)1




                                                       4
The Intertemporal aspects of preferences are captured by another utility function, U.
Thocgh Selden deals with the general case where U is not separable across time
periods, this paper will deal exclusively with the special case of separability. In
that case, the consumer's lntertemporal preferences are described by the utility
fuict ion,


(1.3)            eótu(c)

A consumer with a sharply concave u will a'Id Intertemporal substitution and will
strorgly prefer a consumption path that Is approximately equal in all time periods.
    For the case of two periods, with period I consumption certain, Selden obtains
results that support his claim to a substantial advance over the expected utility
approach..   First, as long as the consumer's preferences about second-period
uncertainty admit an expected utility representation, conditional on the value of first-
period conslonptlon, there exists an OCE representation of his complete preferences.
Second. any expected utility preference ordering has an OCE representation, but
many Interesting OCE orderings do not have an expected utility representation.
Third, and most relevant for this paper, for the OCE ordering based on a V function
with constant relative risk aversion and a u function with constant intertemporal
elasticity




                                                        5
of substitution, the only member that admits an expected utility representation is
one where the elasticity of substitution is the reciprocal of the coefficient of
relative risk aversion.
    Selden's OCE approach lends itself to empirical work along the lines of Hansen
and Singleton (1983). In fact, the OCE procedure for estimating the elasticity of
substitution Is exactly the same as the procedure employed by Haren and Singleton
to estimate the reciprocal of the coefficient of relative risk aversion. From the
standpoint of the OCE representation, Hansen and Singleton have estimated the
elasticity of Intertemporal ahstituuon alone, not some average value of the
lntertemporal and risk aversion parameters.
    For the purposes of what follows, it is not necessary to make specific
assumptions about the market setting of the max1m1zt1on. At one extreme, the
consumer could face a full set of markets In contingent commodities, and then the
budget constraint would say that the sum of all the consumer's demands for the
contingent claims valued at market prices would equal his endowment. At the other
extreme, the consumer could be Robinson Crtoe, with a single risky investment in
a real asset. Then the budget constraint would say that his holdings of the real asset
could never be negative.     For a further discussion of this point, see Sanford
Grossman and Robert Shlller (1982).
   In any case, one of the many choices facing the ccnsuner is to spend a little less




                                                        6
In year t-i,   invest   the savings in one asset, and spend the stochastic proceeds in
year t. &çpose that a unit Investment in year t-1 has the stochastic return e      in
year t. At the point of maximum expected utility, the consumer will have thocht
throch all possibilities of this kind. In particular, the consumer will have solved
the maximization problem,


(1.4)              Max [u(ctj) +     et ut:c)]
                   °t-i
    sLbject to


    U) certainty equivalence,


(1.5)              V(c) = E[V(c)J

    and



    Ui) the budget constraint,


(1.6)              c cr +        e     (* - ct_i)




                                                        7
 Here1 c*t and c* are given levels of consumption and c_ and c are feasible
variations. Taking the derivative with respect to c1 (evaluated at c_ =
                                                                        c*_ and
        c*) and substituting the certainty equivalence definition and the bxlget
constraint gives the first-order condition,




(1
             E[e
                 r   V(Cf))
                        I      ( ——Ve uc
                              u1c1
                 V'(c)




This formula is the precise mathematical formulation of the principle that the
marginal rate of substitution should equal the ratio of the prices of present and
future consumption. Under uncertainty1, it Is not true that the expected marginal
rate of substitution should equal the expected price ratio (the discount function),
Rather, the appropriate discount rate is the risk-adjusted one described by the first
factor In equation 1.7; It Is the expectation of the product of the discount function
and the marginal stochastic utility next period. This expression is related to the
1consurnption betaTM of modern finance theory.

     The reallocation condition of equation 1.7 is the generalization of the proposition
investigated in my earlier paper (Hall (1978)) that marginal utility should be a




                                                         B
trended random welk when real Interest rates are constant over time.          Further
progress In translating the reallocation condition into consequences for observed
variables requires assumptions about the distributions of the random influences. A
set of assumptions related to those Introduced by Breeden (1977) seems a natural
approach. First, assune that the real Interest rate, r_i conditional on information
available in year t- I, obeys the normal distribution with mean      and variance
Because interest rates as they are defined In this paper can be Indefinitely negative,
the normal distribution Is a rtural assumption.            Second, assume that the
consumer's rule for processing new information about income and Interest rates
makes the distribution of consumption log-normal, conditional on information
available last year; that Is, log ct is normal with mean and variance         Because
the new information arriving In year t has a bearing on both the actual return to
Investments maturing in t and on the consumer's long-term well being estimated In
that year, the two random variables rj and log c will be correlated; I will let
Vrc stand for their covariance.
    Breeden assumed, along with all other workers in this area, that the coefficient
of relative risk aversion and the Intertemporal elasticity of sthsututlon were the
reciprocals of one another.       Following Selden, I will asszne that the two are
constant1 but are independent parameters. The coefficient of relative risk aversion




                                                       9
is a:

                                    1-a
                    V(c) =
 (1.8)
                                    ía
and   the lntertemporal elasticity of sJstitution Is Cr:


                            C
                                1-1 /r
(1.9)                uCe)



                                                                      rr je V
      Then the random variable In the definition of the consumption beta
                                                                                  (ct)
is log-normal. The rule that the expectation of the exponential of a normal random
variable with mean p and variance v is              makes it straightforward to evakte
the consumption beta. To finish the derivation of the econometrically ueful form of
the allocation condition, I will redefine c to be the log of consunption In the rest of
the paper. The certainty-equivalent cosumption is

                    —-          4




Note that the certainty equivalent log-consumption exceeds or falls short of the mean

of the log of consumption as a is below or above one. However, the certainty
equivalent is always less than the log of the mean of consuiiption, ich is




                                                           10
WI!)               +



Now applying the lntertemporal allocation condition and substituting the value of the
certainty-equIvalent of consumptIon gives the relatIon between the expected value of
log—consumption in period t given consumption in period t-I and the mean of the
distribution of the real Interest rate:


(1.12)           t=     O•'tI + c,_1 + k

Here k Is a constant that depends on the variances and covarlance of r and c. I will
assume that it does not change significantly over time.
    The condition just derived says that the mean level of consumption In period t
generated by the consumer's choice as of period t-1 Is the level of consumption
ChoSen for period t-1 plus an adjustment positively related to the mean of the real
interest rate plus a constant. The coefficient that governs the influence of the
expected real Interest rate is precisely the elasticity of lntertemporal substitution.
A high value of cr means that, when the real interest rate Is expected to be highs the
consumer will actively defer consumption to the later period.
    The condition Is a constraint on the consumption rule. It says that an optimal
rule will wind up choosing a level of consumption In period t, after the new




                                                          11
 information becomes available, whose mean obe this restriction. The condition is
 not a complete description of consumption behavior irider t.rcertainty. It does not
 describe the actual amout by which consznpt1on charges when new Information
 about Income or asset returns becomes available.
     Theactual log of consumption in period t, c1,            from the mean,       by a
 completely upred1ctable surprise, wtiich I will call   By the hypotheses already
stated, Et is a normal random variable. The two equations of interest can be put In
the form of a bivariate regression,


(1.13)           c=             ÷   c_1 + k +

(1.14)           r_j =    rj    ÷


The random variable     also has the normal distribution.
    if the expected real Interest rate,          is observed directly, then the key
parameter a, the lntertemporal elasticity of sibstituuon, can be estimated simply by
regressing the log—change In consumption on the expected real rate. That regression
also has the property that no other variable known In period t- I belongs in the
regression. The strong testable implication of the theory is that the mean of the
rate of growth of consumption is shifted only by the mean of the real interest rate.




                                                        12
 Information available in year t-1 is helpfUl In predicting the rate of growth of
 consumption only to the extent that it predicts the real Interest rate. This testable
Implication Is the logical extension of the one derived In my earlier paper i.HaU
(1 978)) nier constancy of real Interest rates. In that case1 no variable kno' In
year t-1 should help predict the rate of growth of consumption.
    In the CXI framework, the bivariate relation between consumption and real
Interest rates does not reveal anything about risk aversion. In order to infer
anything about risk aversion, more than one asset must be considered. Estiniation of
the risk aversion parameter would be possible in a multivariata system with the
real returns to two or more assets. Then the magnitudes of the risk premiums
together with the correlations of the returns with consumption would provide
estimates of the coefficient of relative risk aversion.
    Hansen and Singleton (1983) studIed the Joint distribution of the rate of growth
of consunpuon and asset returns In the conventional expected intertemporal utility
framework. They do not mention lntertemporai substitution in their discussion at
all. They identify the single critical parameter they estimate as the coefficient of
relatalve risk aversion. Their statistical model Is the same as the one derived
here. Their estimation teth-iique Involves, in effect, regressing the rate of change
of consiznptlon on expected real asset returns and interpreting the coefficient as the
reciprocal of the coefficient of relative risk aversion. In their framework, as I




                                                          13
 mentioned earlier, the coefficient is also the lntertemporal elasticity of
 substitution.
     It appears that a better interpretation of Hansen and Sirgieton's estimated
 coefficient is the intert.emporal elasticity of substitution, not the coefficient of
 relative risk aversion. The OCE framework provides the
                                                                simplest means for
 distinguishing the two, and the coefficient is unambiguously the Intertemporal one.
The earlier version of this paper (Hail (1981)) constructed an argument within the
expected utility framework that reached the same conclusion,          Moreover, simple
economic Intuition suggests that the rate of change ofcorsunption over time is more
likely to reveal something about intertemporal substitution then about risk aversion.
    Hansen and Singleton1 and Grossman and Shiller (19821 before them, are on
firm ground In treating the differences in retcxns among assets as revealing
something about risk aversion, Indeed, Hansen and Singleton's rejection of the cross-
equation restrictions in a model combining consxnptlon growth with ret.u-ns on
multiple assets may well occu' because the intertemporal elasticity of substitution
Is different from the reciprocal of the coefficient of relative risk aversion.




                                                         14
2. Expectot tons of the real i!2erest rate

    The    measurement of the expected real interest rate is one of the empirical
issues Investigated In this paper. Two basic approaches are taken. First, I study
the change in consumption over a period for which survey data on expected price
changes are available. The expected real interest rate Is the market nominal rate
for an lnstrtunent of suitable term, adjusted for taxes, less the expected rate of
change of the price level. Real returns from the stock market can also be used In
this framework, because survey data on expected nominal stock prices are available.
       The second approach relates the conditional mean of the real Interest rate,
to observed variables known to consumers at the time that they choose
                                                                            c.     Recall
thet        is the mean of the subjective distribution for the real Interest rate held by
the typical consinner at the time consumption decisions are made for year t-1.
What I will call the conventlonal speclf1cat1on' for expectations has been employed

frequently In macroeconomic models derived from rational expectations and, in
particular, uerlies the recent work of Hansen and Singleton.            The conventional
specification says that the mean of the subjective distribution Is a linear
combination of observed variables:


 (2.1)           it_i = x_1fi




                                                          15
 and the coefficients, 9, are known In advance. Under this specification, the complete
 model of expectations and consumption becomes a simple application of bivarlate
 regression with parameter constraints across the equations.      Alternatively, the
 same estimation technique can be thought of as instrumental variables applied to the
 consumption equation, with the determinants of the expected real rate as the
 instruments. The alteritive is the interpretation offered by Hansen and Singleton.




3. Time aggregotki


    The basic equation for the rate of change of consumption,


(3.1)



refers to consumption in discrete time. From the derivation In sectIon 1, it Is also
apparent that it applies to observations on the Instantaneous flow of consumption
measured at two points of time in a setç where time is measured continuously.
Hover, it does not correctly characterize the behavior of time averages of
consumption. If c is the average flow of consumption over an interval of continuous
time, then the relation of Its rate of change to the real interest rate Is more




                                                       16
complex.
       As with other aggregation problems In econometrics, time aggregation for the
left-hand variable cazes only mild problems. If the right-hand variable is obser'1'ed
continuously, or at least quite frequently, then the aggregation of the left-hand
variable In effect defines an appropriate way to aggregate the rlghthand variable.
The problem of time aggregation becomes much more difficult if only a time average
of the right-hand variable Is available tsse Grossman, Melino, and Shiller (1985)).
However, In the present case, interest rates and rates of inflation are measured
monthly or more frequently over the whole time span for which any data at all are
available for consumption, so the time aggregation problem Is readily soluble.
       Suppose that only a time average of consumption is observed, say once a year.
Each month, the expected real interest rate Is know call it t,m with t the year
and m the month. There is an uobeerved °t,m each month, and it evolves as


(3.2)              ct,m =             +
                            t,m-i
Now write out c -l             c                                               . Note
                                t,m as increments over the initial value ct-
                         and
                  t ,m
that



(3.3)              c        °t,rn




                                                         17
 Then a little manipulation shows that the change In aggregate consumption is


 (3.4)              c t= 12(m-i)(cT4
                                   t ,m-1 t-m) +
                              47
                                   U2-m+i)(ir          +
                             m1                 t,m—       t,rn

 Define the time aggregates of the expected real Interest rate and tbe random
element:



                     =
                             (m_l)ti rn1 +         (l2m+lfrtmi

(3.6)           t        Lm-1)c11 m +


Then the relation among the time aggregates Is


(3.7)                    =           +


Two properties of the aggregate random element         call for note. First, as Holbrook
Wor{ung derived In a famot.s paper (1960),        Is not white noise; rather, it obe a
first-order moving average process with serial correlation




                                                            18
  0.25. Second,     Is likely to be correlated with r_1 or with Its determinants or
 instruments, even if these variables are uicorrejated at the monthly level.




 4. Da

     Followir are brief definitions of the data series used in this stuiy:
     c: log of real consumption of nondurables (riot 1ncludir services) In year,
 quarter, or month t, from the U.S. national income arid product accounts. Available
 monthly from 1959, quarterly from 1947, and annually from 1919. For derivation
before 1929, see Flail (1985).

    rt:     realized real retT.n'n after taxes on a investment in the Standard and Poor's
500 stock portfolio, liquidated at a later date corresponding to the
                                                                     consurnpuon
variable,
    OR

realized real return after taxes from a savings account 9arnir the regulated
passbook interest rate,
    OR

realized real retum after taxes from holding a sequence of four 90-day Treasury
bills over the year.




                                                         19
    h: log of the S&P 500 index of share pr1ces deflated.
    dt: dividend yield of the S&P 500.
    zt: nominal yield of Treasury bills discount basis
         nominal passbook interest rate in the third quarter
    Pt: log of the Implicit deflator for consumption of nondo-ables (used as deflator
for all deflated variables).


    After—tax magnitudes were calculated ueing the effective marginal rate under the
federal personal income tax from Barro and Sahasakul (1983). The full nominal
amot.rit of dividends and interest was assumed to be taxed at this effective marginal
rate. Capital gains and losses were assumed to be untaxed, on the grounds that the
combination of low statutory rates, taxation only at realization, and forgiveness of
accrued gains at death make the effective rate close to zero. All data for the study
are listed In an appendix available from the author.




                                                       20
 S. Summary of results


    Following is a brief summary of the various attempts I have made to estimate
the intertemporal elasticity of substitution by regressing the rate of change of
consumption on expected real Interest rates.
    The first set of results uses inflation and stock price expectations recorded in
the Livingston survey. In this work, the expected real return Is measured directly
and the elasticity of substitution estimated by simple regression. For real returns
in the stock market, the results are informative——the elasticity of substitution is
close to zero and the estimate has a small standard error. For savings accounts and
Treasury bills, the estimates are almost useless because of large standard errors.
In these cases, the lack of variation In the expected real return makes it difficult to
estimate the elaslucity.
    A second set of results uses annual changes in consumption starting in 1923.
The real return on Treasury bills is aggregated from monthly data as suggested in
section 3. Because this tecfnique uses a longer span of data and uses all of the data
for each year, the standard error of the estimate of the intertemporal elasticity Is
mu± smaller. The point estimate of the elasticity is negative. All positive values
lie outside the 95 percent confidence Interval.
   A third set of results reconciles the findings of this paper—that the




                                                       21
intertemporal elasticity is around zero—with Hansen and Slngletons finding of large
positive elasticities. Some of the more thvious explanations are rejected: The
discrepancy is not caused by their failure to consider the problem of time
aggregation.    Rather, almost all of the difference comes from their use of
lnstrtu-nents that are correlated with the innovation in the real return.
   A fourth set of results examines Lawrence Surnmers (l982 findings of
lnterternporal elasticities of around one, using querterly postwar data. Again, us of
properly timed Instruments reverses his conclusion.
    My overall conclusion from all four sets of results is that the evidence points in
the direction of a low value for the lntertemporal elasticity. The valuemay even be
zero and Is probably not above 0.2.

   Before plu-.1rg into formal econometric results, I think It is useful to Indicate
why the data point toward the answer that pervades of the the results of this paper,
namely that the intertemporal elasticity of substitution is small. Some simple facts
about the data are apparent just by taking averages over five-year Intervals. The
averaging removes most of the random expectation errors but turns out to leave a
good deal of variation in the real interest rate. Figure 1 shows the real after-tax
return on Treasury bills and the rate of change of consumption for Intervals from
1921 thro4i 1940 and 1946-83 (the last interval Is only three years long).




                                                         22
                          ?ercent cháñge in constiption

                                    6


                                    5                    +



                                  4


                                                         ii
                                                         4
                               ii
                                                                  4
                                                 4
                                        4                                 4



                               I
                                                                      4



                             —1

                                    •        I

                               -75 -5       -25      0            25 510 7,5
                                                         Ra1 intpi'pct        atp.




Figure 1. FIve-year averages of the real r8u.n- on Treasury bills (horizontal axis)
arid the rate of change of consumption (vertical axis), 1921-40 and 1946-83.



   Except for three of the observations, the rate of change of consumption is close
to Its average value of a little below three percent per year, When consumption was
near average, however, the real interest rate varied from -5 percent to +5 percent.




                                                             23
 The only observation combining a high real interest rate and rapid
                                                                       consumption
 growth was for 1921-25, in the upper right-hand corner. The other observation with
 high constnmpuon growth was for 1936-40, when the real interest race was almost
 exactly zero. The period 1931-35 had a high real interest rate and
                                                                    slightly negative
 consumption change. As a general matter, Figure 1 makes a fairly strong case that
 periods of high real Interest rates have not typically been periods of high
 consurnpuon growth. Rather1 consumption growth has generally stuck fairly close to
 Its average value no matter what has happened to real interest rates.




6. Resu'ts based on the LMngstcE srvey




    Each November, Joseph Livingston asks a panel or economists to predict the
values of a long list of economic variables for the following June. Among the
variables are the Consumer Price Index and the S&F 400 stock price index. From
these, It is possible to construct three measures of expected real returns that are
relevant for corsujn er's:




                                                       24
     Treasury bilLs. The startir point Is the market value of a bill maturing in June

as reported in November. All elements of the expected real rate are km except
for the marginal tax rate, wf'ich is highly predictable. I computed the expected real
return at as


                  —1 2—mzN
                 r—
1.0.1)              og27

Here z Is the nominal ren measured in cLtscotrt form at an annual rate (as a
decimal), in is the marginal tax rate, N Is the known price level in November1 and
p3 is the expected price level In June.

    Savings accounts. Nominal bank rates, q, not entirely known in advance, but are
highly predictable. I compute the expected real after-tax return as


(6.2)                   !og[(e7/"2 mU—     —

                                               97/12q)PN]




                                                       25
     Stocks.       I treat the dividend yield, d, as known and use the
                                                                         survey data for the
 expected share price. The expected real after-tax return is


 [6.3)
                            log[((1-m)dNJ
                                       +-) J


 Here       is tt known stock price index in November and        is the expected index for
 the following June. The results from regre1ng the log-change in ccnsunpuon on
 these three measures of the expected real return are:


        Security               Estimate of
                              (standard error)

    TreasLrj bills             0.346


   Savings accxrts            0.271
                              [0.330)

   Stocks                      0.066
                              [0.050)



The results for treasury bills and savings accounts are hardly conclusive.             The
variation In the expected real returns over the 24 7—month periods In the data Is




                                                          26
 inadequate to provide any izeful information about the elasticity of substltuUon, c'.
 But.   for the stock market, the results are conckslvg. The estimate of c Is close to
 zero and the standard error Is small as well. The confidence Interval for cr excludes
 all values that correspond to strong lntertemporal substitution.




7. Resufts from (Ir)uat doto with cslstcnt time aggregat!cr




    Annual averages of consumption are available starting jt after World War L
Monthly data on the realized return on treasury bills can be calculated for the same
period. Aggregation of the real retin'ii data to annual rates, as described In sectIon 3
makes it possible to estimate the lntertemporal elasticity of substitution from a
much longer historical record with much more variance in expected real returns.
Thoh there are good reasons to doubt their accuracy, ordinary least squares
results are a good starting point. The regression coefficient for the annual average
of real retur with the arrl log—change in consumption as the dependent variable
is, for the years 1924 to 1940 and 1950 to 1983:


          Estimate of a:     -0.339
                              tO. 104)




                                                        27
 Recall that the disturbance in this regression has a theoretical serial correlation of
 0.25. The Durbln-Watson statistic is 1.64, close to its theoretical value. After
 making the appropriate correction for the first-order moving average process, the
 standard error of the regression coefficient rose by about 10 percent and the value of
 the estimate was hardly changed. For this reason, I did not try to make any further
 corrections for serial correlation in the other results.
    Ordinary least squares Is not a suitable estimator for two reasons. First, after
 time aggregation, the disturbance is correlated with the right-hand variable. The
 correlation would exist even if the expected real interest rate were measured
correctly; nothing in the theory rules out the possibility that an event that brings an
ward jump In consumption early in the year will not also cause an expected real
interest rate to rise later in the >ar. Second, when the realied real rate Is used In
place of the expected real rate, the difference, v, is probably correlated with the
surprise In consumption. For both reasons, an lnstrtnnental variables estimator Is
required.
   The timing of the instruments turns out to be critical, If the data measured the
istantaneo(E flow of consumption at two Isolated points,, any variable known at the
time that c1 was chosen would be eligible as an Instrument. However, when
                                                                               ctj is
an arnual average, it is apparent that any variable measured during calendar year t- I
can be   correlated with the disturbance, E. 'JT' most recent permissable instrtznent




                                                        28
 is one measured in December of
                                    year t-2. Annual aggregates for year t-2 and earlier
 are usable, but not those for year t-I.    Accordingly, I used the following as
 instruments: the change In arnial log-consumption in year t-2, the level of the
 average real return over year t-2, and the nomiri return in December of year t—2
    The result from tv—stage least sqros      is

       Estimate of cr:   -0.455
                          (0.186)


The finding of a negative value of the lntertemporal elasticity of substitution was not
sensitive to the choice of Instruments, as long as endogenous variables from
                                                                               year t-I
were exclu:ied, Separate estimates for the pre— and post-war periods showed that
the estimate was somewhat negative in the earlier period and positive for the later
period. However, the pooled estimate clearly rejects all positive values of u. It
simply cannot be said that the relation between the real retu-n and the rate of change
of consumption s.çports strong lntertemporal substitution.




                                                       29
 8. Results based on recert morhly data


    Hansen and SIngleton (1983) obtain results whIch can be Interpreted as evIdence
 of large values for ci. A1thoih I have not attempted to reproduce their results
exactly, simple lnstrumentaj estimates do give high estimates of cr, espclally over
the particular time period they studied.
                                       For example, for data from July 1959
throh December 1978, with the real rate lagged two, three, and for months and
the rate of change of consumption lagged one, two, and three months as instruments,
I obtain:


            Estimate of ci:     1.342
                               (0.361)


Incorporaurg data throch December of 1983, 1 still get a fairly high value:


            Estimate of ci:   0.668
                              t0 .235)


Hover, the use of the immediately lagged change in log-consumption as an
instrument, following Hansen—Singleton, is not permitted In the framework of this




                                                      30
paper. Section 3 showed that last years change In consumption depends on some of
the same random disturbances as this years change. The most recent change In
consumption adniissable as an Instrument Is the one lagged two years.     Dropping
     from the list of instruments reduces the estimate of c dramatically:


     stimateofc: 0.207
                   (0.370)



   For the stock market, use of recent monthly data does not change the conck1on
that the estimate of the elasticity Is reliably low:


   Estimate of o -0.060
                   (0.051)

Large fluctuations occurred over the period from 1959 through 1983 In the expected
real return from the stock market, not matched by corresponding changes in the rate
of change of consumption. The monthly results for the stock market strongly confirm
the results from 7-month changes in the earlier study with the Livingston data.




                                                       31
 9. Results based on postwar quarterly data




    Lawrence Summers (1982) presents results to support the view that the
 lntertemporal elasticity of consumption is substantial. In a subseqnt paper
 (Summers (1984)), he has cited his flrsiings in making a case for the Interest-
 elasticity of saving: .available evidence tends to suggest that savings are likely to
 be interest elastic. I find in the more reliable estimates In
                                                                   my working paper
ISummers (1982)J values of the Intertemporal elasticity of substitution wtiich
cluster at the high end of the range EvarE and I considered tabove onel. Similar
estimates are fowi..by EIansen-Sirpaleton. Where Investigators find low estimates of
intertemporal elasticty of substitution, it is ust.lly because of the difficulty in
modelling ex ante rates of return on corporate stock.'
   I have not tried to duplicate Sunlmers*
                                             findings exactly. With postwar quarterly
data on coneumption and real after-tax yields on Treastry bills I have obtained the
following estimate of cr using the same inappropriate instruments as Summers,
namely the real yield, the inflation rate, and the rate of change of consumption dated
t-1 and t-2:




                                                         32
                   Estimate of a     0.234
                                     (.120)


 However, deletion of the 1rtruments known to be correlated with the disturbance
 reverses the finding of an uamb1guously positive a:


                   Estimate ofa     -.151
                                    (0.170)




10. Ccrc1usjoris



   My Investigation has shown little basis for a conclusion that the behavior of
aggregate cornpt1on In the United States in the twentieth century reveals an
Important positive value of the lntertemporal elasticity of substitution. All
investigators have agreed that the covarlatlon of stock market retin- and
consumption did not suggest that consumption rises more rapidly in times of high
expected real returrs In the stock market. Earlier evidence basied on interest-
bearir s9ct.-it1s suct as Treasury bills had sgsted       values of a as high as one.
However use of appropriate lnstr.inents reverses this finding. Moreover, extension
of tf investigation to pre-war years strengthens the evidence that periods of high
expected real Interest rates have not been periods of rapid growth of consumptIon.




                                                     34
 Rfercnces


Robert J. Bar and Chaipet Sahasakul, "Measu-Ing the Average Marginal Tax Rate
from the Individual Income Tax,u Journal of Business 56: 419-452, Ctober 1983


Dot..glas Breeden, PO dissertation, Gradite School of Btiness, Stanford University,
December 1977.

_____________ "An Intertemporal Asset Pricing Model with Stochastic Consumption
and Investment Opportu1ties,: Journal of Ftnancial Econom!cs 7: 265-296, 1979


Sanford Grossman and Robert Shiller, "Consumption Correlatedness and Risk
Measurement in Economies with Non-traded Assets and Heterogeneo Information,"
Journal of Fnanciai Economics 10:195-210, 1982


Sanford Grossman, Angelo Melino, and Robert Shlller, "Estimating the Contiruous
Time Consumption Based Asset Pricing Model," Working Paper 1643, National
Bureau of Economic Research, Jtxie 1985.


Robert E. Hall, "Stochastic Implications of the Life Cycle-Permanent Income
Hypothesis: Theory and Evidence," Journal of Pol!tzcal Economy 86:971-988,




                                                      35
December 1978.



             ulntertemporal Substituuon in Corunpt1on," Workfl- Paper 720,
National Bureau of Economic Research, July 1981


___________ "The Role of Cocumption In Economic Fluctuations" forthcoming In the

proceedirgs of the National Bureau of Economic Research conference on business
cycles, Robert J. Gordon, ed., 1986


Lars Peter Hansen and Kerneth Sir1eton, "Stochastic Consumption, Risk Aversion,
and the Temporal Behavior of Asset Returns," Journal of Fol!ttcol Economy 91:249-
265, March 1983


Robert E. Lucas, Jr., "Econometric Policy Evatuaucn: A Critique," In K. Brunner
and A. Meltzer (eds.) The Ph!ll!ps Curve and Labor Markets, volune I In the

Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Plic Policy, North-Holland, 1976


N. Gregory Mankiw, Julio Rotem berg, and Lawrence Summers, °lntertemporal
Schstitution in Macroeconomics," Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcomir,
1985




                                                     36
Larry Selden, HA New Representation of Prefererxes over 'Certain X Uncertain'
Corumption Pairs: The 'Ordinal Certainty Equivalent' Hypothesis," Econometrica
46:1045-1060, September 1978


Lawrence Summers, "Tax Policy, the Rate of Return, and Savings," Working Paper
995, National Bureau of Economic Researth, September 1982


__________-' "The After-Tax Rate of Return Affects Private Savings," American
Eccnomtc Review Papers and Proceedings 74:249-253, May 1984



Holbrook Working, 'Note on the Correlation of First Differences of Averages In a
Random Chain," Econometrtca 28:916-918, October 1960




                                                      37
