                                       NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           LIFTING THE DOMESTIC VEIL:
THE CHALLENGES OF EXPORTING DIFFERENTIATED GOODS ACROSS THE DEVELOPMENT DIVIDE

                                               Alejandro Artopoulos
                                                    Daniel Friel
                                                Juan Carlos Hallak

                                               Working Paper 16947
                                       http://www.nber.org/papers/w16947


                             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                                             April 2011




      We thank Facundo Albornoz, Sebastián García Dastugue, Ernesto Gore, Ricardo Hausmann, Andrés
      Rodriguez-Clare, Christian Ruzzier, Peter Schott, Ernesto Stein, Jon Vogel, seminar participants at
      San Andrés and Yale, and participants at various conferences for their helpful comments. Juan Carlos
      Hallak acknowledges support by the NSF (Grant No. SES 0550190). Alejandro Molnar, Santiago Pérez,
      Santiago Sautúa, and Gabriela Yu provided outstanding research assistance. A previous version of
      this paper, written in 2007, appeared as a working paper of the Inter-American Developing Bank (RES
      # 4677) under the title “Challenges of Exporting Differentiated Goods to Developing Countries: The
      Case of SME-Dominated Sectors in a Semi-Industrialized Country” (July 2010). The views expressed
      herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
      Research.

      NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
      reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
      NBER publications.

      © 2011 by Alejandro Artopoulos, Daniel Friel, and Juan Carlos Hallak. All rights reserved. Short sections
      of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
      credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Lifting the Domestic Veil: The Challenges of Exporting Differentiated Goods Across the Development
Divide
Alejandro Artopoulos, Daniel Friel, and Juan Carlos Hallak
NBER Working Paper No. 16947
April 2011
JEL No. F10,F14,M13,M16,O14,O33

                                              ABSTRACT

Several developing countries feature weak performances as exporters of differentiated goods to developed
countries. This paper builds a conceptual framework to explain the obstacles that prevent producers
of differentiated products from establishing a consistent presence in the developed world and the process
through which those obstacles may be overcome. We build our framework based on case studies of
export emergence in four Argentine industries: motorboats, television programs, wines, and wooden
furniture. We find that exporting consistently to developed countries requires drastic changes in how
business is conceived and conducted relative to the practices that prevail among domestically-oriented
firms. Attempts by these firms to export often do not succeed because they approach foreign markets
the same way that they approach the domestic one. Their failure to change the business approach stems
from their inability to access critical (tacit) knowledge about differences in consumption patterns and
business practices in developed countries. In three of the sectors we study, an export pioneer is the
first to implement the necessary changes to established practices. His actions set a benchmark, unleashing
a diffusion process that fosters export emergence in the sector. The most salient feature of export pioneers
is their knowledge advantage about foreign markets stemming from their embeddedness in the business
community of their industry in a developed country.


Alejandro Artopoulos                                 Juan Carlos Hallak
Universidad de San Andrés                            Universidad de San Andrés
Departamento de Administración                       Departamento de Economía
Vito Dumas 284 (B1644BID)                            Vito Dumas 284 (B1644BID)
Victoria, Provincia de Buenos Aires                  Victoria, Provincia de Buenos Aires
ARGENTINA                                            ARGENTINA
alepoulos@udesa.edu.ar                               and NBER
                                                     jchallak@udesa.edu.ar
Daniel Friel
Universidad de San Andrés
Departamento de Administración
Vito Dumas 284 (B1644BID)
Victoria, Provincia de Buenos Aires
ARGENTINA
dfriel@udesa.edu.ar
1. Introduction


A hallmark of developing countries that have industrialized in the last fifty years (e.g. South
Korea, Taiwan) is the impressive growth of their exports. Fast rates of export growth have also
been achieved, more recently, by several other developing countries in different regions of the
world.2 One distinguishing feature of the rapid export growth experiences of these countries is
the ability of their firms to become established as consistent suppliers of differentiated products
to high income economies.3 The export success of these countries is sometimes attributed to the
drastic reductions in barriers to international trade associated with the process of globalization.
However, other developing countries have so far displayed a lukewarm performance as exporters
of differentiated goods to high-income economies despite a similar exposure to globalization.
This contrasting export performance is particularly salient in the case of countries that have a
longer tradition in manufacturing and a more diversified industrial base, such as several
countries in South America. While these countries would be expected to take advantage of their
accumulated industrial knowledge by exporting differentiated products, only in a few specific
industries do they seem capable of exploiting the opportunities of a more integrated world by
leveraging on this prior knowledge. This study contributes to identifying the obstacles behind
this apparent failure and the circumstances under which those obstacles are overcome.


Standard theories of international trade could potentially account for this puzzle. Developing
countries with a longer tradition in manufacturing could have developed a domestic production
of differentiated goods through protection despite lacking international competitiveness in those
goods. While this account is plausible, it is not entirely convincing. The set of differentiated
goods includes a wide span of products, ranging from frozen vegetables and footwear to precision
instruments and specialized machinery. In turn, this set of products requires a diverse set of
technological capabilities, natural conditions, factor proportions, and raw materials. Given this
diversity, the notion that a country has a comparative disadvantage in the production of almost
any differentiated good is hard to accept. Here, we develop the alternative view that a
developing country’s possession of a (latent) comparative advantage in a differentiated good is



2
  See Kim (1997) and Nelson and Pack (1999). Section 3 provides a summary description of export performance by
region.
3
  Differentiated products are characterized by disparities in terms of design, components, functions, durability, or
other features that make them imperfect substitutes of one another to the eye of the buyer. This category of products
is primarily – though not exclusively – composed of manufactured goods.




                                                         2
often not sufficient to support sustained exports to developed countries. In order to access those
markets local producers are required to change the way they conceive and conduct business.


We develop a conceptual framework to explain export emergence (and the lack thereof) in
differentiated good sectors. We first characterize the hurdles that prevent most producers of
differentiated products in developing countries from entering markets in the developed world
and the way of conducting business of firms that are able to overcome those hurdles. Then, we
describe the appearance of export pioneers in specific sectors whose main advantage is their
knowledge about the main features and operation of foreign markets. Also, we identify common
elements in their past experiences that explain their possession of this knowledge. Finally, we
analyze how the general nature of key components of their knowledge facilitates its diffusion to
other firms in the sector generating a process of export emergence.


Our findings are based on four Argentine case studies of export emergence in differentiated good
sectors: motorboats, television programs, wines, and wooden furniture. These sectors were
selected among those that displayed substantial export growth oriented towards developed
countries. These industries vary in their stage of export emergence. In television programs and
wines, export development is already advanced and features numerous established exporters
selling to a wide variety of countries. In motorboats, export emergence is incipient and involves
only a few exporters with an established presence in developed countries. In wooden furniture,
export emergence is also incipient but consists primarily of sporadic exporters who have still
been unable to find a stable way into foreign markets. In all four cases, exported products have
an important design component.


We limit the scope of our study to exports of differentiated products to developed countries. We
focus on those exports because the breadth of the set of differentiated products and the
combined market size of developed countries imply that countries that can successfully perform
them might attain fast and sustained rates of export growth. Also, despite the wide diversity of
products and destination countries covered under this scope, performing this type of export on a
sustained basis involves common challenges that can be analyzed under a single conceptual
framework. In fact, we find common determinants of export emergence in four industries that
produce differentiated products but span a broad diversity of economic activities, namely
agriculture-based manufacturing (wines), traditional manufacturing (wooden furniture), non-
traditional manufacturing (motorboats) and services (television programs).


                                                3
Our conceptual framework contains three parts. The first part characterizes how firms that have
been able to achieve consistent exports to developed countries conduct their business and
compare it with the way of conducting business of firms primarily oriented toward the domestic
market. The differences we find are stark. Firms that export consistently to developed countries
introduce drastic changes in the way of conceiving, producing, and marketing products relative
to the practices that prevail among domestically-oriented firms. These changes are not
implemented as isolated improvements in business operation but as coherent elements of a
different approach to business. We call a stylized characterization of this approach the “export
business model” and contrast it with the “domestic business model”.


Firms that implement the export business model understand that establishing a substantial and
consistent presence in a developed country cannot be attained by simply replicating the
prevailing formulas for achieving domestic success. For example, they know that even successful
products in their domestic market tend to require critical adaptations to appeal to foreign
consumers in developed countries as such customers tend to demand products of higher quality
and more sophisticated designs. Thus, these companies hire designers that are familiar with the
tastes and needs of foreign markets and can “speak the same language” with international
consultants and distributors abroad. Furthermore, since they value the role of foreign
distributors as providers of information about the evolving features of demand and are aware
that business practices in developed countries are different, they are careful to adjust their
production and marketing practices to the more stringent requirements of those distributors to
keep them as partners in long-term relationships.


Implementing this different approach to business is a hard task but not an insurmountable one
once firms understand the importance of changing their business model. However, it is often the
case that domestic firms are not even aware of the need to implement these changes. This
situation is particularly common when the industry has no established exporters. Under those
circumstances, domestic producers lack a benchmark about how things should be done to
achieve consistent exports to developed countries. As if covered by a “domestic veil”, they
attempt to export following the business approach they use to compete in the domestic market.
Those attempts are often condemned to failure, or at most achieve limited or sporadic sales
abroad.




                                               4
The second part of our conceptual framework characterizes the initial stages of export
emergence in a sector. In three of the four industries we study, we encounter one export pioneer
who develops a new way of conducting business that is conducive to establishing a sustained
presence in high-income countries. The export pioneer is the first to fully implement the export
business model. His export success is based on his possession of a knowledge advantage that
stems from his embeddedness (Granovetter, 1985) in the business community of his industry in a
key foreign country. That is, in addition to being embedded in his industry’s business
community at home, as is the case of any other domestic producer, he is also part of a business
and social network in a foreign (developed) country. His foreign embeddedness allows the
pioneer to access detailed, subtle information about markets abroad such as the latest
consumption trends, which distributors would be good partners, and how to gain their trust.
Furthermore, he becomes aware of the need to change the way business is done. In contrast to a
long tradition of research that emphasizes the acquisition of technological capabilities as the
main determinant of export performance in industrial sectors (Katz, 1984; Amsden, 1989), in the
sectors we study we find that the knowledge advantage of export pioneers consists primarily of a
thorough understanding of how foreign markets operate. This knowledge allows them to
conceive and implement the export business model. The wooden furniture industry is an
exception among our four sectors. In this industry, we find no individual who can be considered
an export pioneer. Consistent with our emphasis on the role of pioneers in sectoral export
emergence, after an initial export spurt this industry has displayed stagnant sales to the
developed world.


The foreign embeddedness of export pioneers is not the outcome of purposeful actions they
undertook to enhance their chances of establishing a future export business. On the contrary, it
is the result of previous life experiences they acquired independently from their subsequent
decision to become exporters (two of the pioneers were previously importers). Since acquiring
this background was in all cases the natural consequence of choices they made to satisfy other
goals at a time when they did not think of exporting, the route they took is in general not
replicable for other domestic producers. Nevertheless, it is not necessary for others to follow the
pioneer’s same path once he sets off the diffusion process.


The final part of our conceptual framework characterizes the process of diffusion of the export
business model. This process is ignited by the pioneer’s export success. On the one hand, the
pioneer demonstrates that exporting consistently to developed countries is possible and


                                                 5
profitable. On the other hand, his exporting efforts make clear to others that achieving an
established presence in those countries requires substantial changes in the way business is done.
Sometimes his actions also convey valuable clues about which markets to target or which kind
of products to design. The export pioneer sets an observable benchmark that provides visibility
to a new way of conducting business.


The impact of the export pioneer in his industry relies on the fact that his actions, and
sometimes his own predicament, convey knowledge that is of a very general nature. For
example, they demonstrate the importance of addressing specific tastes of target markets or the
need to ensure high and consistent quality standards. The general character of this knowledge
facilitates its diffusion. While more specific components of the pioneer’s knowledge, e.g.
commercial secrets, might remain unknown to other firms, the mere diffusion of its general
components loosens some of the most important constraints that hamper the export potential of
other firms.


Although we cannot ascertain how export performance in the industries we study would have
evolved in the absence of export pioneers, our findings suggest that sustained export growth in
those industries would have not occurred or would have been substantially delayed. They also
suggest that a potential explanation for why a priori similarly promising sectors do not display
sustained export activity is that an export pioneer has not emerged in those sectors – as is the
case in wooden furniture. Thus, identifying the constraints that prevent most firms from
exporting and understanding why the background of export pioneers allows them to overcome
those constraints may contribute to the design of public policies to promote cross-sectoral
diffusion and help firms deal with similar difficulties in sectors in which an export pioneer does
not appear spontaneously.


The rapid growth of differentiated-good exports from various developing countries in recent
decades was initiated by the integration of their firms into global value chains. These firms took
advantage of low local wages by assembling products or performing other unskilled labor-
intensive activities following designs created by their buyers in developed economies (Abernathy
et al, 1999; Gereffi, 1999; Humphrey and Schmitz, 2002). Argentina, in contrast, does not
display new exporting sectors that support their international competitiveness on low wages.4 In

4
    We conduct a statistical analysis to identify emergent exporting sectors in Appendix 2.




                                                             6
fact, in the four sectors we study the foreign success of exported products is heavily dependent
on the appeal of their designs. This is not surprising. Argentina’s relatively high wages
undermines its firms’ competitiveness in unskilled labor-intensive tasks. As a result, the
prospects of export success for firms in this country seem more closely associated with an
alternative route into world markets entailing the ability to design products that can appeal to
foreign consumers. This ability is not confined to specific design skills but involves as well the
ability to understand the idiosyncrasies of foreign demand and to establish channels to keep
updated about their evolving patterns. The difficulties of acquiring this ability prove to be the
primary source of most of the obstacles we identify in this study. Many apparel firms in East
Asia followed an export path that started with assembly work and concluded with the
acquisition of marketing and design capabilities (Gereffi, 1999). This path appears not to be
open for firms located in developing countries that have relatively higher wages.


The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 relates our findings to those of the
literature. Section 3 compares the recent evolution of Argentina’s differentiated-good exports
with the world. Section 4 justifies the scope of the study and describes the methodology. Section
5 characterizes the export business model and contrasts it with the domestic business model.
Section 6 describes the knowledge advantage of export pioneers and how this advantage helped
them establish a consistent presence in developed countries. Section 7 characterizes the process
of diffusion. Section 8 provides concluding remarks. While this paper describes and
conceptualizes the main findings of our study, a detailed description of our four case studies is
available in a companion paper.5




2. Related literature


This study is related to literatures in international trade and international business concerned
with the determinants of export performance, export dynamics, and firm internationalization.
First, a bourgeoning theoretical and empirical literature in international trade analyzes
determinants of export behavior at the firm level. This literature points to firms’ productivity as
the key determinant of whether firms export. Melitz (2003) lays out the basic mechanism in a


5
  “Export Emergence of Differentiated Goods from Developing Countries”, Economics Department Working Paper
107, Universidad de San Andrés, March 2011.




                                                    7
formal model. Since more productive firms can charge lower prices abroad, their products
attract more demand and generate higher profits. Thus, only more productive firms export
because they can make profits abroad sufficiently large to cover the fixed or sunk costs of
entering a foreign market. Other models introduce additional elements to this framework such as
endogenous quality choice (Verhoogen, 2008) and marketing costs (Arkolakis, 2008). However,
they still point to productivity as the only source of firm heterogeneity and hence the sole
determinant of export behavior. Compared to these models, our findings suggest that export
performance might be more dependent on how thoroughly foreign markets are understood than
on how efficiently production is organized.


A related set of models postulates that, in addition to productivity, firms are also heterogeneous
in the amount of fixed or sunk costs that they need to pay to enter foreign markets (Das et al.,
2007; Ruhl, 2008; Armenter and Koren, 2009). For example, firms might differ in how much
they need to invest to set up a distribution network, learn about export procedures, or
understand foreign regulations. Thus, exporting not only depends on firms’ productivity but also
on export-specific attributes. A relatively unproductive firm, for instance, might still export
because it has family ties abroad. While export performance in these models is partly
determined by firm attributes that are specifically related to the exporting activity, the models
assume that firms sell the same products abroad that they sell in the domestic market.6 In
contrast, our conceptual framework – focused on exports from developing to developed countries
– emphasizes the importance of product adaptation. Product adaptation is required both to
address systematic differences in demand patterns associated with the income gap between
developing and developed countries and demand idiosyncrasies that exist even among markets
with similar income per capita.


A more recent set of models introduces the notion that the appeal of products varies across
countries (e.g. Albornoz et al., 2010; Bernard et al., 2009; Eaton et al., 2008; Nguyen, 2008).
This variation is modeled as a country-specific random component of demand affecting how
much of an existing product is consumed in each country. Although these models account for
demand variation across countries, there is no knowledge firms may possess that might help
them adapt their products to match the specificity of countries’ demands. In our framework,


6
  This assumption is also present in the work of Hallak and Sivadasan (2009), in which they model heterogeneity in
productivity and “caliber”.




                                                        8
possessing this knowledge is critical for establishing a successful presence in developed
countries.7 Furthermore, this ability is not confined to awareness about demand idiosyncrasies of
targeted markets. It is the capacity to implement the export business model, which encompasses
knowing how to design and produce goods that meet those demand idiosyncrasies and how to
relate to distributors to continuously keep this knowledge up to date. Moreover, making a
product “appealing” to foreign consumers also involves conforming to the business practices of
foreign distributors who are the means to reach those consumers.8


In addition to the above literature, this study is also related to a long tradition in the field of
international business concerned with the dynamics of firm internationalization. A seminal work
in this literature is the Uppsala model (Johanson and Vahlne, 1977; Johanson and Vahlne,
1990).    This model emphasizes the uncertainty surrounding a firm’s initial involvement in a
foreign market and the gradual process of learning that results from its foreign exposure.9 Due to
the initial uncertainty, the amount of resources a firm first commits to a foreign venture is
limited. However, even this limited foreign exposure allows it to gain foreign market knowledge,
which reduces its uncertainty and induces more investment. More export-related investment
then leads to higher foreign exposure and further learning, initiating a “virtuous circle” of firm
internationalization. More recently, the literature has pointed to the existence of “born global”
firms. Instead of the gradual process emphasized by the Uppsala model, these firms have a
global orientation from inception. Born globals are “small, (usually) technology-oriented
companies that operate in international markets from the earlier days of their establishment”
(Knight and Cavusgil, 1996).10 Studies of born global firms find that an important determinant
of their rapid internationalization is the international experience of the entrepreneur (Madsen
and Servais, 1997; Sharma and Bomstermo, 2003). This experience provides him with
professional connections and knowledge about intricacies of foreign markets that allows him to
speed up the internationalization process.




7
   In Mayer et al. (2009), firms pay customization costs to sell their products abroad. However, all firms know how to
customize and are uniformly able to perform this customization.
8
   In this last regard, our study also relates to models of search and matching in international trade by Rauch and
Watson (2003) and Eaton et al. (2009). Compared to those models, our account emphasizes firms’ ability to engage in
a long-term relationship with a foreign distributor and the role this relationship plays as a source of information
about foreign demand.
9
   Johanson and Vahlne (2009) provide a recent adaptation of the Uppsala model and describe recent developments in
the literature.
10
    See Rialp et al. (2005) for a survey of this literature.




                                                          9
We also stress the importance of foreign market knowledge.          In particular, like born-global
entrepreneurs our export pioneers’ knowledge about foreign markets also stems from their
previous familiarity with those markets. However, the distinguishing feature of our analysis is
that, given our focus on exports from developing countries, we emphasize the existence of a gap
between what firms know and what they need to know in order to succeed in the developed
world. Export pioneers, and later their followers, bridge that gap by conceiving and conducting
business in a drastically different way from how firms do it domestically. Furthermore, in our
context the knowledge gap that firms need to bridge is so wide that rather than the speed of
internationalization, the possession of this knowledge determines, more fundamentally, whether
firms can eventually become established exporters. Thus, firms that do not possess this
knowledge do not enter the virtuous learning-investment process postulated by the Uppsala
model as they are unable to correctly process the signals and feedback received from their
incipient activity and deals abroad. In fact, their efforts at internationalization follow a process
that is soon truncated.


Our focus on exports from developing to developed countries also explains why we analyze the
process of diffusion, which is unaddressed in the literatures reviewed so far. In our context, the
study of this process is important because the knowledge advantage of export pioneers is
susceptible to being diffused. For example, like born-global entrepreneurs export pioneers are
also familiar with intricacies of foreign markets. However, their most important knowledge
advantage relative to other domestic producers consists of a more basic acknowledgement and
understanding that the way of doing business needs to be changed to address demand patterns,
quality standards, and business practices that are systematically different in developed
countries. This knowledge is more susceptible to diffusion because it is manifest in the actions of
pioneers and becomes visible as they implement the export business model.


A less developed literature in international business deals with foreign market entry of firms
located in developing countries. For example, Ellis (2000) studies Hong Kong toy manufacturers,
Zhou et al. (2007) small and medium enterprises in the Chinese province of Zhejiang, and
Elango and Pattnail (2007) Indian manufacturers. This literature also stresses the importance of
foreign market knowledge for export performance. However, despite its focus on developing
countries, it does not emphasize the fact that acquiring this knowledge is especially challenging
for developing country producers accustomed to different consumption patterns and business
practices. Rather, their main findings point to parental ties with foreign networks as the key


                                                10
conduit for acquiring such knowledge. Implicit in their analysis is the existence of a large
Chinese and Indian diaspora, in developed markets such as the United States and the United
Kingdom in particular. The absence of a comparable Argentine diaspora implies that in our
cases firms cannot take advantage of this type of ethnic network.


By adopting a sectoral approach and a pioneer-diffusion framework to explain export dynamics
we follow the work of Hausmann and Rodrik (2003) – henceforth HR. As in their work, we also
emphasize a learning externality generated by the actions of an export pioneer. However, the
pioneer-diffusion framework we propose is different. First, in HR production costs are the only
source of uncertainty and the object of diffusion. Instead, we find that the main source of
uncertainty and object of diffusion is the viability and characteristics of the export business
model. Second, the export pioneer in HR is ex-ante identical to other explorers of potential
export opportunities but ex-post the fortunate one to discover a profitable export activity.
Rather, we find that export pioneers are distinguished by the possession of a knowledge
advantage in their industries about how foreign markets operate. Third, while HR emphasizes
the existence of an appropriability problem depleting incentives to explore new export
opportunities, we find diffusion to benefit more than harm export pioneers.                           The policy
conclusions that could be derived in each case are also different. While HR suggests the
potential benefits of policies that spur discovery activity, our findings suggest that those policies
may not be effective unless firms gain prior understanding of foreign markets and change their
approach to business to serve them.


Recent papers have used customs data to statistically identify the appearance of exports
pioneers. Freund and Pierola (2009) analyze exports in the non-traditional agricultural sector in
Peru and find that pioneers are larger than followers. Iacovone and Javorcik (2010) investigate
manufacturing exports in Mexico and find that in half of the cases when a new product starts
being exported an additional firm follows during the next year. Wagner and Zahler (2010) study
Chilean exports finding that pioneers enter and remain smaller than followers – opposite to
Freund and Pierola (2009). These papers differ in their criteria for identifying an export
pioneer.11 Nevertheless, their common use of quantitative criteria differs from the qualitative
approach we take here to identify export pioneers. Our export pioneers are not necessarily the


11
  Wagner and Zahler (2010) use the most stringent criterion. To be classified as a “new export”, they require that a
product has not been exported in the previous five years.




                                                        11
first to export a product but rather the first to implement the export business model. We find
the latter type of export activity to be the one with the potential to generate diffusion and spur
export emergence in a sector.


Our study originated as part of a larger project conducted by the Inter-American Development
Bank (IADB) in 2006.12 Many of the case studies included in that project emphasize the
resolution of coordination problems as the main trigger of export growth. While we also identify
coordination problems that hinder export growth in our case studies, we do not find that the
initial stages of export emergence are explained by the resolution of this type of problems. Our
discrepancy with those findings may stem from the strong predominance in that project of cases
of export emergence in agriculture-based products such as flower cuts in Colombia or artichokes
in Peru. In that type of sector coordination among producers, or between producers and public
agencies, would appear to be necessary to sustain activities that generate large externalities (e.g.
experiments with new seeds) or that demand the provision of public goods (e.g. roads or air
transport). As those products tend to have limited scope for differentiation, exporting them
implies different obstacles to be surmounted than those we underline in this study.


Finally, Keesing and Lall (1990) characterize the challenges of exporting consumer goods from
developing to developed countries and point to similar obstacles as those we identify here.
However, they emphasize the role of international buyers for overcoming those obstacles. In
their account, these buyers spontaneously approach potential sellers in developing countries,
provide them with designs, and gradually teach them how to change their products and business
practices to conform to their demands. As we argue in the next section, this gateway to world
markets does not appear to be open for firms located in countries with wages that are not
sufficiently low to attract unskilled-intensive stages of the production process. In fact, in none of
the sectors we study we find that export emergence originated from the spontaneous actions of
foreign buyers.




12
     The working papers of that project can be downloaded from the                  following   website:
http://www.iadb.org/research/projects_detail.cfm?id_sec=8&id=89&Language=English.




                                                 12
3. Argentina’s recent export performance in differentiated goods compared to the
world


External conditions and government policies faced by Argentine exporters varied widely over the
period from 1980 to 2008. After a decade of commercial protection and high inflation, in the
1990s the government implemented the Convertibility Plan (a currency board) and a drastic
reform program that included unilateral trade liberalization, opening of the capital account,
removal of restrictions on FDI, privatization, and de-regulation. This decade was characterized
by high rates of economic growth and a strong real appreciation of the domestic currency.13 The
Convertibility Plan culminated in a severe financial, currency and debt crisis in 2001 and 2002.
The recovery from the crisis was rapid, and the rest of the 2000s witnessed high rates of
economic growth associated with a depreciated domestic currency at approximately half of the
value of the real exchange rate that prevailed in the previous decade.


The evolution of total exports also underwent periods of varied performance. As displayed in
figure 3.1, export growth picked up in the early 1990s in response to the liberalization program
but stalled at the end of that decade due to the loss of international competitiveness brought
about by the steady real appreciation of the peso. This process was accelerated in 1999 by the
devaluation of the currency in Brazil. After the large devaluation of the peso in January 2002,
exports resumed vigorously for the rest of the decade.


                                                                                 FIGURE 3.1
                                                                                 Total Exports
                                                                              Argentina 1980-2008
                                  80
                                  60
                            Billion US$
                                  40
                                  20
                                  0




                                          1980         1984          1988          1992           1996   2000   2004   2008
                                                                                              .
                                           Source: INDEC (National Institute of Statistics)




13
     Appendix 1 describes the evolution of the Argentine economy during the period 1980-2008 in further detail.




                                                                                       13
The change in the composition of exports from 1980 until 2008 displayed a relative increase in
the participation of manufactures at the expense of primary products. While the export share of
primary products declined from an average of 35% during the period 1980-1990 to an average of
21% during the period 2002-2008, the export share of manufactures increased from 22% to 30%
between the same periods. In line with the rise in manufacturing exports, sales of differentiated
products also exhibited a substantial increase, going from 18% of total exports in 1980 to 32.7%
in 2008 (see figure 3.2).14 Yet, this rise has been primarily driven by exports to the developing
world, in particular to neighboring countries in MERCOSUR. While exports of differentiated
products to non-OECD countries grew by a factor of 11.7 between 1991 and 2008, exports of
differentiated products to OECD countries grew by a factor of 4.5 during the same time period.
As a result, Argentina’s exports of differentiated products to developed nations have consistently
accounted for less than ten percent of its total exports over the last three decades.


                                                             FIGURE 3.2
                                                  Exports of Differentiated Products
                                                                 Argentina 1980-2008
                      20 40
                         30
                      %
                         10
                         0




                              1980        1984          1988          1992          1996          2000          2004     2008
                                                                                .

                                             % differentiated to OECD countries                             % differentiated
                               Note: Products are considered differentiated according to Rauch liberal classification
                               Source: COMTRADE




14
    We use Rauch’s (1999) classification to classify goods into differentiated and non-differentiated. Rauch (1999)
classifies SITC 4-digit categories into three categories: homogenous goods are those that are traded in organized
exchanges (e.g. wheat). Reference-priced goods are those that are not traded in organized exchanges but have
reference prices in specialized publications (e.g. polyethylene). Differentiated goods are all remaining ones. We follow
the “liberal” version of his classification and group the first two categories as “non-differentiated”. Some SITC 4-digit-
categories are not included in his classification. We assign them to “differentiated” and “non-differentiated” following
this criterion: First, we count for each 3-digit category the number of products classified by Rauch as “differentiated"
and "non-differentiated" and we assign the unclassified products to the group with the highest number of products
within that 3-digit category. Then, we repeat the procedure at the 2-digit and at the 1-digit level as certain products
remain unclassified after the first two rounds.




                                                                          14
Argentina’s lukewarm performance as an exporter of differentiated products to developed
countries can be compared with the export performance of different groups of countries. Figure
3.3 displays the evolution by region, from 1980 to 2006, of the share in total exports accounted
for by differentiated products exported to the OECD.15 There is considerable heterogeneity
between regions. In most regions, this share has increased more than five percentage points,
achieving more than 20% of total exports. This is particularly the case of South Asia, where
exports of differentiated products to the OECD accounted for almost a half of total exports in
2006. Central America, North Africa, Eastern Europe and the Middle East also display
substantial rises, while East Asia and High-income OECD countries exhibit modest increases
although starting from relatively high levels.


                                               FIGURE 3.3
                        Share of Differentiated Exports to OECD in Total Exports
                                                                   1980-2006
                                 Sub-Saharan Africa     1980
                                                        2006
                                          South Asia    1980
                                                        2006
                      C. America and the Caribbean      1980
                                                        2006
                                         North Africa   1980
                                                        2006
                                         Middle East    1980
                                                        2006
                                      South America     1980
                                                        2006
                                  Europe non-OECD       1980
                                                        2006
                            Oil abundant economies      1980
                                                        2006
                                East Asia and Pacific   1980
                                                        2006
                                 High-Income OECD       1980
                                                        2006


                                                               0   10    20     30    40     50    60    70   80   90 100

                                                          SITC 84                     Other sectors
                     Note: Products are considered differentiated according to Rauch liberal classification
                     Sources: COMTRADE, Stats Canada




By contrast, in Sub-Saharan Africa, Oil abundant economies, and South America (except Brazil)
these exports have remained stagnant and still account for less than 10% of total foreign sales.
The weak performance of South America is particularly interesting in the context of our study
as it shows that Argentina’s apparent lack of international competitiveness in this type of
exports is not exceptional.




15
   The figure displays average shares by region. Oil abundant economies are included in a single group and excluded
from their geographic region in order to analyze their performance separately.




                                                                         15
One potential explanation could be related to the fact that export growth of differentiated
products in most developing countries has been largely driven by the integration of firms into
global value chains. At the initial stages of these export growth processes, local firms attract
unskilled-labor intensive stages in the production of mass-produced items to take advantage of
prevailing low wages. In most cases, they primarily perform assembly work following designs
created by their buyers in developed countries. The products they sell are typically unbranded
as branding and marketing is conducted by retailers or other intermediaries (Abernathy et al.,
1999; Gereffi, 1999; Humphrey and Schmitz, 2002). The apparel industry is prominent among
the economic activities undertaken by those firms. Figure 3.3 above singles out one product
category, “Articles of apparel and clothing accessories” (SITC 84), which is among the most
unskilled labor-intensive product category within manufacturing. The figure demonstrates the
prominent role that this single product category has played for most regions displaying
substantial export growth of differentiated products to the OECD. While many low wage
countries have integrated (part of) their economies to global value chains delivering
consumption goods for high income countries, other developing countries with higher wages
(such as some countries in South America) appear unsuitable to perform this role in the
globalization process. Some evidence supporting this explanation is provided by figure 3.4. This
figure shows that countries with higher GDP per capita (and hence higher wages) in 1980 have
tended to be those with the smallest increase in the share of exports of differentiated products to
the OECD between 1980 and 2006.16


                                                              FIGURE 3.4
                                                  Change in the share of differentiated
                                                    exports to OECD vs GDP 1980
                                                                     1980-2006
                             .4
                             .3
                             .2
                             .1
                             0
                             -.1




                                   4                         6                       8         10
                                                             GDP per capita in 1980 (logs)
                                   Sources: COMTRADE, Stats Canada




16
     A test that the negative slope is significantly different from zero yields a p-value of 0.12.




                                                                        16
The prevalence of relatively higher wages may undermine the latter countries’ participation in
global value chains as producers of mass-produced items. As a result, those countries need to
find a different route to developed markets. This route involves facing challenges that tend to be
insurmountable for most firms and frequently result in unsuccessful attempts to establish a
consistent presence in the developed world. In the remaining sections, we describe the nature of
those challenges and the circumstances under which they can sometimes be overcome.




4. Scope of the study and methodology


This section delimits and justifies the scope of this study, lays out the criteria we use to select
our four case-study sectors, and describes the methodology used in our investigation.


4.1. Scope in terms of products and destinations


This study characterizes the challenges and constraints facing firms in developing countries that
attempt to export differentiated products to developed countries on a consistent basis. Since
imports of these products by developed countries constitute a substantial fraction of world trade
and largely exceed the production capacity of most developing countries, this type of exports
offers ample room for expansion. Hence, understanding the factors that determine their growth
is relevant as these exports constitute a potential opportunity for economic development.


Despite the wide span of products and destinations covered by the scope of this study, the
challenges and constraints for exporting that we identify in the different cases are remarkably
similar. Thus, they can be analyzed under a unified framework.17 On the one hand, exporting
differentiated products requires firms to have the ability to make product adaptations that
appeal to specific needs and tastes of foreign consumers. This ability is not required in the case
of agricultural and industrial commodities, or other homogenous products, due to their intrinsic
absence of differentiating features. Marketing the latter products also involves lower information
requirements both for the buyer and for the seller. In fact, transactions are often performed


17
   We do not include highly concentrated sectors in our analysis, e.g. automobiles or electronics, which have high
entry barriers and require large fixed outlays in R&D or advertising. Export behavior in those sectors might have
different determinants than the ones we emphasize here.




                                                       17
anonymously through organized exchanges.18 On the other hand, exporting differentiated
products to developed countries imposes the common need to address systematic differences in
consumption patterns and business practices between developed and developing countries.


The challenges for exporting differentiated products that we identify here apply to developing
countries broadly. However, following our discussion in section 3 our characterization of how
those challenges are overcome have more specific applicability to the case of developing
countries that have relatively higher wages. These countries are the primary focus of our
investigation. Nevertheless, our conceptual framework may have more general relevance.
Easterly and Reshef (2010) investigate the emergence of new exporting products in East Africa
and find their determinants to be remarkably consistent with our conceptual framework even
among some of the poorest nations in the world.


 4.2. Choice of case-study sectors


We conducted case studies of export emergence in four industries: motorboats, television
programs, wines, and wooden furniture. These industries were chosen among sectors producing
differentiated goods that satisfy the following criteria: (a) strong recent export growth; (b)
substantial fraction of exports shipped to developed economies; and (c) non-trivial amount of
exports. The wine and wooden furniture industries were identified and selected after conducting
a statistical analysis of exports at the 4-digit product-category level of the Harmonized System
(HS) during the period 1991-2005. The analysis filtered 4-digit HS product categories that
passed quantitative thresholds for the above criteria – 40% top percentile in terms of export
growth, at least 1/3 of exports shipped to OECD countries, and more than 10 million US dollar
exports in 2005, respectively.19 The motorboats and television program industries were identified
based on our previous knowledge of their recent emergence as new exporting sectors in
Argentina and selected after confirming that they also satisfied the above criteria.20 The four
selected sectors span a diverse set of broadly-defined economic categories: agriculture-based
manufacturing (wines), traditional industrial manufacturing (wooden furniture), non-traditional
industrial manufacturing (motorboats), and services (television programs). Among sectors that
18
   See Rauch (1999) for a characterization of the distinctive nature of international trade in differentiated goods and
its quantitative implications for bilateral trade flows.
19
   This analysis and its results are described in detail in Appendix 2.
20
   An exception was made in the case of motorboats, which displayed exports in 2005 slightly below the 10 million
U.S. dollar threshold.




                                                          18
satisfy the above criteria, these industries were selected to maximize the diversity of economic
activities and thus the potential for generalizing our findings.


Figure 4.1 displays the evolution of exports from 1994 to 2008 in the three sectors with available
data on trade flows, namely wines, motorboats and wooden furniture21. Total exports exhibit
substantial growth in those three sectors, particularly after the currency devaluation of 2002. In
wines, total exports reached US$ 645 million in 2008, making Argentina the tenth largest
exporter of wine in the world.                     At the same time, the share of the OECD in total exports
increased from 33% in 1994 to 66% in 2008. This industry features a substantial number of
established exporters sending their products to more than one hundred countries. In motorboats,
the volume of exports is still modest and is explained by a small number of regular exporters.
Nevertheless, exports from this sector have greatly diversified since the mid-nineties in terms of
countries of destination, mainly due to an increased presence in the European market. The sharp
decline in exports during the last year of our sample, 2008, is explained by the international
crisis which disproportionately hit luxury-good sectors with income-elastic demand.




                                                        FIGURE 4.1
                                             Total exports in selected industries
                                                         1994-2008
                                      Wine                            Motorboats                   Wooden furniture
                                                          15




                                                                                            30
                      600




                                                          10




                                                                                            20
                      400




                                                                                            10
                      200




                                                          5
                      0




                                                          0




                                                                                            0




                            1994   1998   2002   2006          1994   1998   2002   2006         1994   1998   2002   2006


                                                   Total exports                    Exports to the OECD
                    Note: exports are expresed in US$ millions
                    Source: COMTRADE and Argentine Customs




21
   Although the amount of exports of T.V. formats is not available in our customs dataset, the existing evidence
indicates an important growth over this period. According to the Format Recognition and Protection Association




                                                                         19
The panel on the right of figure 4.1 shows that total exports of wooden furniture increased from
less than 5 US$ million in 1994 to approximately 25 US$ million in 2008. In this case, exports to
the OECD have remained relatively stagnant since 2000 while 96% of export growth since that
year is explained by increased sales to Latin America. This sector displayed a peak in exports to
the OECD around the time we selected our four sectors (early 2006). But consistent with the
absence of an export pioneer in this sector, exports to the developed world subsequently
declined. Moreover, a substantial fraction of exporters of wooden furniture sell abroad only on a
sporadic basis.



4.3. Methodology for case studies


After selecting the industries to be studied, our first objective was to gain a general
understanding of those industries and, in particular, of their histories of export emergence. We
contacted local trade associations, conducted interviews, and consulted academic studies and
industry reports. We also analyzed customs data to identify the top exporters in each sector and
their export performance over the last fifteen years. In all four of the sectors we soon found
ample consensus among industry participants about the person that could be singled out as the
one who first made decisive and successful efforts at exporting consistently to the developed
world. One of the authors of this study had some previous knowledge about the television and
motorboat industries and therefore had a general idea about potential pioneers in each of these
sectors. Nevertheless, even in those sectors the existence of an export pioneer was established
after consulting different industry sources and analyzing customs data.


In the wine industry we conducted interviews with nine of the leading exporters and
representatives from four organizations linked to this sector. In the wooden furniture sector, we
carried out interviews with four of the leading exporters, the leading designer for exporters, and
representatives of two trade associations. In the motorboat industry, we interviewed four of the
top exporters, the leading designer for exporters, and representatives of the main trade
association. In the television industry, we conducted interviews with seven firms and with
support organizations including an educational institution and a scriptwriters association.
Interviews were generally conducted with the owner or general manager of each firm. In all of


(Frapa), Argentina is the fourth largest exporter of formats in the world in terms of volume, only behind the U.K.,
the U.S., and the Netherlands.




                                                        20
the sectors except the wine industry, all of the owners or general managers had been directly
involved in developing the export business of their companies. In the few cases we could not talk
to the owner or to the general manager of the company, we arranged meetings with the export
manager.


All interviews were conducted over an eight-month period between May and December of 2006.
A few follow-up interviews and phone calls were made afterwards. The interviews were
conducted in Spanish using open-ended questions and generally lasted approximately one hour
and a half. In most cases, they were conducted at the production facility of the firm and were
accompanied by tours of these facilities. All interviews were digitally recorded. We used an
inductive method to identify the elements that established exporters had in common in their
way of thinking of and carrying out their export business. Based on those common elements we
built our characterization of the two ideal-type (export and domestic) business models.
Similarly, we used an inductive method to identify the common elements that were present in
the background and vision of export pioneers.




5. What do exporters do differently? Export versus domestic business models


Firms in a developing country that attempt to export differentiated products to high-income
countries on a sustainable basis are severely hampered in their efforts to achieve this goal if they
do not accompany their attempts with a drastic change in the way they do business. The
knowledge they possess and the business practices they are familiar with may work in the
domestic market but are in general not conducive to establishing a long-run presence in
developed markets. To achieve this goal, firms need to do things differently. Based on the
findings of our fieldwork, in this section we characterize the different requirements foreign and
domestic markets respectively impose on the way firms operate by contrasting two business
models: the “export business model” and the “domestic business model”.


We define a business model to be a simplified representation of the elements that, as a coherent
system, characterize a way of conducting business. While actual business models that firms
implement contain specific elements that differentiate them from one another, we focus on two
ideal types. The first is the export business model, which characterizes the way of doing business
of consistent exporters to developed countries. The second is the domestic business model, which


                                                21
characterizes the way of doing business of firms primarily focused on the domestic market.22 We
propose a characterization of business models built upon three main components. The “product”
component relates to the identification of the products to sell and the market segments to
target. The “production” component relates to the design and actual production of goods. The
“marketing” component relates to how products are marketed and sold.23


While the domestic business model provides viability in the domestic market, it is not conducive
to achieving long-term profitable exports.24 Firms primarily focused on the domestic market that
wish to export need to change their business model. Transitioning between models involves
changes in business practices in all three components of the model (product, production, and
marketing). Prominent among these changes are the need to adjust product characteristics to
foreign tastes (product), production processes for quality upgrading (production), and marketing
practices to conform to those of foreign distributors (marketing). These changes are
fundamentally intertwined and need to be implemented as a coherent system.


Domestic firms often embark on an export venture while still conducting business according to
the domestic business model (or after applying only some elements of the export business
model). But unless they implement all elements of the export business model concurrently as a
coherent system, the success of their export venture will be limited. These firms might achieve
stable and substantial exports to developing countries, particularly those that are geographically
proximate. They might also achieve sporadic, or stable but insignificant, exports to developed
countries. However, they will face great difficulties in exporting substantial volumes to the latter
countries on a sustained basis.


Unfortunately, it is often the case that domestic firms do not understand the particular ways in
which they need to change their approach to business or even fail to recognize the need to make
22
   Despite its wide use, there is no agreed upon definition of the term “business model” in the management literature
(Shafer, 2005). Since we focus on ideal types rather than on specific business models, our characterization of the
business models highlights more general issues than those emphasized in the literature. Also, abusing terminology we
refer to “the” export (domestic) business model as the ideal type and to “an” export (domestic) business model as an
actual form of the ideal-type model as is implemented by a particular firm.
23
   Although the term marketing is customarily used to refer to those activities associated with defining the product to
be produced as well as those associated with selling it on the market, we use this term only to refer to the latter so
that we can distinguish between two distinct activities that are located at each end of the process of developing,
producing and selling a product.
24
   We emphasize once again that this study focuses on consistent exports of differentiated goods from developing to
developed countries. For compactness, we sometimes refer to those as just “exports”. Also, we sometimes refer to
foreign markets in developed countries as just “developed markets”.




                                                          22
those changes. A critical obstacle is that the channels and mechanisms at their disposal for
acquiring relevant information and knowledge about the domestic market are not suitable for
understanding foreign markets. A substantial amount of their knowledge about the domestic
market is spontaneously acquired due to their geographical and cultural proximity with
consumers, distributors, and other participants in this market. In contrast, the geographic and
cultural distance (Kogut and Singh, 1988; Shenkar, 2001) that separates them from developed
markets renders analogous information and knowledge about those markets considerably more
difficult to access and interpret. As we argue below, this difficulty is one of the main hurdles for
adopting the export business model, particularly at early stages of export emergence in a sector.
The remainder of this section characterizes the export and the domestic business models
emphasizing    the   contrast   between   their   main   components.    We    also   illustrate   our
characterization of the two ideal-type business models using examples from the actual business
models that firms in our case studies have implemented.


i) The product component


Characteristics of consumer demand usually vary, often markedly, between countries. Part of
this variation is systematically related to countries’ income per capita. Consumers in high
income countries tend to demand products of higher quality (Hallak 2006, Choi et al. 2009),
which have more sophisticated designs, are made of better materials, or are less likely to
malfunction. Variation in consumer demand across countries also stems from market-specific
factors such as idiosyncratic tastes or needs. For example, U.S. consumers prefer fruiter wines
with less alcoholic content while Europeans tend to like less fruity wines with a higher content
of alcohol. Idiosyncratic tastes are also manifest in style differences. While leather covering on
tables is increasingly appealing to U.S. consumers, this design feature is not considered stylish in
other countries.


Since demand characteristics vary across countries, firms must know the idiosyncrasies of
demand in the markets they target. Although this requirement also applies to domestic sales,
acquiring knowledge about idiosyncrasies of foreign demand in developed countries is
substantially more challenging. Moreover, as demand characteristics evolve over time, firms need
to secure information channels for continuously updating this knowledge. In our fieldwork, we
have encountered that successful exporters use foreign distributors as a key source of
information about the evolution of foreign consumption trends.


                                                  23
Understanding the characteristics of consumer demand in a specific country allows firms to
identify the market segments they wish to target, understand the nature of competition in those
segments, and define the specific products they want to sell. For example, motorboat exporters
in Argentina have decided to focus their exporting efforts on the segment of relatively small
units (less than fifty feet) to avoid competition with the largest European producers. The
existence of differences in consumer demand often implies that market segmentation in foreign
countries is considerably different from the way the domestic market is segmented. For instance,
Argentine exports of wooden furniture to the U.S. are mainly concentrated in the “contemporary
furniture” market segment. This market segment consists of consumers that place a distinctive
emphasis on design originality and replace their furniture with relatively high frequency (about
once every five years). In the domestic market, there is no distinguishable market segment with
the same features. Also, consumers in the U.S. tend to demand longer tables than those
customarily purchased in Argentina since apartments and houses in that country are generally
larger. Due to the differences in market segmentation and in the relative appeal of specific
product features, most firms that attempt to export find the task of identifying the right market
segment and the particular products to sell in a foreign country extremely challenging.


Opportunities for entering foreign markets are often associated with shifts in consumption
patterns. One notable recent shift, primarily taking place in high-income countries, is associated
with the increasing importance of “new luxury” goods. These are a “new category of products
and services that possess higher level of quality, taste and aspiration than other goods in the
category but are not so expensive as to be out of reach” (Silverstein and Fiske, 2003).25 Although
some of these goods still satisfy basic necessities, their appeal resides in the fact that they
“…evoke and engage consumers’ emotions while feeding their aspirations for a better life”
(Silverstein and Fiske, 2003). In the three goods-producing sectors we study – the fourth
(television programs) produces a service – export emergence has been based on products that
can broadly be defined as “new luxury”.


The increasing importance of this type of good in the consumption patterns of developed
countries elevates the knowledge requirements imposed on firms from developing countries that
attempt to export. While understanding the idiosyncrasies of foreign demand is already difficult

25
     Specific examples of this type of goods are Sam Adams beers and BMW cars.




                                                         24
for those firms, the challenge may become insurmountable when the potential appeal of the
products they offer hinges on the extent to which their particular features engage consumers’
emotions and aspirations, shaped by specific cultural traits and collective values of a country.
Furthermore, it is often the case that shifts in consumption patterns are associated with the
emergence of a new product or a substantial variation of an existing product that reshapes
consumer demand in the industry. As a considerable time lag might elapse before the new
product gains significative acceptance in lower-income countries (Vernon, 1966), domestic
producers might struggle to understand the specific ways in which foreign demand has changed
due to the absence of analogous products in the domestic market that can act as a reference
benchmark. Thus they may be unable to identify the proper segment to target or the products
to sell abroad, thereby risking the opportunity to establish themselves as regular suppliers to a
foreign market.


The transformation of consumption patterns in the wine industry is a notable example. This
market was traditionally divided into two primary segments, one dominated by price-sensitive
consumers of table wines and another dominated by consumers of high quality wines who
customarily possessed extensive knowledge about the French vineyards from which most high
quality wine originated. The emergence in the early 1970s of new high quality wineries in Napa
Valley led to a revolution in this industry. In particular, the nature of market segmentation
changed enabling wineries throughout the world to compete with the French by producing “new-
world wines”. This new competition generated a wider variety of high quality wines at
substantially lower prices, thereby giving rise to a large new segment of wine consumers.26


Although Argentina has a strong tradition in winemaking, domestic winemakers did not take
advantage of this new opportunity for more than a decade after the revolution in Napa Valley.
Despite their long expertise in winemaking, they were unable to produce and market their wine
in a way that could satisfy those foreign needs and aspirations. One illustrative example is their
failure to pay attention to the important role played by labels. Consumers of new world wine
want the labels of wines to communicate something about the place where the wine was
produced, while also stating basic facts about how the wine was made.                           For example labels
should state whether the wine was aged in oak barrels and if so what type of oak barrels were

26
  New world wines are an example of new luxury goods. They fulfill consumer’s basic necessities while also satisfying
their aspirations for a better life at a price that is significantly lower than traditional high quality wines (Bartlett,
2003).




                                                           25
used and how long the wine was stored in them. Also, such consumers do not tolerate labels
that peal off easily or boxes that are easily damaged. These presentation problems were common
among Argentine wines and largely tolerated by domestic consumers.


In our fieldwork, we have encountered numerous cases of firms that attempt to export without
understanding the idiosyncrasies of foreign markets. Most of these firms are not even aware that
understanding these idiosyncrasies is critical for establishing a long-term presence abroad. These
firms sometimes make substantive efforts to find export markets for their existing products
rather than examining potential export opportunities that would require slight or radical
modifications to these products. Their failure to address the specificities of foreign demand limits
the volume and sustainability of their exports. For example, Bodegas López, one of the most
widely recognized brands of wine in the domestic market, has not adapted its wines to the new
consumption patterns in the developed world. As a result, the export performance of this winery
did not replicate its domestic success. At the same time, as the market in Argentina gradually
adopts the consumption patterns of the developed world, this winery is finding its sales
increasingly limited to a declining market segment. Ideas del Sur, one of the most successful
producers of television content in the domestic market, has attempted to export its T.V.
programs but did not succeed because its program designs were not sufficiently flexible to
incorporate content with the local flavors of their target countries. Several furniture producers
also have attempted to sell their products in the U.S. market without realizing the simple fact
that this market demands larger units. Those producers sometimes export on a limited basis but
find substantive difficulties in expanding their foreign penetration.


The main reason why it is so hard for domestic producers to understand the differences in
consumption patterns and market segmentation between the domestic and foreign markets is
that the knowledge they need to acquire is, to a large extent, tacit in nature (Polanyi, 1966). As
opposed to explicit knowledge, tacit knowledge is hard to codify and therefore difficult to
transmit. For example, it is difficult for a domestic producer to learn from books, trade
magazines, or other formal communication channels how stylish consumers in a particular
foreign country will regard specific aspects of product design, or how those specific aspects will
engage their emotions and feed their aspirations. As a result of its tacit nature, domestic
producers usually lack precise knowledge about specificities of what foreign consumers, at any
given point in time, like or need.




                                                 26
Although tacit knowledge is hard to transmit in codifiable form, there are alternative channels
through which it can be transmitted. Building on Granovetter’s (1985) embeddedness approach
for understanding the economic activities of firms as shaped by the communities in which they
operate, Uzzi (1997) examines how embeddedness in a business community of a specific sector
influences the flow of tacit knowledge within that community.27 In the context of our study,
domestic producers are naturally embedded in the domestic business community of their sectors
in their own countries. Consequently, they access critical “fine-grained information” about
features of domestic demand, such as perceptions of style, consumer aspirations, and quality
expectations. This information allows them to identify the specific products that will have
appeal to local consumers.


By contrast, as domestic producers are typically not embedded in the business communities of
their industries abroad, analogous transmission of tacit knowledge about foreign demand does
not occur spontaneously. As a result, their understanding of its distinguishing features is
lacking. In particular, they cannot elucidate the specific ways in which foreign demand differs
from domestic demand. Moreover, this lack of understanding is precisely what prevents them
from being aware that those differences are important.28 Even if they communicate and engage
in transactions with foreign agents, key information about foreign markets comes bundled and
can only be understood in a specific context that needs to be shared by the communicating
parties.29 These difficulties are particularly pronounced when export emergence in a sector is still
incipient. Intricacies of foreign markets may later become common wisdom within the local
business community once the diffusion process has taken place.


ii) The production component




27
   In particular, he studies the consequences of embeddedness in a network of relationships in the New York City
fashion industry. He contends that embeddedness facilitates the interchange of fine-gained information between a firm
and its suppliers enabling them to address problems rapidly.
28
   Experiments in psychology find that people who are incompetent in the strategies they adopt to reach success and
satisfaction not only reach erroneous conclusions and make unfortunate choices but also their incompetence robs them
of their ability to realize it: “the skills that engender competence in a particular domain are often the very same skills
necessary to evaluate competence in that domain” (Kruger and Dunning, 1999).
29
   According to Uzzi (1997), “fine-grained information transfer is not only more detailed and tacit but has a holistic
rather than a divisible structure that is difficult to communicate through market ties… this information structure is
manifested as a particular “style”, which is the fusion of components from different fashions, materials, nomenclaturas,
and production techniques.”




                                                           27
Once companies have understood the characteristics of market demand, identified the market
segments to target and the type of products they want to sell, they still need to create and make
the specific products to be marketed. The production component of a business model
characterizes how firms design and produce these products.


In the sectors we study, professional designers are usually in charge of the actual design of a
product. They are the “enologists” in the winemaking industry, the “yatch designers” in the
motorboat industry, and the “content managers” in the television industry. The specific task of
professional designers, like the more conceptual task of defining which goods to produce
described earlier, also requires the ability to understand the tastes and needs of consumers in
foreign markets. Moreover, professional designers need to be able to integrate idiosyncrasies of
foreign demand into actual product designs.


To help local designers perform this task, the entrepreneur or manager of a firm sometimes hires
an outside, customarily foreign, consultant. This agent is the “design expert”, an intermediary
who conveys relevant information about foreign markets to the local designer. For example, in
wooden furniture, motorboats, and wines there are international consultants who help firms
understand international trends and provide them with general advice about how to produce the
type of products that could be in line with them. They lay out the basic parameters of a
potential product and work with local designers to adapt their products to the tastes of foreign
consumers. Sometimes these adaptations are minimal but they are nonetheless critical. These
consultants do not fully design a product but they may sometimes revisit a factory or winery to
see how a product is evolving. In the television industry, “format consultants” are experts in a
format who have the ability to interpret cultural codes of different national audiences and
translate the principal components of the format to match specificities of those audiences.


In order to take full advantage of the services of foreign experts, local designers must be capable
of understanding and communicating with them, i.e. they need to “speak the same language”.
The existence of these foreign consultants facilitates the acquisition of tacit knowledge necessary
for making products with appeal to foreign consumers. However, since the cost of their services
is high, entrepreneurs are usually reluctant to hire them unless they are convinced of the
importance of adapting products to foreign needs and are also willing to implement the
remaining components of the export business model.




                                                28
Once products are designed, firms need to adjust the production process to effectively make
those products. One of the most important differences between the export and the domestic
business models regarding how goods are produced stems from the fact that consumers in high-
income countries demand products of higher quality. Satisfying the higher quality requirements
of these consumers often imposes the need to reorganize production processes.


Adapting production processes to meet foreign demand sometimes requires investing in new
machinery. For example, in the wine industry exporters had to invest in stainless steal tanks
and in some cases 225-liter oak barrels in order to produce wines suited to the tastes of
international consumers. Those investments may in turn require access to financial resources
and technological capabilities. However, such requirements do not appear to be the most
important hurdles firms need to overcome to meet the quality standards of international
markets. Rather, the main production challenge is more often associated with making changes in
production techniques to gain better control of the production process. Firms that implement
the export business model need to pay careful attention to how goods are produced as small
defects in the products can lead to their rejection by their foreign distributors or even to the
termination of the business relationship. In the wooden furniture industry, quality derives from
how parts are dried, stained and assembled. For example, firms have to ensure that wood is
dried properly so that stain can be applied evenly. They also have to ensure that no cracks are
visible between two separate pieces of wood in the same piece of furniture. In essence, workers
have to pay careful attention to how they do their work. To be able to do so, factories have to
be well lit so that workers can see better what they are doing. Producers of goods for the
domestic market do not pay attention to such details simply because they do not play such a
determinant role in the purchasing decisions of domestic consumers. Similarly, exporters in the
motorboat industry own the matrices used to mould the hull of the boats to control their
precision and obtain a standardized finished product that does not require subsequent hand
polishing. In the domestic market, standardization is not a valued feature as domestic consumers
are more tolerant of polishing imperfections.


To accompany their production upgrade, firms also need suppliers and service providers to
upgrade their own products or services. Accomplishing this task requires them to work closely
with suppliers. In the wine sector, the most difficult production challenge is not related to the
actual elaboration of wine but rather to methods for growing higher quality grapes. Grape vines
have to be pruned and trimmed carefully. Grape producers also need to learn how to adapt the


                                                29
standard techniques for producing such grapes to the particular conditions of the Argentine
climate. Because of the critical role that grapes play in the elaboration of high quality wine and
the difficulty in ensuring the provision of quality grapes by suppliers, wineries often produce
their own grapes for their top wines and rely on suppliers for their medium range ones.


We never find it to be the case that a firm understands the importance of meeting the quality
standards of developed countries but lacks the technological capability to attain them. While
many firms appear to be technologically capable of attaining those standards, most often they
do not achieve stable exports to developed countries because they fail to maintain them
consistently. In the furniture industry, a large amount of production and commercialization
effort by a group of producers and distributors to establish a long-term presence in the United
States and Canada was wasted when the first consolidated shipment was found to contain an
unacceptably high fraction of defective items. The fact that managers and workers are not
sufficiently convinced of the critical importance of achieving and maintaining quality standards
appears to be a stronger impediment for export growth than lack of technological knowledge.
Indeed, in the sectors we studied access to production knowledge does not stand out as a critical
bottleneck for export success.


iii) The marketing component


Finally, we describe the marketing component of a business model. In this component, we
emphasize the relationship that firms establish with their distributors and the actions they take
to make their products known and appealing to consumers in destination markets. There is a
sharp contrast between how products are marketed in the domestic market and how they need
to be marketed in developed countries. The latter requires establishing long-term relationships
with foreign distributors who, compared to domestic ones, demand conformance to more
stringent business practices, have stronger bargaining power, are more uncertain about the
reliability of the seller as a partner, and play a more important role as suppliers of information
about the evolution of demand. Producers who want to export also need to develop a marketing
strategy for products that do not enjoy brand recognition in foreign countries.


The way of conducting business and the business codes that regulate the commercial activity
differ considerably between developing and developed countries. Despite these differences,
distributors in developed countries expect their foreign suppliers to conform to their own


                                                30
business practices and codes. For instance, they are used to much higher standards of quality
consistency and timely delivery than those that prevail in developing countries. Foreign
distributors also have specific requirements about packaging and back office procedures that
they expect their providers to fulfill. For example, Trapiche, a leading exporter of wines, has
restructured its back office to ensure issuing invoices that are consolidated and easy to process.
Failure to conform to these requirements may risk the continuity of the business relationship
with the channel. For instance, a furniture producer’s incipient relationship with a foreign
distributor was terminated when the producer failed to provide the requested price quotes in
time. Similarly, the relationship between another furniture producer and a foreign distributor
was abruptly severed when the producer attempted to increase the original price quote soon
after he learned about the distributor’s success at selling his products.


The importance of complying with the expectations and requirements of foreign distributors
stems from the fact that their negotiating power tends to be substantially larger than that of
domestic distributors. Foreign distributors can choose business partners from a large worldwide
pool of a priori similarly apt potential suppliers and select only a few to engage in a long-term
relationship. Domestic producers, therefore, need to understand and deal with the fact that their
relationships with foreign distributors are more asymmetric than those they establish with
distributors at home.


Foreign distributors usually lack information about the professionalism and reliability of
potential suppliers overseas. Therefore, they extract signals about those attributes from the
suppliers’ compliance with their procedures and requirements. For example, foreign distributors
in the wine and wooden furniture industries interpret receiving products in boxes that are
damaged as an indication that the producer is not serious about quality. Firms that implement
the export business model are aware of the importance of such signals and make specific efforts
to reduce the distributor’s uncertainty about their reliability. Compañía Constructora de
Embarcaciones (CCE), a leading exporter in the motorboats industry, ensures post-transaction
services for the ships they sell to convey the assurance that they are trustworthy. This firm has
even sent its own technicians to the country in which a ship was bought to make specific
repairs. The distributors’ reliance on such signals constitutes a severe problem for local firms




                                                 31
that operate under the domestic business model. Not only are they unfamiliar with how business
is done abroad but also they are unaware of the importance distributors place on such signals.30


Finally, foreign distributors in developed countries seek out long-term suppliers with whom they
can establish fluent communication and mutual understanding about the evolving patterns of
consumer demand and who can react rapidly with new or modified products to those changing
patterns. In turn, firms that implement the export business model regard their distributors as a
resource not only to help them sell their products abroad but also to help them understand how
markets are evolving. In contrast, firms that attempt to export but still work according to the
domestic business model do not realize that they are unlikely to establish a stable presence in
foreign markets unless they develop this kind of a relationship with a distributor. These firms
end up working with distributors who act merely as middle-men. Business relationships with
those distributors tend to be transitory as they conduct transactions on a spot basis, do not
invest in making the supplied products distinctively appealing to consumers or retailers, and are
ready to substitute those products with similar ones from competing suppliers when offered a
slightly lower price. In essence, dealing with those distributors implies that their differentiated
products end up being sold in the foreign market as if they were commodities.


In the case of branded products, firms need to elaborate an advertising strategy to make their
products known and appealing to potential consumers. While these products often enjoy brand
recognition domestically, those brands are in general not recognized abroad.                         The domestic
recognition may have been built through past advertising investments.                        Sometimes, it is the
mere result of their long presence in the domestic market. In contrast, implementing the export
business model requires that firms create a brand from scratch and develop its positioning
strategy in an unfamiliar market. For example, CCE advertised its boats in major European
trade magazines while Catena Zapata, a leading exporter of wines, created a tour with tango
dancers around the U.S. to introduce its wines to specialized journalists.31




30
   A potential explaination for why domestic firms so often fail to conform to foreign distributors’ requierments is
that, in some cases, they might consider those requirements to be inefficient relative to alternative arrangements that
fit local conditions better. This perception might sometimes be right. DiMaggio and Powell (1983) argue that
isomorphic processes – in this case distributors’ demands that xporters conform to their business practices – usually
proceed in the absence of evidence that they increase internal organizational efficiency.
31
   In the wooden furniture industry, direct advertising to consumers is less common as consumers tend not to base
their product choice on brands.




                                                          32
At the early stages of export emergence in a sector, firms that wish to export typically have to
confront the existence of “country-of-origin (COO)” bias. As a response to the imperfect
observability of quality attributes in a product at the time of purchase and the absence of a
country reputation as a reliable producer of quality in a given sector, consumers often use the
level of development of the product’s country of origin as an extrinsic cue of product quality.32
COO bias also exists among distributors. If they have a bad image about a country’s business
practices – e.g. the degree to which they fulfill contracts – they may be unwilling to invest in a
long-run relationship with a producer at the outset as they might presume that this potential
partner shares those practices. Potential exporters, therefore, need to be aware of this bias and
develop a strategy to offset it. Reno, a furniture producer, opened a warehouse in California to
store his goods with the main purpose of convincing his potential customers that he would be
able to deliver their orders in time. Horacio Levin, a television program producer, confronted
COO bias by associating with a Spanish colleague at a television festival. As an owner of a
production company from a country that at that moment had scarce participation in the
international market of T.V. formats, he was convinced that this bias would hamper the
possibility of engaging in favorable commercial deals.


In sum, firms that wish to export to developed countries on a consistent basis need to learn how
to market their products in a different environment. In foreign markets, they need to adapt to
foreign distributor’s business practices and codes, they depend on information about consumer
demand that those distributors can provide, and they might need to develop an advertising
strategy. Implementing the marketing component of the export business model, like
implementing the product component, also requires a substantial amount of tacit knowledge
about how markets in the developed world operate. Firms that do not possess this knowledge
have substantive difficulties in adapting marketing practices to those markets’ requirements. As
we argued above, those firms end up commercializing their differentiated products as
commodities, thereby causing them to sacrifice profitability and the prospects for a long-run
presence in those markets.




32
   A vast literature in international marketing documents the existence of COO bias. See, for example, Bilkey and Nes
(1982) and Verlegh and Steenkamp (1999).




                                                         33
6. Export pioneers


In three of the four sectors we study (motorboats, television programs and wines) an export
pioneer was the first to establish a consistent export presence in a developed country. A
common characteristic shared by export pioneers is their possession of a substantial knowledge
advantage about foreign markets over other domestic producers in their industries. Based on
this knowledge they conceive and implement the export business model. In this section, we start
by characterizing the approach to exporting of a typical domestic producer in an industry that
does not yet display consistent exports to developed countries. Then, we describe the knowledge
advantage of export pioneers, how they acquire this knowledge, and how its possession helps
them become consistent exporters to the developed world.


When an industry has no established exporters to a developed country, the typical domestic
producer in the sector who evaluates whether to embark on an export venture lacks a
benchmark about how things should be done in order to achieve a consistent presence abroad.
This producer realizes that he is unfamiliar with the foreign environment and is usually even
able to distinguish key differences between this environment and the domestic one. But he is
unable to map those differences into specific changes that are needed in his approach to
business. More generally, he does not realize that he needs to change his business model.


As this producer does not realize that his way of doing business needs to be changed or is unable
to elucidate the relevant dimensions along which he needs to do it, he approaches foreign
markets the same way as he does it domestically. Thus, he soon finds that his incipient deals
abroad do not develop into deeper and more stable relationships. The export activity of a large
fraction of differentiated-good sectors in Argentina consists exclusively of producers like the one
just described. Those industries display a stagnant and limited export performance. However,
there are also a few specific industries that exhibit substantial export growth and ship a
considerable fraction of exports to developed countries.33 Our four case studies are chosen from
these sectors. In three of them we find that export growth was spurred by an export pioneer
whose success in the foreign market demonstrated to the industry the logic and viability of the
export business model.



33
     The statistical analysis used to identify those sectors is described in Appendix 2.




                                                              34
We define an export pioneer of an industry as the individual who first implements all of the
elements of the export business model. By implementing the export business model, he
inaugurates a new way of conducting business that is conducive to establishing a stable presence
in developed markets. Export pioneers in our case studies display a common characteristic. They
possess a knowledge advantage over their peers consisting of a thorough understanding of
foreign markets. In particular, they understand their demand idiosyncrasies and ways of
conducting business. This understanding allows them to build a “vision” of the export business
model as they decipher its key pieces and put them together according to the model’s internal
logic.


Based on their vision, export pioneers assess the implementation of the export business model as
feasible and profitable, and hence develop and embark on a focused export strategy. As they
experiment and learn in the course of its implementation, pioneers mould their original vision
into a complete business model. The implementation of the export business model requires
making a number of changes to common industry practices. For example, export pioneers
sometimes develop new suppliers rather than work with established ones, visit international
trade fairs systematically, and hire employees with relevant work experience abroad or with a
different set of skills than those traditionally demanded. Since other players in the industry do
not see the logic of the pioneer’s actions, they simply deride his efforts at early stages in the
implementation of the export business model. Later, they widely acknowledge them as the
individuals who “have shown the way” to developed markets.


The distinguishing element of export pioneers is their foreign market knowledge. This knowledge
stems from their embeddedness in their industry’s business community in a developed country.
Moreover, in all cases they are embedded in the business community of a country that
concentrates a substantial amount of world trade in their industries. While they are also
embedded in the business community of their industries at home, as any other domestic
producer, their foreign embeddedness constitutes a doorway to a variety of resources for
acquiring foreign market knowledge. In particular, their foreign social and business relationships
allow them to acquire fine-grained information about the market such as the latest consumption
trends and the nuances of the competition environment. Also, these relationships allow them to
identify distributors that would be willing to form partnerships and to understand how to gain
their trust. More fundamentally, they gain an understanding of the logic of the market, its
demand patterns and its business practices. As described in the previous section, this


                                               35
information is fundamentally tacit and as such very difficult to acquire through alternate
channels.


Given the importance of being embedded in a foreign business community – in a context in
which export emergence has not taken off – it is critical to understand how export pioneers
become enmeshed in those social networks abroad. We find that their foreign embeddedness is
the result of past activities carried out previously and independently to their subsequent decision
to become exporters. In particular, export pioneers in our study did not undertake those
activities as a means to learn about the export market.


Next we describe some particular instances in the life experiences of our three export pioneers
that have enabled them to become embedded in business communities of their industries abroad.
We also describe how the knowledge they acquired helped them construct an export business
model. While we provide a very succinct account here, the individual case studies in our
companion paper describe in much greater detail their individual experiences that enabled them
to achieve consistent exports to developed countries. The case of wooden furniture, where we do
not find an export pioneer, is treated later in this section.


In two of our industries (motorboats and television programs) the export pioneers were first
importers. Luis López Blanco was the pioneer in the motorboat industry. He founded his own
trading company after working for years as an accountant and business administrator for
different shipyards. This company was the representative in Argentina of internationally
recognized brands such as Ferreti, a premium Italian brand of motorboats, and Cummins, a U.S.
motor engine producer, as well as domestic boat brands. Despite no previous production
experience, in 2000 he started to produce his own motorboats and even made his first export to
a developed country. López Blanco was the first to establish a consistent presence in OECD
markets. Since 2002, his exports to those markets – primarily to Europe – have been consistent
and increasing. Among the producers in this industry in Argentina who exported to the OECD
until 2004, he was the only one still active in the export market in 2006.34


His experience as an importer was crucial as it made him familiar with the motorboat market in
Europe. The core of this market is in Italy, the largest world exporter in this industry. His

34
     We have access to customs data by exporter only until year 2006.




                                                           36
importing activity, which involved regular trips abroad, attendance at the most important trade
fairs, and frequent and fluent contact with foreign agents, promoted his embeddedness in the
business community of European motorboat producers and traders. He learned about consumer
tastes, demand trends, quality requirements, and business practices. He also learned about
foreign distributors’ needs and how to gain their trust. For instance, López Blanco became
aware of the importance of providing distributors with detailed blueprints and manuals of every
boat so that they could respond to specific requests from their clients. More generally, the
knowledge he acquired allowed him to build the vision of the export business model he later
implemented.


A few examples are useful to illustrate how López Blanco’s embeddedness in the European
business community of the motorboat industry allowed him to achieve a stable presence in the
European market. First, the knowledge he acquired by socializing in that community permitted
López Blanco to develop a thorough understanding of the tastes and aspirations of European
motorboat users. He discovered, for instance, that purchasers of such boats in Europe are more
leisure-oriented than motorboat users in Argentina. Based on this understanding, he designed
the control panel of the Aqualum 35, the first motorboat he sold abroad, following the style of
instrument panels of premium automobiles such as Audi and Ferrari. He also realized that
European consumers had concerns about buying a big-ticket item such as a motorboat from a
developing country with no established reputation in the industry. Thus, among other initiatives
to address these concerns, he decided to equip the boat with more expensive Italian comfort
appliances to set foreign consumers at ease by providing appliances they already recognized and
trusted, and that could easily be repaired in Europe. López Blanco also understood that similar
concerns from distributors could hamper their willingness to invest time and resources in a
serious partnership with him. To show trustworthiness and commitment to quality, he once sent
his own technician abroad – rather than rely on outsourced post-sale service – to repair a boat
he had recently sold.


Horacio Levin, the pioneer in the television program industry, also was an importer before
becoming a producer. Having started his business career as a producer of television commercials,
he later imported cartoons and animated films that he sold to state-owned television
broadcasters in Argentina. He was the first person in this country to take advantage of the




                                              37
growing importance of formats in the television industry and of the myriad of services associated
with them.35 Initially, he adapted foreign formats to the domestic market. Then, he exported
production services by adapting foreign formats to audiences in third countries. Finally, he
systematically created and exported his own formats.


As in the case of López Blanco, Levin’s previous experience as an importer proved critical. By
regularly visiting industry trade fairs in Europe and the U.S. and being involved in commercial
dealings with foreign agents, he became embedded in an increasingly global television business
community. As a result, early on he understood the new logic underlying the design, production
and trade of television formats, and exploited the opportunities that they created for a country
like Argentina.


His familiarity with this global business community also shaped key business decisions he made.
For example, he acknowledged that foreign agents might be reluctant to make deals with a
businessman from Argentina. To avert those concerns and ensure that he would be taken
seriously by potential partners, he associated with the independent Spanish producer
Globomedia to obtain the rights to adapt the format The Survivor to Spain and all of Latin
America.


In contrast to the pioneers in the motorboat and television program industries, the pioneer in
the wine industry, Nicolás Catena Zapata, was not new to production in his industry. In fact, he
was the heir of one of the oldest and largest wineries in Argentina. Although he was only the
second largest exporter during the initial years of export emergence in this sector during the
early nineties, he was the first to implement the export business model. He was also the only
producer whose exports to the OECD have displayed uninterrupted growth since those initial
years. His early exports were directed to the United States. Now he exports to more than 32
countries. His winery is the second largest exporter in Argentina and the largest one to the
OECD.


Catena Zapata’s early choice of the U.S. as the destination market for his fine wines was not a
coincidence. He was a Visiting Professor at the University of California, Berkeley for three years,


35
   Television formats consist of the structure and main features of a television program, which is later completed with
specific content adapted to the idiosyncratic tastes of local audiences.




                                                          38
where he taught courses in basic microeconomics at the Agricultural and Resource Economics
Department. The proximity of Berkeley to Napa Valley allowed him to socialize with members
of the wine business community in that region and become embedded in that community. In
particular, he became a close acquaintance of Robert Mondavi, a pioneer of the transformation
of this sector in the United States. Catena Zapata’s familiarity with the intricacies of that
transformation motivated him to attempt to emulate it in Argentina. Thus, he became the
pioneer of the transformation of the Argentine wine industry and led the way in establishing
international recognition for Argentina as a producer of new-world wines.


Catena could not have built his successful export strategy without his thorough knowledge
about how new-world wines are produced, consumed, and marketed. For instance, convinced
that he would risk his long-run export prospects if the quality of his wines faltered, he decided
not to export the wine from the first harvest he obtained using new-world wine production
methods. He also leveraged his understanding of the new prevailing attitude toward wine
consumption to organize a promotional tour that included a sophisticated tango-dance show so
as to associate his wines with other recognized symbols of high quality from Argentina. His
familiarity with how prestige was assigned in the wine business community of the United States
also led him to seek recognition for his icon wines so that they would serve as a quality-signaling
umbrella for his other wines. More generally, he sought to have his wines reviewed by the Wine
Spectator, the most important wine magazine in the United States, and he courted specialized
journalists to obtain positive reviews that would be critical for promoting his wines.


It is less obvious in Catena’s case that his embeddedness in the business community of Napa
Valley was the result of activities undertaken previously and independently to his decision to
export. However, we think this is still the case. On the one hand, it is unlikely that his decision
to accept the visiting position at Berkeley was influenced by the possibility of acquiring
knowledge that would later help him become an exporter of new-world wine. In fact, Catena
explicitly told us that his willingness to accept the position was not motivated by Berkeley’s
proximity to Napa Valley as he was not even aware of the transformation taking place in the
industry at that time.36 On the other hand, the offer to take a visiting position at Berkeley was
the consequence of having done a Ph.D. in Economics many years earlier, since it was one of his
former classmates at Columbia University who offered him the position. Another consequence of

36
     Furthermore, he told us he would have accepted a similar position elsewhere in the United States.




                                                            39
this decision was that his four years as a Ph.D. student in New York City made him familiar
with the American culture and its values, which might have facilitated his social embeddedness
in the wine business community of Napa Valley.


Two types of evidence underlie our claim that the key advantage that distinguishes export
pioneers from other domestic producers is their foreign embeddedness. First, as illustrated in
some of the examples above (and others described in the case studies), we identify several
instances in which key decisions of export pioneers appear to have been the result of their
thorough understanding of export markets and unlikely to have been made by other producers
lacking this knowledge. Second, since it is very uncommon for a domestic producer in Argentina
to be embedded in the business community of a developed country, the chances of observing all
three export pioneers exhibiting this uncommon characteristic would be extremely low if this
attribute were not critical for attaining consistent exports to the developed world.


Our emphasis on export pioneers’ embeddedness abroad does not imply that other aspects of
their background, resources, and personality characteristics are not important determinants of
export performance. In fact, export pioneers know their industries well, have access to financial
resources, and probably possess some common psychological characteristics such as ambition,
drive, creative energy, and ability to think systematically. Following Diamond’s (1997) Anna
Karenina Principle, which he uses to characterize a situation in which many elements need to
be present for an event to happen, we could think of a pioneer’s profound understanding of
foreign markets as being as critical to their export success as their industry-specific knowledge,
financial resources, or psychological characteristics.37 However, we highlight their understanding
of foreign markets in our analysis because this characteristic is the most common lacking
attribute among domestic producers.


The case of the wooden furniture industry provides an example of an industry in which no
producer combines all necessary requirements for achieving a stable presence in developed
markets. In this industry, we do not find an export pioneer as no single producer has
implemented all the elements of the export business model. The absence of a pioneer is manifest
in the fact that, although the industry shipped 35% of its exports to the OECD in 2008, almost
all export growth since 2000 (96%) was accounted for by exports to other destinations.

37
     Kremer’s (1993) O’Ring theory is built on a similar principle.




                                                             40
Furthermore, while total exports grew substantially until 2004, they have since stagnated. Many
of the firms in this sector continue to export on a sporadic basis, simply seeking to compensate
for occasional declines in the domestic market.38


Despite the absence of an export pioneer, the case of Jorge Etchebehere is illustrative as an
example of an individual who has a vision of an export business model but can not successfully
implement it. Etchebehere is not a producer. He is a commercial agent. However, he was
regularly singled out by other members of the industry as the person who best understands
foreign markets and who made the most substantive efforts to enter them. After working many
years as a sales representative for a domestic furniture company, Etchebehere decided to start
his own business as an intermediary between local producers and U.S. distributors. First, he
contracted a U.S. designer to teach Argentine producers how to adapt the style of their
furniture to the tastes of U.S. consumers. Later, he formed a company with two U.S. sales
agents to represent eight Argentine firms in the U.S. and Canada.


Etchebehere’s early life experience exposed him to social interactions that provided him with a
strong familiarity with the U.S. culture and values. When he was 16 years old, he spent three
months as an exchange student in the United States. As an adult, he held a position in a
multinational company that involved regular social and business interactions with Americans
who went to Argentina to train local employees. This experience gave him the ability to
understand and communicate with people from the United States. These skills proved critical in
helping him build business ties with people from this country.


Etchebehere is fully aware of the basic elements of the export business model. For example, he is
convinced of the importance of adapting the products to foreign tastes, maintaining consistent
quality standards, and conforming to the requirements of foreign distributors. Despite this
knowledge, he seems unable to convince the local producers he represents that they need to
change the way they do things to successfully export. In particular, as those producers are
geographically dispersed around the country, he is unable to guarantee the quality of their
shipments. As a result of the failure of these companies to meet the requirements of foreign
distributors, Etchebehere’s export business has not taken off.


38
  The case study of wooden furniture in the companion paper describes some of the main exporters in the industry
and explains why none of them can be considered an export pioneer.




                                                      41
Before concluding this section, we would like to emphasize that our findings should not be
understood to imply that embeddedness in a foreign business community is always necessary to
consistently export. While this appears to be the case when export development in an industry
has not yet occurred, producers can acquire the required tacit knowledge through alternate
channels at later stages of this process. In fact, once the pioneer demonstrates that a successful
business model exists and some of its elements become visible to others in the industry, this
knowledge can spread throughout the local business community without the need for those who
follow the pioneer to have a similar experience abroad. The latter constitutes the process of
diffusion. We now turn to this topic.




7. The diffusion of the export business model


The export success of the pioneer generates a demonstration effect that induces others to follow
him and thus spurs export growth in an industry. In this section, we analyze the process of
diffusion of the export business model. We describe its main determinants and the most
important channels through which it operates. Since there is seldom a smoking gun to identify
most critical instances of diffusion, the characterization we provide here is partially based on
indirect evidence and, in some cases, even on mere speculation. However, all of its elements and
implications are consistent with the evidence collected in our field work.


The implementation of the export business model by the pioneer is visible to other players in
the industry. Notable among them are competitors and suppliers. Although those players do not
observe many aspects of the business model the pioneer is implementing, they understand that
he is making consistent efforts to export such as systematically attending trade fairs, developing
new suppliers or procuring upgraded versions of his inputs. More generally, they realize that
those efforts involve a different way of conducting business. But they find it hard to understand
the economic logic that drives his actions. In fact, some even think the pioneer is simply crazy.
In any event, it is still clear for most industry participants that he is trying something different.
Luis López Blanco, Horacio Levin, and Nicolás Catena are all acknowledged by their peers as
export pioneers in their respective industries. Even Jorge Echebehere, the commercial agent in
the furniture industry, is so regarded. Sometimes export pioneers are themselves open and vocal
about what they are doing. This is particularly the case of López Blanco, who was the president
of the business association of motorboat builders at the time he was developing the export


                                                 42
business model. From this position, he preached about the benefits of establishing a consistent
presence in foreign markets and adopting the business practices that are conducive to that goal.


Once an export pioneer succeeds in his venture, knowledge about his export performance spreads
throughout the industry. The export success of the pioneer is taken as an indication that there
is a way of doing things to achieve profitable exports on a sustained basis – i.e. that a profitable
export business model exists in a given industry. Even if several components of the pioneer’s
business model are not visible, merely realizing that there is a profitable way of approaching
foreign markets might be sufficient to convince some firms to search for its unknown
components. For instance, potential followers may pay careful attention to a pioneer’s actions,
poach some of his employees, or hire an international consultant. The pioneer sets an observable
benchmark. He shows that gaining a stable and profitable presence in developed markets is
possible. The transmission of this very general knowledge is the most important role of the
pioneer in the diffusion process.


In addition, as the export pioneer implements the export business model other firms might gain
knowledge about the markets he targeted or the type of products he exports. For example,
winemakers in Mendoza knew that Nicolás Catena was targeting the U.S. market and working
with Cabernet Sauvignon and Chardonnay grapes. While Cabernet Sauvignon and Chardonnay
were the staple varietals of the emergent new wine industry in California, focusing on those
grapes at the time was not an obvious choice for a potential Argentine exporter as they were not
important in the domestic market. Another example is found in the motorboat industry, where
it was known that López Blanco was specifically targeting the European market. Altamar, an
early follower, switched its exporting efforts to that market after initially attempting to export
to the United States. Three other firms also followed López Blanco soon after he first exported a
yatch to the United Arab Emirates. In sum, generating diffusion about export opportunities in
particular products or markets is another important role of the pioneer in the diffusion process.


The actions and decisions of export pioneers might also transmit more specific information. For
instance, the pioneer may voluntarily or unintentionally provide information about specific
aspects of what he is doing to competitors and suppliers, or they may learn about them through
other channels such as former workers and managers switching firms. For example, competitors
and suppliers might learn that the pioneer has hired an international consultant to help him
design products with foreign appeal, or they might hear about specific features of the


                                                43
technological upgrade that he is implementing. Below, we describe particular episodes we
identified in our field work that we can reasonably presume have encompassed instances of
diffusion stemming from the actions of pioneers. We note, however, that it is very difficult to
find those specific instances as the transmission of knowledge seldom leaves a trail and managers
tend to be reluctant to acknowledge what they have learned from competitors.


Two of these episodes involve Horacio Levin, the export pioneer in the television industry.
Besides his efforts at exporting his own programs, Levin was also an intermediary in the export
of Caiga quien Caiga, the first export of an Argentine format to a developed country. The
owners of this format, the production company Cuatro Cabezas, had created the program
without knowing how to format or export it. Levin connected them with his Spanish commercial
partners, who were interested in buying the format, and managed the whole transaction by
representing those partners. Soon after this operation, Cuatro Cabezas sold this format to
numerous other countries and later created and exported several other formats. This
transaction, generated and conducted by Levin, provided Cuatro Cabezas the opportunity to
learn the very basic logic underlying the production and trade of T.V. formats. In addition, we
presume this operation also taught them more specific issues about the types of programs that
could be formatted and the main elements of a format over which a contract could be written.


A second episode involving Levin is related to his leasing of studio space from Telefé Contenidos
to shoot El Frijolito, a Mexican-style soap opera aired in the U.S. for the Hispanic audience.
Although Telefé Contenidos had no relevant export experience at the time, it later would
become one of the leading Argentine exporters in the television industry. Despite the fact that
we do not have concrete evidence of learning in this case, we find it reasonable to presume that
by hosting Levin, staff at Telefé learned about his target market, the type of program he was
exporting, and various technical aspects of its production. This knowledge may have later
helped them develop their own exportable products. Another episode we identified consists of a
classical example of diffusion that occurred in the wine industry. Pedro Marchevsky, the long-
time head agronomist for export pioneer Nicolás Catena, left the latter’s company to found his
own winery Dominio del Plata with Susana Balbo, his wife and former foreign sales
representative for various wineries in Mendoza. In his new company, Marchevsky applied the
knowledge about how to produce appealing wines for world markets that he acquired working
for Catena. His winery eventually gained a strong presence in the United Kingdom.




                                               44
Diffusion is facilitated by the fact that the type of knowledge that gives export pioneers an
advantage over other local producers is, to a large extent, of a very basic and general nature.
Export pioneers understand the need to change the business model in order to export. They
know that the gap that divides consumption patterns of developing and developed countries
requires specific efforts to bridge it, such as building design capabilities and upgrading
production processes. They also know that business practices are different and thus require
efforts to comply with the expectations of foreign distributors to gain them as partners in long-
term relationships. Furthermore, they possess the fundamental understanding that establishing a
profitable and consistent export business in developed countries is feasible. The general nature of
this knowledge enables it to be diffused. It is embedded in specific components of the export
business model, such as target markets, main product characteristics, type of technological
upgrades, and skills of hired workers and managers. These components of the export business
model become observable in the course of its implementation. Their visibility may be just
sufficient to induce early followers to embark on an export venture of their own and hence
initiate a process of export emergence in the sector.


The general nature of key components of our export pioneers’ knowledge advantage is strongly
associated with the fact that these pioneers are located in developing countries. As discussed in
previous sections, in developing countries it is often the case that even this very basic and
general knowledge is not widespread among local producers of differentiated products. Thus,
these producers have much to gain from the diffusion of the pioneer’s knowledge. In contrast,
producers of differentiated products in developed countries already possess this general
knowledge since there is no gap in consumption patterns and business practices that they need
to bridge to sell their products in other developed countries. The difference between the
knowledge background of firms in developing countries and those in the developed world
explains why diffusion is important in the context of our study but not necessarily so for
studying export performance in developed countries. Of particular interest is the comparison of
our export pioneers with the born-global entrepreneurs described in the international business
literature. Both had previous international experiences that allowed them to acquire knowledge
about intricacies of foreign markets such as commercial secrets, business contacts, and details of
the competition environment. However, the knowledge advantage of born-global entrepreneurs
relative to other producers in their countries is confined to these intricacies. This knowledge is
less prone to being diffused as it tends to be specific and does not become visible to others
through the actions of those who possess it. The knowledge advantage of our export pioneers, by


                                                45
contrast, has more general components that are diffusible. Hence, their export success has the
potential to generate export growth in the industry justifying a sectoral approach to
understanding export performance.


Although a large number of firms know about the pioneer’s efforts at exporting and are
potentially aware of specific aspects of what he is doing, at an initial stage in the diffusion
process only a few early followers embark on the business transformations required to export.
But the adoption of the export business model by these few early followers is critical to ignite its
diffusion throughout the industry. As diffusion progresses, the export business model becomes
more visible while the notion that it is possible to export consistently and profitably to
developed countries becomes increasingly accepted. This stage in the diffusion process has only
been reached in two of our four cases, wines and television programs, where a large number of
firms successfully export to the developed world. In those industries, current knowledge about
how to conduct business to achieve that kind of foreign presence is, following Marshall’s
metaphore, “in the air”.


The left panel of figure 7.1 shows the total number of exporters by year in the wine industry
(dark color) and the number of wine exporters to the OECD (light color). Since the early
development of export emergence in this industry, the total number of exporters and the
number of those exporting to the OECD has increased steadily. In particular, exporters to the
OECD increased from less than 50 firms in 1994 to more than 350 exporters in 2006.39 In the
motorboat industry, by contrast, export emergence is only incipient. In 2006, the total number
of exporters was eighteen, twelve of which sold their ships to the OECD (middle panel of figure
7.1). Despite this small number, the growth in the number of exporters has been remarkable
during the last decade, taking into account that during the 1990s exports of motorboats to the
OECD were only sporadic. Given the existence of an export pioneer and a few early followers,
we would expect that diffusion in this industry will eventually follow a similar path to that
observed in wines and television formats. However, the spread of this process within the
industry is yet not certain.40 Finally, the right panel of figure 7.1 shows the number of exporters
in the furniture industry. Both the total number of exporters and the number of those exporting
39
   As explained in section 4, our customs dataset does not include information on value of exports or number of
exporters for the television industry.
40
   Granovetter (1978) develops a model of diffusion with heterogeneous thresholds for adoption across agents. The
diffusion process might be halted if there is a sufficiently large gap between the thresholds of adopters and non-
adopters.




                                                       46
to the OECD peaked after the devaluation of the peso in 2002 and later stagnated. Since no
firm has yet implemented the export business model in this industry, the object of diffusion is
not even present. Therefore, the diffusion process cannot take place to spur sectoral export
growth.


                                                      FIGURE 7.1
                                           Number of exporting firms by industry
                                                       1994-2006
                                      Wine                             Motorboats                      Wooden furniture
                       500




                                                                                              800
                                                           20
                       400




                                                                                              600
                                                           15
                       300




                                                                                              400
                                                           10
                       200




                                                                                              200
                       100




                                                           5
                       0




                                                           0




                                                                                              0
                             1994   1998   2002     2006        1994   1998   2002     2006         1994   1998   2002   2006


                                                  Total exporters                    Exporters to the OECD
                     Source: Argentine customs




The diffusion of the export business model entails firms learning how to change the way they
approach foreign markets in developed countries. As firms learn, we should expect a higher
likelihood that they will be able to maintain an active presence in those markets after they enter
them for the first time. Figure 7.2 displays two time series for each of the three industries with
available exporter-level data. One is the number of new exporting firms that sell to at least one
OECD country by year (left axis). The other is the survival rate, measured as the fraction of
those new exporters that continue to export to the same market in the following year (right
axis). Consistently with the stage of the diffusion process in each of the three industries, the
survival rate of new entrants to the OECD in 2005 is highest among the three in the wine
industry, reaching 35% of new exporters.41 Moreover, this rate has doubled since 1996, when
export emergence was only starting. In the motorboat industry, the (incipient) emergence of
exports is also associated with a stark increase in the survival rate. While no single exporter was


41
   Since our firm-level customs data cover the period 1994-2006, we exclude the first two years of data from the figure
in order to avoid a disproportionate presence of export reentrants – which tend to have a higher survival rate – in the
first years of the sample.




                                                                         47
able to maintain a stable presence in the same OECD market before 2003 (0% survival rate),
this rate reached 24% in 2005. By contrast, despite the large number of new exporters in the
wooden furniture industry, the absence of an export pioneer to make the export business model
visible is manifest in the virtual long-run stagnation of the fraction of surviving exporters to
OECD countries. In fact, this fraction has been decreasing in the last two years displayed in the
figure and was below 10% in 2005.


                                                   FIGURE 7.2
                                        First time exporters to the OECD
                                                    1996-2006
                                Wine                        Motorboats                    Wooden furniture
                   150




                                                    15
                                               .4




                                                                               .4




                                                                                                                .4
                                                                                    300
                                                                                    250
                                               .3




                                                                               .3




                                                                                                                .3
                   100




                                                    10




                                                                                    200
                                               .2




                                                                               .2




                                                                                                                .2
                                                                                    150
                   50




                                                    5
                                               .1




                                                                               .1




                                                                                                                .1
                                                                                    100
                                                                                    50
                   0




                                               0


                                                    0




                                                                               0




                                                                                                                0
                         1996 1999 2002 2005             1996 1999 2002 2005              1996 1999 2002 2005


                               New exporters (left axis)                % of surviving exporters (right axis)
                 Source: Argentine customs




The generalization of the diffusion process involves a wide variety of actors. Among them, the
role of multinationals is salient. In the wine and television industries numerous multinationals
have entered the sector at relatively early stages of the diffusion process and currently account
for a substantial fraction of production and exports. In both industries, multinationals mainly
entered through the acquisition of domestic firms with the primary objective of serving the
foreign market. Thus, their presence significantly contributed to the spread of the export
business model. Despite their important role, in none of our case studies do we find a
multinational to be the export pioneer or one of the very early followers. While they possess
organizational knowledge about how foreign markets operate, before the pioneer and early
followers implement the export business model they are unconvinced that they can adapt their
way of conducting business to the local conditions. Their uncertainty is magnified by the fact
that not only they need to ensure appropriate production conditions in the domestic market but
also find a way to develop latent design capabilities into their products to address the evolving



                                                                 48
needs and tastes of foreign markets. This uncertainty is only resolved once the pioneer and early
                                                                                       42
followers demonstrate the viability of the export business model.                           Our findings here are
consistent with those of Wagner and Zahler (2010), who find in their quantitative analysis of
Chilean new exports that export pioneers tend to be smaller than their followers. They explain
this fact with a model in which larger firms have more choices about how to allocate their
managerial capacity and prefer to wait until their uncertainty is resolved by the actions of
smaller firms.


Other important agents of diffusion are independent designers, who are hired by firms to
develop new products that address the demand needs and tastes of foreign countries. In the
motorboats industry, for instance, Gino Giandino owns a design company that works for
different boatyards. He transfers knowledge to them about design features that would enhance a
boat’s appeal in the Italian market. He acquired this knowledge working in Italy for Germán
Frers, an Argentine naval architect internationally renowned for his successful designs of racing
yachts.


Some studies underscore the role of public agencies and private associations as agents of
diffusion in export development (e.g. McDermott, 2007). We find, however, that their role is not
important at the initial stages of export emergence but only later in this process. For example,
the government’s main agricultural extension agency, INTA, conducted experiments with new
grapes and wines in the early 1980s, simultaneously with Nicolás Catena’s own trials with new
world wines. Despite those early experiments, this agency became an important agent of
diffusion only later in the 1990s after Catena had already exported his first bottles of new world
wines to the United States. In addition, INTA did not help wineries understand the new ways in
which wine was consumed in the developed world, as it was only involved in the diffusion of the
production component of the export business model.


A common theme in the innovation-diffusion literature is the appropriability problem. In
particular, Hausmann and Rodrik (2003) emphasize that the incentives to discover a new
product for export can be severely reduced by the prospects of diffusion. Although diffusion

42
   In fact, in the sectors we study we do not observe either a relevant presence of multinations oriented to the
domestic market before export emergence takes place, maybe due to its unattractively small size. A few exceptions,
such as Bodegas Chandon in wines, and Aceros Johnson in furniture, were specificialized in champagne and kitchen
furniture, respectively. But these products were different from those at the core of export growth in their industries.




                                                          49
could potentially hurt the pioneer, in our cases we have not encountered evidence that the
possibility of diffusion discouraged them from investing relative to a benchmark with no
diffusion. Furthermore, the pioneers’ own account of their decision environment at the time of
implementing the export business model suggests that they were not concerned about diffusion
eventually eroding their profits. On the contrary, in most cases the pioneers were themselves
promoters of diffusion. This behavior can be rationalized by the fact that foreign markets are
sufficiently large to accommodate many potential competitors from their own country.
Furthermore, diffusion may even benefit export pioneers, in particular at early stages of this
process. First, consumers often identify country of origin as one of the main characteristics of
foreign products.   In all of our case studies, pioneers benefited from the appearance of other
exporters who helped them develop brand recognition for the country as a whole.            Second,
pioneers sometimes benefit from the appearance of other exporters as they increase the demand
for specialized infrastructure, intermediate inputs, and services. Third, pioneers might benefit
from cooperating with others to take advantage of economies of scale in international
transactions. For example, they can share stands at trade fairs, organize trade missions together
or cross-offer their products in foreign markets to diversify their portfolio. The fact that export
pioneers benefit from diffusion to other firms points to the potential feasibility and desirability
of schemes aimed at fostering inter-firm cooperation.


One lingering but crucial question is whether export emergence would have nevertheless
occurred without the existence of the export pioneer. Was he necessary for the eventual spread
of the export business model throughout the sector or was he instead just the first emergent
player in a process that would have happened inexorably (although maybe with a substantial
delay) due to changing external conditions? The second view can be sustained more forcefully in
the case of the wine industry, as drastic shifts in consumption patterns and production methods
gave many countries the opportunity to enter world markets as exporters of bottled fine wine.
Given that Argentina was already an important producer of traditional wines, it is reasonable to
think that its rise as a significant world exporter would have occurred even if Catena had not
pioneered the transformation of the wine industry in Argentina. Greece, however, constitutes a
counterexample of a country that is also a traditional wine producer (actually one of the oldest
ones) but has been unable to take advantage of the transformation of wine consumption by
developing new-world wines that appeal to customers in the developed world.




                                                50
In the motorboat and television industries it is less obvious that export emergence could have
occurred without the existence of an export pioneer. In Argentina these industries do not seem
to enjoy a stronger comparative advantage than other industries, like leather footwear and
wooden furniture. The latter industries enjoy favorable conditions in terms of design capabilities
and access to raw materials but also display weak performances as exporters to the developed
world. The existence of an export pioneer in one industry but not in the others appears to be
the main distinguishing feature that explains the different export performance of these
industries.




8. Conclusions and further comments


This paper develops a conceptual framework to explain the constraints that prevent producers
of differentiated goods in developing countries from achieving a consistent export presence in the
developed world and the process through which those constraints may be overcome. The
framework is built upon the findings of four sectoral case studies of export emergence in
Argentina and consists of three main parts. The first part contrasts two ideal-type business
models to compare the different ways in which consistent exporters and firms oriented to the
domestic market conceive and conduct business. The second part describes the role of export
pioneers in the emergence of new exporting sectors, emphasizing their understanding of foreign
markets and how to approach them with differentiated products as their most important
common attribute. The third describes the process of diffusion initiated by export pioneers. This
last part characterizes the general nature of their knowledge advantage, which makes it
susceptible to diffusion.


One of our key findings is that export performance appears to be more dependent on how
thoroughly foreign markets are understood than on how efficiently production is organized. This
understanding by pioneers and later by their followers leads them to implement an approach to
business, the export business model, which differs drastically from the one that prevails in the
domestic market. Most notably, those firms address the need to adapt products to the
consumption patterns of developed countries and build long-run relationships with foreign
distributors. Firms that attempt to export to the developed world while doing business
according to the domestic business model often achieve only limited and sporadic sales abroad.
Despite this limited success, they do not change their approach to foreign markets since they


                                               51
lack the knowledge that would prompt them to do it. Due to its tacit nature, this knowledge is
difficult to access. Moreover, firms are often unaware of the need to possess it. In contrast to the
importance of understanding foreign markets, we do not find that firms face strong technological
difficulties in designing and producing products for export once they understand the type of
adaptations in design and quality that are required and are convinced of the importance of
implementing them to achieve a stable presence in developed markets.


The knowledge advantage of export pioneers stems from their embeddedness in the business
communities of their industries abroad. Other producers, however, do not need to be similarly
enmeshed in a foreign network. They can acquire this knowledge through the process of diffusion
set off by the pioneer. In addition, this knowledge could be potentially diffused across sectors
since some of its critical components, such as awareness of the need to adapt products to foreign
needs, ensure quality consistency, and build long-run relationships with distributors, are quite
general in their nature. In this light, an implication of our study for policies of export promotion
is the potential desirability of programs focused on building “soft skills” associated with changing
the mindset of potential exporters when they approach foreign markets relative to helping them
buy machines or attend trade fairs. Those programs could even involve the participation of
successful exporters who, according to our findings, are not necessarily reluctant to share their
experience and knowledge with other producers.


An interesting finding of our study relates to the role of multinationals in export emergence. In
the sectors we study, multinationals are not the ones that initiate the process of export
emergence. Rather, they enter the industry once the export pioneer has demonstrated the
viability of the export business model. Multinationals have the foreign market knowledge that
domestic firms tend to lack. However, they may not be familiar with the local conditions. In the
first place, they may be uncertain about their ability to combine local factors to produce the
goods that they need while satisfying quality standards and cost pressures imposed by world
markets. In the second place, establishing operations in a developing country to design and
produce differentiated products for the developed world implies harder challenges than those
involved in just manufacturing them using designs developed elsewhere. They need to transform
local design capabilities into the ability to design and produce goods that at the same time meet
the tastes and needs of consumers in developed countries and the local production conditions of
a developing country. Multinationals may be uncertain about their ability to achieve this goal or
even about its feasibility. In any event, while we underscore the fact that we do not observe


                                                52
multinationals pioneering export emergence, we also acknowledge that their role in this process
deserves further research. Such research could inform debates about the desirability, or perhaps
the optimal timing, of polices designed to foster new exports from local producers vis a vis those
aimed at promoting new exports by attracting foreign direct investment.


Finally, our findings suggest that the systematic study of the success and failure of export
emergence in different industries may provide further insights into export development and how
public policy can influence it. In this study we have largely devoted our research to
understanding the conditions that explain the appearance of an export pioneer and his role as
the initiator of export emergence in a given industry. Further research could focus on later
stages of the diffusion process, paying special attention to the role played by public and private
support institutions as well as multinationals.




                                                  53
References


1. Abernathy, F. H., Dunlop, J.T, Hammond, J. H. and Weil, D. (1999), A stitch in time: Lean
    retailing and the transformation of manufacturing—Lessons from the apparel and textile
    industries, (Oxford University Press).
2. Albornoz, F., Calvo Pardo, Hector F. and Corcos, G. (2010), "Sequential Exporting,"
    Discussion Papers, 10-08, Department of Economics, University of Birmingham.
3. Amsden, A. H. (1989), Asia’s Next Giant: South Korea and Late Industrialization, Oxford
    University Press.
4. Arkolakis, C. (2008), “Market Penetration Costs and the New Consumers Margin in
    International Trade,” NBER Working Paper 14214.
5. Armenter, R. and Koren, M. (2009), "Economies of Scale and the Size of Exporters," CeFiG
    Working Papers 7, Center for Firms in the Global Economy.
6. Artopoulos, A., D. Friel, and J.C.Hallak, “Export Emergence of Differentiated Goods from
    Developing Countries: Four Argentine Cases,” Economics Department Working Paper 107,
    Universidad de San Andrés, March 2011.
7. Bartlett, C. A. (2009), “Global Wine War 2009: New World versus Old,” Harvard
    Business Review.
8. Bernard, A., Redding, S. and Schott, P. (2009), "Multi-Product Firms and Trade
    Liberalization," Working Papers 09-21, Center for Economic Studies, U.S. Census Bureau.
9. Bilkey, W. and Nes, E. (1982), “Country-of-Origin Effects on Product Evaluation,” Journal
    of International Business Studies, 13, 89-99.
10. Butman, J., Fiske, N. and Silverstein, M. (2003), “Trading Up: Why Consumers Want New
    Luxury Goods and How Companies Create Them,” Portfolio Hardcover.
11. Choi, Y. C., Hummels, D. and Xiang, C. (2009), "Explaining import quality: The role of the
    income distribution," Journal of International Economics, 77(2), 265-275.
12. Crozet, M., Head, K. and Mayer, T. (2009), "Quality Sorting and Trade: Firm-level
    Evidence for French Wine," CEPR Discussion Papers 7295.
13. Das, S., Roberts, M.J. and Tybout, J. R. (2007), “Market Entry Costs, Producer
    Heterogeneity, and Export Dynamics," Econometrica, 75(3), 837-873.
14. Diamond, J. (1997), Guns, Germs, and Steel, (W. W. Norton).
15. DiMaggio, P. and Powell, W. (1983), “The Iron Cage Revisited: Institutional Isomorphism
    and Collective Rationality in organizational fields,” American Sociological Review, 48, 147-
    160.
16. Easterly, W. and A. Reshef (2010), “African Export Successes: Surprises, Stylized Facts, and
    Explanations,” NBER Working Paper 16597.
17. Eaton, J., Eslava, M., Krizan, C. J., Kugler, M. and Tybout, J. (2009), “A search and
    learning model of export dynamics,” mimeo.
18. Elango, B. and Pattnaik, C. (2007), “Building Capabilities for International Operations
    through Networks: A Study of Indian Firms,” Journal of International Business Studies, 38,
    541-555.




                                              54
19. Ellis, P. (2000), “Social Ties and Foreign Market Entry,” Journal of International Business
    Studies, 31, 443-469.
20. Freund, C, and Pierola, M. (2009), “Export Entrepreneurs: Evidence from Peru,” mimeo.
    The World Bank.
21. Gereffi, G. (1999), "International Trade and Industrial Upgrading in the Apparel
    Commodity Chain," Journal of International Economics, 48(1), 37-70.
22. Granovetter, M. (1978), "Threshold Models of Collective Behavior," The American Journal
    of Sociology, 83(6), 1420–1443.
23. Granovetter, M. (1985), “Economic Action and Social Structure: The Problem of
    Embeddedness,” The American Journal of Sociology, 91(3), 481-510.
24. Hallak, J. C. (2006), “Product Quality and the Direction of Trade,” Journal of International
    Economics, 68(1), 238-265.
25. Hallak, J.C. and J. Sivadasan (2009), “Firms’ Exporting Behavior under Quality Contraints,”
    Working Paper 88, Intermational Policy Center.
26. Hausmann R. and Rodrick D. (2003), “ Economic Development as Self-Discovery," Journal
    of Development Economics, 72(2), 603-633.
27. Humphrey, J. and H. Schmitz (2002), “How Does Insertion in Global Value Chains Affect
    Upgrading in Industrial Clusters?” Regional Studies, 36(9), 1017-1027.
28. Iacovone, L. and B. Javorcik (2010), “Multi-Product Exporters: Product Churning,
    Uncertainty and Export Discoveries,” Economic Journal, 120, 481-499.
29. Johanson J and Vahlne J. (1977), “The Internationalization Process of the Firm: A Model of
    Knowledge Development and Increasing Foreign Market Commitments,” Journal of
    International Business, 8(1), 23-32.
30. Johanson, J. and Vahlne, J. (1990), “The Mechanism of Internationalization,” International
    Marketing Review, 7(4), 11–24.
31. Katz, J. (1984), “Domestic Technological Innovations and Dynamic Comparative
    Advantage,” Journal of Development Economics, 16, 13-37.
32. Keesing, D. and S. Lall (1990), “Marketing Manufactured Exports from Developing
    Countries: Learning Sequences and Public Support,” in G. Helleiner (ed.), Trade Policy,
    Industrialization, and Development: New Perspectives (Clarendon Press – Oxford, 1992)
33. Kim, L. (1997), Imitation and Innovation. The dynamics of Korea’s Technological Learning,
    (Boston: Harvard Business School Press).
34. Knight, G. and Cavusgil S. Tamer (1996), “The Born Global Firm: a Challenge to
    Traditional Internationalization theory,” Advances in International Marketing, JAI Press,
    11-26.
35. Kogut, B. and H. Singh (1988), “The Effect of National Culture on the Choice of Entry
    Mode,” Journal of International Business Studies, 19(3), 411-432.
36. Kremer, M. (1993), "The O-Ring Theory of Economic Development," Quarterly Journal of
    Economics, 108, 551-575.
37. Kruger, J. and D. Dunning (1999), “Unskilled and Unaware of It: Howe Difficulties in
    Recognizing One’s Own Incompetence Lead to Inflated Self-Assessments,” Journal of
    Personality and Social Psychology, 77(6), 1121-1134.




                                              55
38. Madsen, T, and Servais, P. (1997), “The Internationalization of Born Globals: An
    Evolutionary Process?” International Business Review, 6(6), 561-83.
39. McDermott, G. (2007), “The Politics of Institutional Renovation and Economic Upgrading:
    Recombining the Vines That Bind in Argentina,” Politics \& Society 35(1), 103.
40. Melitz, Marc J. (2003), "The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and
    Aggregate Industry Productivity," Econometrica, 71(6), 1695-1725.
41. Nelson, R. and H. Pack (1999), “The Asian Miracle and Modern Growth Theory” The
    Economic Journal, 109(457), 416-436.
42. Nguyen, D. (2010), “Demand Uncertainty: Exporting Delays and Exporting Failures,”
    mimeo, Univeristy of Copenhague.
43. Polanyi, M. (1966), The Tacit Dimension, (London: Routledge).
44. Rauch, J. E. (1999), "Networks Versus Markets in International trade," Journal of
    International Economics, 48(1), 7-35.
45. Rauch, J.E. and Watson, Joel, (2003), "Starting Small in an Unfamiliar Environment,"
    International Journal of Industrial Organization, 21(7), 1021-1042.
46. Rialp, A., Rialp, J. and Knight, G. (2005), “The Phenomenon of Early Internationalizing
    Firms: What do We Know after a Decade (1993-2003) of Scientific Inquiry?” International
    Business Review, 14(2), 147-166.
47. Romalis, J. (2004), “Factor Proportions and the Structure of Commodity Trade,” American
    Economic Review, 94, 67-97.
48. Ruhl, K. (2008), “The International Elasticity Puzzle”, mimeo, New York University.
49. Shafer, S. M., Smith, H.J., and Linder, J.C. (2005), "The power of business models,"
    Business horizons, 48, 199-207.
50. Sharma, D. (2003), “The Internationalization Process of Born Globals: a Network View,”
    International Business Review, 12(6), 739-753.
51. Shenkar, O. (2001), “Cultural Distance Revisited,” Journal of International Business Studies,
    32, 519–535.
52. Steenkamp, J.-B.E.M. and Verlegh, P.W.J. (1999), “A Review and Meta-analysis of
    Country-of-Origin Research,” Journal of Economic Psychology, 20 (5), 521-546.
53. Uzzi, B. (1997), “Social Structure and Competition in Interfirm Networks: The Paradox of
    Embeddedness,” Administrative Science Quarterly. 42, 35-67.
54. Verhoogen, E. (2008), "Trade, Quality Upgrading, and Wage Inequality in the Mexican
    Manufacturing Sector,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(2), 489-530.
55. Vernon, R. (1966), “International Investment and International Trade in the Product Cycle,”
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, 80, 255-267.
56. Wagner, R. and A. Zhaler (2010), “New Exports from Emerging Markets: Do Followers
    Benefit from Pioneers?” mimeo.
57. Zhou, L., Wu, W-p., and Luo, X. (2007), “Internationalization and the Performance of Born-
    global SMEs: The Mediating Role of Social Networks, Journal of International Business
    Studies, 38, 673-690.




                                               56
Appendix 1: Recent evolution of Argentina’s economy and exports (1980-2008)



This section provides a brief background of the Argentine economy in the last decades and
describes the structure and recent evolution of its exports.


Reversing a long history of protectionism, in the late 1980s Argentina initiated a unilateral trade
liberalization process that was mostly completed by the early 1990s.43 The nominal average tariff
decreased from 37% in 1985 to 12% in 1991 while most non-tariff barriers were removed.
Argentina was also a founding a member of Mercosur, which was launched in 1991 and included
a transition period that finished in 1995 with the creation of a customs union. In addition to
substantial unilateral and regional trade liberalization, other structural transformations took
place simultaneously. These reforms included the removal of restrictions to FDI, the
liberalization of the capital account, and a drastic privatization and de-regulation program.
After a decade of stagnation, the Argentine economy started a period of considerable growth
which lasted until the third quarter of 1998. That moment was the beginning of a severe
recession that culminated in a financial, currency and debt crisis in 2001. Since reaching the
trough of the crisis in 2002, GDP growth has been consistently strong until 2008. Figure A.1
shows the evolution of Argentina’s GDP at constant prices since 1980.


                                                                         FIGURE A.1
                                                                    Gross Domestic Product
                                                                           Argentina 1980-2008
                              400
                              350
                         billion AR$
                               300
                              250
                              200




                                       1980         1984          1988          1992       1996   2000   2004   2008
                                        Note: 1993 prices
                                        Source: INDEC (National Institute of Statistics)




43
     A drastic program of trade liberalization was implemented in the late 70s but lasted only a few years.




                                                                                    57
Large real exchange rate fluctuations have also been a chief characteristic of the conditions
facing Argentine exporters since 1980. As displayed in figure A.2, the real exchange rate
drastically decreased following the launch of the convertibility regime in 1991, as inflation
persisted for several months following the peso’s peg to the U.S. dollar. After remaining
relatively stable for more than half a decade, it considerably appreciated in 1999 due to Brazil’s
devaluation of the real, and continued at this level until the crisis of 2001-2002. This episode led
to a large sudden devaluation of the real exchange rate. It has since been decreasing gradually
and, in 2008, was roughly at about twice its value during the previous decade.


                                                        FIGURE A.2
                                                  Real Exchange Rate Index
                                                           Argentina 1991-2008
                    300
                    250
                  200
                   .
                    150
                    100




                          91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08
                                                    .
                          Note: Dec. 2001=100
                          Source: Central Bank of Argentina until 2006. Own calculations based on Central Bank of Argentina
                          and Buenos Aires City (University of Buenos Aires) since 2007




The combined effect of reforms in the trade and investment regimes and a relatively more stable
macroeconomic environment had a significant impact on the evolution of Argentina’s exports.
While export growth averaged 5.9% annually in the period 1980-1990, it averaged 10.6% in the
period 1991-2008 (see figure 3.2). Export growth picked up in the early 1990s, stalled during the
end of that decade, and resumed vigorously after the devaluation of the peso in January 2002.


Even though all major export categories have grown substantially in the past 30 years, different
rates of growth have led to a significant change in Argentina’s export composition. Figure A.3
reports the composition of exports in three different periods. Primary products and agriculture-
based manufactures, which jointly dominated exports in the period 1980-1990 with 73% of the
total exported, declined to 54% in the period 2002-2008. Most of this fall can be attributed to



                                                                    58
primary products, whose share went from 35% to 21%. On the contrary, the share of industrial
manufactures went from 22.1% in 1980-1990 to 30.1% in 2002-2008, although most of this
increase was accounted for by increasing exports to other developing countries (see figure 3.2).
Finally, exports of fuel and energy increased from 4.8% to 15.2% as a result of the privatization
and deregulation of the oil and gas industries – which was partially reversed in the last years of
the period.




                                                         FIGURE A.3
                                                      Exports composition
                                                         Argentina 1980-2008
                             1980-1990                               1991-2001                   2002-2008



                             4.852%                            12.49%                         15.22% 21.08%
                                                                             23.48%
                                        35.04%
                    37.99%
                                                         34.27%                            33.52%
                                                                          29.76%                        30.17%
                                 22.11%



                                            Primary Products                          Manufactures (Ind.)
                                            Manufactures (Agr.)                       Fuel and energy
                  Note: period averages
                  Source: INDEC (National Institute of Statistics)




                                                                        59
Appendix 2: Quantitative identification of new exporting sectors



This appendix presents a brief statistical analysis of Argentina’s export performance at the
sectoral level. The objective of this analysis is to identify sectors that have been successful in
exporting differentiated goods to developed economies.


Although our database reports Argentina’s exports at the 6-digit level of the Harmonized
System (HS), we aggregate at the 4-digit level and use this level of aggregation to conduct the
statistical analysis of sectoral export growth. In the majority of cases, we think that 4-digit
categories best group firms and products that share similar technologies, labor-skill needs,
distribution channels and marketing requirements, and thus can be thought of as economic
sectors. There are 1328 4-digit HS categories.


We consider export growth between the average of the periods 1991-1994 and 2002-2005. The
Argentine economy underwent a period of drastic trade liberalization that was mostly complete
by 1991. Therefore, the choice of base period attempts to minimize the identification of sectors
with emerging export activity driven by sectoral reallocation in response to trade liberalization.
Averaging over four years prevents exceptional peaks – sometimes driven by measurement error
– from dominating the measure of export growth.


We impose the following quantitative filters on the database. First, we require exports in 2005
to be above the threshold value of US$ 10 million to exclude categories that have insufficient
economic significance. This amount represents 0.025% of total Argentine exports and 0.091% of
industrial manufacturing exports in that year. This criterion leaves 267 out of 1328 4-digit
categories in the database. Second, we rank the remaining 267 categories according to export
growth between 1991-1994 and 2002-2005, and select only those in the top 40 percentiles.
Applying this criterion narrows the list to 106 4-digit categories. Finally, among those 106
categories, we select only those that have shipped more than a third of their exports to OECD
countries. The application of this last filter results in a list of 30 4-digit sectors. Applying
Rauch’s (1999) classification, 13 sectors can be classified as differentiated (listed in table A.1)
and 17 as non-differentiated (listed in table A.2).




                                                 60
Since categories in the Harmonized System do not necessarily correspond to relevant economic
sectors, the industries we choose for case study do not exactly match the 4-digit categories used
in the statistical analysis. One of our sectors, wooden furniture, straddles HS category 9403
(“furniture NESOI and parts thereof”) and HS category 9401 (“seats (except barber, dental, etc),
and parts”), which are two of the thirteen categories included in table A.1. Another of our
selected sectors, wines, coincides with HS category 2204 (“wine of fresh grapes; grape must
NESOI”). Although this category is classified in table A.2 as “non-differentiated”, we consider
this classification to be the result of an ambiguity created by aggregation. Whereas this category
is dominated by fine wines – a differentiated product – in Argentina’s exports, Rauch (1999)
classifies wine as a reference-price category maybe based on the category’s inclusion of grape
must and table wine. A third of our sectors, motorboats, is very hard to identify using customs
data since not even at the finest levels of disaggregation does the HS classification discriminate
by tonnage or length. Once properly defined, the motorboats industry passes all the criteria
established above, except for its value of shipments which is slightly below the minimum
threshold of US$ 10 million. Finally, information about exports in our fourth sector, television
programs, is not included in customs data.


For a number of sectors listed in tables A.1 and A.2, growth is primarily driven by the
increasing exploitation of resource-based comparative advantage in response to trade
liberalization and deregulation. For instance, this is the case of copper ores (HS 2603), leather
(HS 4107) and wood boards (HS 4407, 4409 and 4421). A few other sectors are highly
idiosyncratic. On the one hand, nuclear reactors (HS 8401) are exported by only one
government-owned agency. On the other hand, exports reported under “reaction initiators and
accelerators and catalyst preparations NESOI” (HS 3815), “turbojets, turbo propellers and other
gas turbines and parts” (HS 8411) and “aircraft” (HS 8802) correspond to sales of used
equipment, previously imported. Netting these sectors out from the list and re-classifying wine
as a differentiated product places wines, seats and seat parts, and furniture at the top of an
export-ranked list of differentiated products with high export growth and substantial orientation
towards OECD markets.




                                               61
Table A.1. High growth, high value sectors with large exports to OECD.
Differentiated



              Exports      To
     HS4       2005      OECD      Growth†    Description
             (US$ M)      (%)

     3815        41        36        13.1     reaction initiators & acceler & catalyt prep
                                              NESOI
     9403       36.3       36         5       furniture NESOI and parts thereof
     4409       30.4       93        49.3     wood, continuously shaped (tongued, grooved
                                              etc.)
     6907       27.2       94        32.4     unglazed ceramic flags & paving, hearth tiles
                                              etc
     8401       17.6      100         6.6     nuclear reactors; fuel elem (n-i); mach isotop
                                              sep
     8455       17.5       51         5.7     metal-rolling mills and rolls therefor; parts
     8516       12.5       35         4.6     elec water, space & soil heaters; hair etc dry,
                                              pt
     4421        12        89        16.7     articles of wood, NESOI
     8411       11.9       50        11.8     turbojets, turbopropellers & oth gas turbines,
                                              pts
     6109       10.4       47        14.7     t-shirts, singlets, tank tops etc, knit or crochet

               39,876      69         2.4     Total exports

†
    Growth: ratio between the average for 2002-2005 and the average for 1991-1994.




                                                 62
Table A.2. High growth, high value sectors with large exports to OECD. Non-
differentiated


            Exports     To
HS4         2005        OECD     Growth†       Description
            (US$ M)     (%)

2603        1026.9      42       318783        copper ores and concentrates
2204        303.7       67       6.8           wine of fresh grapes; grape must NESOI
4107        268.1       41       57.8          leather of animals NESOI, no hair NESOI
7210        166.6       51       6.3           fl-rl iron & na steel nun600mm wd, clad etc
7108        145.4       70       16.2          gold (incl plat plated), unwr, semimfr or
                                               powder
2008        130.5       70       5.4           fruit, nuts etc prepared or preserved NESOI
2905        110         65       5.3           acyclic alcohols & halogenat, sulfonatd etc
                                               derivs
806         75.7        60       5.2           grapes, fresh or dried
7224        54          99       1144.5        alloy steel NESOI in ingots, oth pr frm & semif
                                               pr
2302        52.1        91       5.1           bran, sharps etc from working cereals & leg
                                               plants
7214        39.6        64       8.5           bars & rods, iron & na steel NESOI, h-r etc
2827        38          70       149.2         chlorides etc; bromides etc; iodides etc.
2901        30.1        60       27.1          acyclic hydrocarbons
810         28.9        99       126.8         fruit NESOI, fresh
3913        24.9        34       166.4         natural (inc modified) polymers NESOI,
                                               primary forms
2836        19.4        62       21.6          carbonates; peroxocarbonates; comm amm
                                               carbonate
811         11.1        72       434.6         fruit & nuts (raw or cooked by steam etc),
                                               frozen

            39,876      69       2.4           Total exports

†
    Growth: ratio between the average for 2002-2005 and the average for 1991-1994.




                                                 63
