                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                MACROECONOMIC CONDITIONS AND CAPITAL RAISING

                                               Isil Erel
                                            Brandon Julio
                                            Woojin Kim
                                         Michael S. Weisbach

                                        Working Paper 16941
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16941


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2011




We would like to thank Effi Benmelech, Murillo Campello, Naveen Daniel, Mike Faulkender, John
Graham, Campbell Harvey, Christopher Hennessy, Mark Huson, Mike Lemmon, Laura Liu, Gordon
Phillips, Matt Spiegel, Per Stromberg, René Stulz, Ralph Walkling, and an anonymous referee, as
well as seminar participants at The 2009 AFA Meetings, University of Alberta, Carnegie Mellon University,
University of Cincinnati, Drexel University, Harvard University, Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology, KDI School of Public Policy and Management, Korea University, University of Illinois,
NBER, Ohio State University, Oxford University, Seoul National University, Southern Methodist
University, Stockholm School of Economics, University of Utah, Washington University, and Yale
University for very helpful suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Isil Erel, Brandon Julio, Woojin Kim, and Michael S. Weisbach. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Macroeconomic Conditions and Capital Raising
Isil Erel, Brandon Julio, Woojin Kim, and Michael S. Weisbach
NBER Working Paper No. 16941
April 2011
JEL No. E00,G21,G32

                                                ABSTRACT

Do macroeconomic conditions affect firms’ abilities to raise capital? If so, how do they affect the
manner in which the capital is raised? We address these questions using a large sample of publicly-traded
debt issues, seasoned equity offers, bank loans and private placements of equity and debt. Our results
suggest that a borrower’s credit quality significantly affects its ability to raise capital during macroeconomic
downturns. For noninvestment-grade borrowers, capital raising tends to be procyclical while for investment-grade
borrowers, it is countercyclical. Moreover, proceeds raised by investment grade firms are more likely
to be held in cash in recessions than in expansions. Poor market conditions also affect the structure
of securities offered, shifting them towards shorter maturities and more security. Overall, our results
suggest that macroeconomic conditions influence the securities that firms issue to raise capital, the
way in which these securities are structured and indeed firms’ ability to raise capital at all. This influence
likely occurs primarily through the effect of macroeconomic conditions on the supply of capital.


Isil Erel                                              Woojin Kim
Department of Finance                                  Korea University Business School
Ohio State University                                  Anam-Dong, Seongbuk-Gu,
832 Fisher Hall                                        Seoul 136-701
2100 Neil Avenue                                       South Korea
Columbus, OH 43210                                     woojinkim@korea.ac.kr
erel@fisher.osu.edu
                                                       Michael S. Weisbach
Brandon Julio                                          Department of Finance
London Business School                                 Fisher College of Business
Regent's Park                                          Ohio State University
London NW1 4SA                                         2100 Neil Ave.
United Kingdom                                         Columbus, OH 43210
bjulio@london.edu                                      and NBER
                                                       weisbach.2@osu.edu
1. Introduction

         Practitioners view the possibility that macroeconomic conditions will adversely affect a firm’s

access to capital markets as an important factor in their firms’ financial policies. For example, Richard

Passov, the longtime treasurer of Pfizer, argues that the possibility of being shut out of the capital markets

during market downturns is the primary reason why Pfizer and other technology companies often place

such importance on a high bond rating (See Passov 2003). According to Graham and Harvey (2001)’s

well-known survey, an important goal of Chief Financial Officers is to maintain financial flexibility “so

that they do not need to shrink their business in case of an economic downturn (p.218).” While

practitioners view the potential shocks to the supply of capital as having the first order impact in shaping

financial decisions, academic corporate finance has focused more on the demand for capital as the key

determinant in security design (see for example Baker (2009)).

         Do macroeconomic conditions in fact influence firms’ capital raising? If so, what is the channel

through which they operate? How do they affect firms’ choices of securities, the structure of those

securities, and firms’ very access to the capital markets? In this paper, we address these questions using a

sample containing detailed information on 21,657 publicly-traded debt issuances, 7,746 seasoned equity

offerings, 40,097 syndicated loans, and 12,048 private placements in the U.S. between 1971 and 2007. 1

         Existing theories have a number of predictions about the relation between macroeconomic

conditions and the structure and availability of security issues. These theories can be broadly classified

into two groups, one based on firms’ changing demand for certain types and quantities of financing over

the business cycle, and the other based on supply-of-capital effects, driven either by a contraction in

available funds or through changes in investor demand for relatively safe securities. The demand-for-

capital mechanism typically is based on changes in information asymmetries or adverse selection costs




1
 Syndicated loans tranches are available for the latter part of our sample (from 1988 to 2007), and private placement
are available from 1981 to 2007. The primary sources of capital omitted from this sample are regular bank loans and
commercial paper.


                                                         1
over the business cycle. 2 If the adverse selection costs associated with asymmetric information between

firms and investors is negatively related to overall business conditions, poor macroeconomic conditions

will lead firms to issue less information-sensitive securities, shifting from equity to convertibles, and from

convertibles to debt. Traditional demand-based theories have found success in explaining cross-sectional

differences in corporate financing decisions, but have been less successful describing the time-series of

issuance decisions (Baker (2009)).

        The second mechanism by which macroeconomic conditions can affect the distribution of

financing choices is through their effect on the supply of capital. Holmstrom and Tirole (1997) explain

how economic downturns can create a “credit crunch” that reduces the availability of intermediary capital,

especially for lower-rated firms. In addition, downturns can affect not only the availability of capital but

also the types of securities that investors demand. If volatility and economic uncertainty increase during

recessions, “flight to quality” models such as Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2008) and Vayanos (2004)

suggest that investors will become more risk averse, leading them to sell risky assets and to purchase

relatively safe assets instead. Flight to quality models predict that poor macroeconomic conditions lead

the supply of capital (i.e. demand for securities) to shift toward higher credit quality and lower volatility

because of a change in the relative prices of risky and safe assets.

        These explanations are not mutually exclusive, so it is possible that macroeconomic conditions

could affect both the demand and supply of capital, or neither of them. Both demand and supply of

capital-based arguments conceivably could affect the quantity of capital raised by firms, the type of

securities they use to raise this capital, and the way in which these securities are structured.

        Our econometric analysis suggests that macroeconomic conditions affect both firms’ abilities to

raise capital and the manner in which they raise it. We also find that cyclicality of different types of

securities depends on the credit quality of the issuing firms. For example, consistent with the prior

literature, the aggregate issuance of public equity over time is pro-cyclical. But this relation is driven


2
 Examples of demand-based models of security choice are Choe, Masulis and Nanda (1993) and Bolton and Freixas
(2000).


                                                       2
primarily by noninvestment-grade borrowers, for whom public equity issuances, as well as

(noninvestment-grade) bond issuances are pro-cyclical. In contrast, for investment-grade borrowers,

public issuances of equity do not decline during downturns and issuances of both convertible and straight

public bonds are countercyclical. Similarly, during downturns, private loans significantly increase for

investment-grade borrowers but they significantly decline for noninvestment-grade borrowers.

         These differences between investment-grade and noninvestment-grade firms in their capital

raising patterns over the business cycle are difficult to reconcile with demand-based theories of capital

raising. They are more consistent with the supply of capital shifting toward less risky securities during

worse economic times. Noninvestment grade firms raise capital when they can during strong economic

conditions and appear to be shut out of the public capital markets during poor economic conditions.

Higher quality firms take advantage of the increased demand for their higher rated securities and actually

increase their capital raising during macroeconomic downturns.

        A prediction of the flight-to-quality hypothesis that does not also come from the information

arguments concerns the uses of the funds that are raised. The flight-to-quality theories predict that the

increased demand for safer securities in recessions will make issuing them relatively attractive, so that

high quality firms will issue debt and keep the proceeds as cash in recessions, while lower quality firms

will spend all capital they raise and not keep any as incremental cash. Consistent with the flight to quality

hypothesis, we find that investment grade firms tend to hold a larger proportion of capital raised in the

form of cash during recessions than in normal times, suggesting that the change in the relative prices of

high quality bonds induces a firm to issue, rather than raising the financing to invest in real assets.

        In addition to the choice of securities, we also find that market-wide factors affect the structure of

debt contracts. In particular, market downturns decrease the expected maturity of public bonds and private

loans, and increase the likelihood that these loans are secured. These findings are consistent with both

views: poor macroeconomic conditions could lead firms to structure securities in ways that lessen their

information sensitivity or an increase in investor demand for relatively safe securities could lead firms to

issue securities with shorter maturities and more security.


                                                       3
        Taken together, the empirical results tend to support the view that the supply of capital has a

larger impact than the demand for capital on corporate finance during economic downturns. First, public

bond issues, particularly those with high credit quality and short-term maturity, are countercyclical.

Second, the pro-cyclicality of bank loans and public bonds for lower-quality firms is contrary to the

demand-based information asymmetry hypothesis, in which firms prefer financing sources with a lower

sensitivity to information in response to a market downturn. Third, we find that the relative prices of

highly rated bonds to bonds of lower credit quality shifts during recessions. Specifically, the AAA to

BAA credit spread increases during recessions, consistent with an increase in investor demand for safer

securities (or the supply-of-capital arguments). Finally, investment grade firms hold a larger proportion

of the funds from the bond issue in the form of cash during recessions compared to expansions, consistent

with the hypothesis that firms respond to changes in the relative prices of securities.

        This paper extends the literature on security choice in a number of ways. Important early

contributions to this literature are Jung, Kim and Stulz (1996) Lewis, Rogalski, and Seward (1999), and

Gomes and Phillips (2007) whose concern is how firm-level factors influence the choice of securities.

Gomes and Phillips (2007) in particular analyze a variety of securities including both public and private

issues of debt and equity and find support for the view that information asymmetries are an important

factor in firms’ choice of which security to issue.         We extend these papers by considering how

macroeconomic effects change these choices at the margin, because macroeconomic factors affect the

nature of information asymmetries and also the supply of capital. As such, our paper is in the tradition of

Choe, Masulis and Nanda (1993) and Korajczyk and Levy (2003), focusing on the details of how firms

raise capital and how the capital-raising process changes over the business cycle. To our knowledge, our

paper is the first to evaluate the different implications of demand versus supply based theories about

security issues over the business cycle, considering a menu of securities broader than between equity and

public debt, including convertibles, private debt, and private placements, as well as alternative

characteristics of public and private debt such as maturity and security.




                                                      4
2. Data Sources and Sample Description

A. Data Sources

        We obtain data on security issues from three different sources: SDC Global New Issues Database

for public SEOs and private placements of both equity and debt, Mergent Fixed Income Securities

Database (FISD) for convertible bonds and other public debt, and Loan Pricing Corporation’s Dealscan

for private loans. The SDC database provides information on total proceeds and the number of primary

and secondary shares offered for each SEO. We drop SEOs that only offer secondary shares since these

offerings do not lead to a capital inflow to the firm. This process leads to a sample of 7,746 SEOs

occurring between 1971 and 2007. From SDC, we also obtain information on 12,048 private placements

of equity and debt between 1981 and 2007.

        Mergent FISD provides comprehensive information for U.S. corporate debt, including total

proceeds raised as well as other characteristics such as maturity, security, convertibility, and credit quality.

We utilize all public debt issues made by industrial firms reported in FISD from 1971 to 2007. Our initial

public bond sample consists of 21,657 issues from 3,072 firms with Compustat identifiers. The average

initial maturity is 12 years and the median is 10 years. Most of the bonds are unsecured (96.3%) and

slightly more than half (55%) have investment-grade ratings.

        Our data on bank debt are from Loan Pricing Corporation’s Dealscan, which contains detailed

issuance-level information on the characteristics of syndicated and sole-lender bank loans. These

characteristics include size and maturity of the loan, credit quality of the borrower, as well as information

on whether the loan is secured by some type of collateral or not. Each loan can have multiple tranches,

each of which contains different characteristics. Our sample comprises 40,097 completed loan tranches to

7,465 firms with Compustat identifiers between 1988 and 2007, including 364-day facilities (9.58%),

bridge loans (1.6%), term loans (29.84%), and revolving loans and credit lines (58.98%). 3 The mean loan



3
 We thank Amir Sufi and Michael Roberts for sharing Compustat identifiers that allow us to match Dealscan Loan
data with accounting data from Compustat. See Chava and Roberts (2008) for a discussion of the process of
gathering these identifiers.


                                                      5
maturity is about 3.7 years with a slightly shorter median of 3.4 years. Contrary to the sample of public

bonds, most of the loans are secured, with 79% of sample loans being secured by some type of collateral.

        Using these issue-level data, we collapse each firm’s issues at the month level. We focus on

monthly issue-level data because our macroeconomic data is available monthly and we explore the

manner in which macroeconomic conditions affect firms’ capital raising decisions. 4 We then match the

firm-month observations with accounting information from most recent fiscal year end reported in

Compustat and eliminate all financial firms (one-digit SIC equal to 6) and utilities (two-digit SIC equal to

49). After this process, we end up with a sample containing 7,170 firm-months with SEO issues, 2,546

firm-months with convertible bond issues, and 10,400 firm months with straight public bond issues from

1971 to 2007, 2,957 firm-months with private placements of equity and 4,547 firm-months with private

placements of debt from 1981 to 2007, and also 20,322 firm-months with private loan contracts from

1988 to 2007.

        For macroeconomic data, we obtain recession/expansion dates from the National Bureau of

Economic Research (NBER) and GDP growth rates from the US Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA).

In addition to macroeconomic data, we consider a direct survey-based measure of the state of financial

conditions provided by the Federal Reserve, called the ‘Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank

Lending Practices.’ This survey is a quarterly survey of approximately sixty large domestic banks and

twenty-four U.S. branches of foreign banks, asking the managers of these banks how their bank is

changing their credit standards. The particular variable we focus on is the net percentage of domestic

respondents who claim that they are tightening standards for commercial and industrial loans. 5 One

limitation of this survey is that it is available only after the second quarter of 1990, so when we use the

survey data, we restrict our sample to this sub-period.

4
  We have estimated all equations in the paper using firm-quarter issuance data matched with quarterly Compustat
data as well. Quarterly issuance data does not match perfectly with the macroeconomic data, but has the advantage
of corresponding exactly with quarterly accounting data. The results using quarterly data are in all cases similar to
those reported below and are available from the authors on request.
5
  See Lown, Morgan, and Rohatgi (2000) for more information about the survey. These authors document that the
survey results are strongly related to loan growth, with tightening standards being associated with slower loan
growth.


                                                         6
B. The Pattern of Security Issues over Different Macroeconomic Conditions

        Table I presents descriptive statistics of our security issuance sample. To provide a rough idea of

the time-series variation in the use of securities, we divide the sample into sub-periods based on the

NBER’s expansion/recession classification.      For each sub-period, we report the proceeds raised in

constant 2000 $US million for six types of securities in that period: SEOs, convertibles, straight public

bonds, private loans, and private placements of equity and debt. Since recessions are substantially shorter

than expansions during our sample period, we report the monthly average proceeds rather than total

proceeds during each sub-period.

        A complicating factor in our analysis is that the quantity of capital raised increased substantially

over the sample period as the economy expanded even after controlling for the inflation, due in part to the

development of the syndicated loan market. Given the rapid growth in the quantity of issuances, it is

difficult to infer patterns about the incremental effect of macroeconomic conditions. Nonetheless, a few

patterns relating macroeconomic conditions and security offerings are evident from Table I. In particular,

during recessions, public equity offerings decline but public debt offerings increase. The rise of the

syndicated loan market is also apparent, coming into existence in the late 1980s and becoming the

predominant form of capital raising by the 2000s.

        We observe a similar pattern in Figure 1, which reports the time-series trend of the natural

logarithm of the proceeds raised (in constant 2000 $US million) for each calendar month during our

sample period. Shaded areas in the figure denote recessions as defined by the NBER. Figure 1 highlights

the manner in which SEOs decrease during recessions while public bonds and convertibles increase.

        Table II normalizes the value raised through each method of raising capital in each calendar

month by the total capital raised in that particular month, and documents the way in which the fraction of

capital raised by different methods varies over macroeconomic conditions. We measure macroeconomic

conditions using three alternative measures. In addition to an NBER-defined recession, we characterize

months by GDP growth, and label a month ‘Low Growth’ if GDP growth in that particular quarter is

below the 25th percentile of economic growth over the entire sample period. Finally we define ‘Weak


                                                     7
Credit Supply’ months as those for which the net percentage of senior loan officers indicating that they

are tightening standards for loans to large and medium firms is positive for that particular quarter.

        Panel A of Table II presents the proceeds raised through alternative forms of financing for the

1971-1987 sub-period, for which there are no syndicated loans, while Panel B reports the results

subsequent to 1988, the first year for which we have data on syndicated loans. For both sub-periods, the

fraction of capital raised by public debt is larger during market downturns than in expansions. In contrast,

public equity issues are pro-cyclical, with larger fractions being raised during expansions than

contractions. Macroeconomic conditions have a somewhat ambiguous effect on convertibles; in the

earlier sub-period convertibles account for a larger fraction of capital raised during expansions while in

the latter sub-period they account for a larger fraction during recessions. Similar to public bonds, the

fraction of private placements of both equity and debt generally increases in worse macroeconomic

conditions. These results are generally consistent with the demand for capital argument that firms use

more information-sensitive securities during better economic conditions.

        On the other hand, the demand-driven information-asymmetry hypothesis does not do well at

explaining patterns in private bank loans. Private debt appears to account for a higher fraction of capital

raised during expansions than recessions, in contrast to the information hypothesis, which suggests that

bank loans should be countercyclical. The observed pattern is better explained by the supply of capital

changing over the business cycle, so that in recessions overall intermediary capital declines sufficiently to

more than offset the substitution from public to private debt for monitoring reasons.

         In addition to the broad type of securities offered, the quality and structure of the securities used

to raise capital also potentially vary depending on macroeconomic conditions. Table III breaks down the

public debt issues more finely, documenting the extent to which the use of bonds of different maturity,

security, and quality vary by market conditions. In the first two columns we report the relative proportion

of short-term public debt, as well as secured public debt. 6 We define a bond to be short-term if the time


6
 Mergent does not contain any short-term debt issues prior to 1985. Hence, we consider short-term debt to be
missing before 1985 when computing the numbers presented in Table III.


                                                      8
to maturity of the issue is less than five years. 7 Our measure of security level is a dummy variable set to

one if the bond is secured and set to zero otherwise. If the firm issues more than one bond in a particular

month, we consider the observation to be secured if the proceeds raised from the secured bond is at least

half of the total proceeds raised.

        The first column of Table III indicates that the relative proceeds raised through short-term debt

increase significantly during recessions and weak credit supply. However, the results for secured debt in

the second column of Table III are more ambiguous, with the proportion of debt that is secured being

somewhat higher in good economic times than in downturns. The remaining columns of Table III present

the fraction of capital raised by public debt with different credit quality across varying macroeconomic

conditions. The pattern here is clear: Lower quality and unrated debt issues decline substantially during

poor market conditions. During recessions, the quantity of low-quality issues declines to one third to one

half of the expansion levels, depending on the sample period used. In contrast, the level of investable B-

rated issues is about the same, leading the fraction of A-rated issues to increase by about twenty

percentage points during recessions. The pattern is similar if we measure market conditions using GDP

growth or the survey of credit supply, although the differences are somewhat smaller.

        Figure 2 illustrates this pattern graphically. The vertical axis measures the natural logarithm of

proceeds raised (in constant 2000 $US million) through public bonds of various quality. The figure

suggests an overall upward trend in the use of public debt financing in all levels of credit quality.

However, it also points out the differential impact of a recession on the public debt with different ratings.

During recessions, the quantity of capital raised by low-rated and non-rated debt issues drops significantly

while highly-rated bonds remain relatively constant or even rise.

3. Firm Characteristics

        In addition to market-level characteristics, firm-level characteristics affect both the likelihood of

raising capital, and conditional on raising capital, the method used to raise the capital. To illustrate how


7
 If the firm issued more than one bond in a given month, then the issue activity is classified as short-term if the
proceeds-weighted maturity of the bonds is less than five years.


                                                        9
firm-level differences vary with the frequency capital raising, the first two columns of Table IV compare

characteristics of firms in months in which some type of security was offered to months in which no

security was issued.         These characteristics are firm size (natural logarithm of total assets), market

leverage, market to book, cash flow, cash, the inverse of interest coverage, a debt-rating dummy, sales

growth, and the past stock return. Inverse interest coverage is defined as the natural logarithm of

(1+interest/EBIT) and stock return is calculated over the previous twelve months. 8          The accounting

variables reported are taken from the fiscal year-end immediately prior to the issue.

           Relative to firm-months with no issues, firms in issuing months tend to be larger, older, and have

higher growth and better prior stock performance. For the issuing months, the average sales growth for

the year just prior to the security issuance is 0.27 during the whole sample period, compared to 0.18 for

non-issuing months. The stock return over the previous twelve months is 0.36 for issuing months

compared to 0.17 for non-issuing months. In addition, issues are less likely during market downturns in

most cases, regardless of which measure of financial conditions one uses.

           The remaining columns of Table IV summarize differences in firm characteristics across issuers

of alternative securities. Equity issuers tend to be the smallest, youngest, and have the highest market to

book ratios. Public debt issuers are substantially larger, and have higher fixed asset ratios than issuers of

other types of securities. In contrast, issuers of private loans and private placements of debt are noticeably

smaller than public debt issuers, with lower cash flows and fixed assets. This pattern suggests that public

debt issuers are noticeably different from other kinds of issuers, consistent with the view that publicly-

traded debt is the most attractive form of financing, and that firms using other forms are unable to issue

publicly-traded debt.



4. Multivariate Analysis of Security Choice

           The aggregate statistics and the univariate comparisons are both suggestive of the hypothesis that

firm characteristics and macroeconomic conditions affect the way firms raise capital. However, to

8
    Appendix Table 1 contains detailed definitions of all variables.


                                                            10
identify the effect of macroeconomic conditions on the issuance of the firms’ funding choices, it is

important to estimate this relation in a multivariate setting, controlling for firm-level factors and time

trends. Consequently, we employ discrete-choice models that estimate the likelihood of a firm issuing a

specified type of security in a particular time period. At any point in time, a firm can choose not to obtain

financing, to obtain a private loan, to issue private placements of either equity or debt, or to access the

public security markets by issuing a straight bond, convertible bond, or seasoned equity. Given the

number of potential alternative outcomes, we utilize econometric approaches that allow for multiple

discrete choices.

A. A Multinomial Logit Approach

        Multinomial logit models provide one way to estimate systems in which independent variables

affect the choice among a finite number of alternative outcomes. Thus, it provides a natural way of

modeling a firm’s choice of how to raise capital given alternative financing methods, or not to raise

capital at all. 9 Specifically, we estimate the following model:

                                                 β j 'X
                                            e
            Pr(security type = j ) =       6
                                                                                                        (1)
                                          ∑e
                                          k =0
                                                   βk 'X




where j equals 0 if the firm does not issue any type of security, 1 for a bank loan, 2 for a public bond, 3

for a convertible debt, 4 for an SEO, 5 for a private placement of equity, and 6 for a private placement of

debt. βj is a vector of coefficients for outcome j where β0 is assumed to be zero, and X is a vector of

explanatory variables.

        Panel A of Table V reports estimates of this equation. In each specification, ‘no issue’ is the

omitted variable, so the coefficients in each column can be interpreted as the impact on the probability of

issuing a particular type of security relative to not issuing at all. Specification (1) uses the NBER-defined


9
 One potential drawback to multinomial logit is the underlying independence of irrelevant alternatives assumption,
which requires that the choice between any two financing choices be independent of the existence of a third choice.
For example, the multinomial logit specification implicitly assumes that the choice between public debt and private
debt is independent of the choice of whether or not to issue seasoned equity. See Greene (2000) pp. 857-862, and
875-879 for more discussion on the estimation and properties of multinomial logit.


                                                           11
recession as our measure of market conditions, while (2) uses the level of GDP growth. We also report

results of a model using the Senior Loan Officer Opinion survey on lending standards in Appendix Table

2. Each specification also includes a number of variables designed to capture the firm’s financial

condition and demand for capital (e.g., market to book, cash flow, and sales growth). Other firm-level

controls are firm’s age, natural logarithm of the total assets, market leverage, cash, natural logarithm of

the inverse of interest coverage, 10 and a debt-rating dummy. We also include the firm’s stock return for

the prior twelve months, which restricts our sample to listed firms. Furthermore, we include the term

spread, defined as the difference between the yields on ten-year treasuries and one-year treasuries, as a

macro-level control. Finally, all equations include industry fixed effects. 11 The equations are estimated

using a panel of monthly observations for all firms that had at least one type of security issue at any point

during the sample period, a procedure that leads to 728,639 observations. 12 We calculate the standard

errors in these equations allowing for clustering of observations at the firm level.

        In Panel A of Table V (and also in Panel A of Appendix Table 2), the coefficient on the variable

indicating poor macroeconomic conditions is negative and statistically significantly different from zero

for SEOs, using all measures of the downturns. Additionally, the SEO coefficient is statistically

significantly different from the coefficients on the other securities in the specifications using the recession

dummy and the weak credit market dummy variable as our measures of financial conditions. This result

indicates that a recession lowers the likelihood of issuing an SEO, relative to not issuing any security or

issuing any other type of security and is consistent with the notion that as financial conditions worsen,

firms are less likely to issue public equity. As such, it confirms the findings of Hickman (1953), Moore




10
   The transformation used is a negative function of conventional interest coverage, so that the negative coefficient
on this variable for a specific security type means that better interest coverage increases the likelihood of the
corresponding issue type. We use this transformation because the usual measure of interest coverage becomes
infinite for all-equity firms.
11
   One exception is in Panel C below, for which the multinomial logit model does not converge when we include
industry fixed effects. We also ran the regressions reported in Panel B for noninvestment-grade borrowers without
industry fixed effects and found similar results.
12
   We obtain similar results when we include all other firms in Compustat that did not have any security issue during
the sample period.


                                                        12
(1980) and Choe, Masulis and Nanda (1993), who find similar patterns of security issuances over earlier

time periods (1900-1938, 1946-1970, and 1971-1991 respectively).

        Convertible bonds appear to be more likely to occur during poor economic times, holding other

factors constant. All three coefficients on the variables indicating poor financial conditions are positive

(see Panels A of Table V and Appendix Table 2), and two of them are statistically significantly different

from zero. These results provide evidence for the argument that firms that otherwise would be issuing

public equity choose to issue a convertible bond during market downturns. Given that asymmetric

information likely increases during these downturns, this pattern is consistent with the logic of the Stein

(1992) model, in which convertible bonds are issued as an alternative to equity when asymmetric

information is high.

        The other coefficients in the equations in Panel A of Table V are consistent with the view,

implicit in the Holmstrom and Tirole (1997) model among others, that the firms issuing public debt are

the lowest quality risks to a lender. These coefficients indicate that, relative to firms that issue other types

of securities (or no issue at all), public debt issuers are oldest and are most likely to have a debt rating. In

addition debt issuers in general are larger than firms that issue equity either publicly or privately.

        Because the supply of capital arguments imply that recessions should affect poorly-rated firms’

access to capital more than highly rated ones, we reestimate these equations on subsamples of

noninvestment-grade and investment-grade borrowers in Panels B and C of Table V, as well as Appendix

Table 2, Panels B and C. We define investment-grade firms as those that ever issued at least one

investment-grade public bonds during the whole sample period.

        The results from these panels imply that a firm’s quality leads to very different capital-raising

patterns over the business cycle. The coefficient on the issuance of public equity remains negative and

significant for noninvestment-grade borrowers in all specifications. However, for investment grade

borrowers, it is consistently positive although not statistically significant. In addition, issuances of

convertible bonds do not appear to be countercyclical for non-investment grade firms while they are

strongly countercyclical for investment grade firms.


                                                      13
        In the estimates using the entire sample in Panel A of Table V, we do not observe an increase in

the quantity of public bonds and bank loans during economic downturns, which is difficult to reconcile

with issuers shifting towards less information sensitive financing sources as predicted by the demand-

based theory. However, when we break down our estimates into noninvestment-grade and investment-

grade firms in Panels B and C of Table V and Appendix Table 2, it becomes clear that combining firms of

all quality masks important differences in the borrowing behavior between noninvestment-grade and

investment-grade firms over the business cycle. In particular, these estimates imply that private loans

significantly increase for investment-grade borrowers but they significantly decline for noninvestment-

grade borrowers, consistent with the view that capital available to intermediaries goes down and

consequently they tighten lending standards during down cycles. We see a similar pattern for public

bonds: the coefficient on issues of public bonds is negative and statistically significant for noninvestment-

grade borrowers while it is positive and statistically significant for investment-grade borrowers.

        Both the credit crunch and flight to quality (supply-based arguments) predict that we should

observe better quality firms issuing debt during recessions than during expansions. The credit crunch

arguments suggest that capital is rationed from the poorly-rated firms and that only the highly-rated ones

can receive financing. In addition, the flight to quality arguments compound this effect because they

imply that financiers will prefer lending to highly-rated firms during recessions. This argument is

commonly made by practitioners, who often claim that one reason for having a high bond rating is to

avoid getting shut out of the debt market during poor economic times (see Passov (2003) and Graham and

Harvey (2001)). Thus, a clear prediction of the supply of capital arguments is that a higher fraction of

issuances of debt should be of high quality during recessions than during expansions.

        Our findings provide strong support for these commonly discussed arguments of practitioners, as

well as the credit crunch and flight-to-quality arguments. During bad economic times, poor quality

borrowers appear to be shut out of the bond market. The only bonds that are not affected by poor

economic times are highly-rated ones. In other words, the fact that the quality of bonds issued is strongly

countercyclical is evidence consistent with the view that financial constraints are exacerbated during


                                                     14
recessions. This finding mirrors the patterns reported in Kahle and Stulz (2010), who report that large

investment-grade firms’ capital raising was not substantially affected by the Financial Crisis of 2008.

         Could changing demand for capital be responsible for these effects? In other words, could it be

possible that poorly rated firms simply demand less capital during recessions than during expansions?

This pattern of demand seems unlikely, since poorly rated firms typically are relatively highly cyclical

and will require more outside funding during poor economic times. The fact that poorly rated firms often

require a Chapter 11 reorganization to obtain DIP financing during recessions is strongly suggestive of

the notion that they have trouble raising outside capital at these times. Consistent with the prior literature

(for example, Hertzel and Smith (1993)) arguing that firms under information asymmetry choose private

placements, lower-quality firms in our sample seem to be relying more on private placements, especially

of equity, during downturns (see Panels B of Table V and Appendix Table 2 for the positive and

significant coefficient for noninvestment-grade borrowers).

         Consistent with this logic is the strong negative relation between cash holdings and the

probability of issuing investment grade debt. As argued by Almeida, Campello and Weisbach (2004,

2009), more financially constrained firms are likely to save a higher percentage of cash from their cash

flows. Firms with low bond ratings are more likely to face financial constraints, so they will tend to save

more cash, leading to a negative relation between firms’ cash holdings and the ratings of the bonds they

issue. During recessions, poorly rated firms use up their cash reserves since they cannot raise capital.

Consequently, the relation between business conditions and the quality of issuances is likely driven by

supply of capital rather than demand for capital considerations. 13 In the next section, we analyze the uses

of funds for borrowers with different credit ratings in detail.

B. Uses of Funds from Capital Raising Activities over the Business Cycle




13
   One objection to this “constraints” view is that there must be some interest rate at which poorly rated firms can
issue public debt during recessions. But that rate must be sufficiently high so that the firms choose to draw down
their cash and lines of credit rather than paying it. If this were the case, it is nonetheless the limited supply of capital
that ends up leading to poorly-rated firms not issuing public debt during recessions.


                                                            15
        The flight-to-quality hypothesis shares many of the same predictions as the demand for capital-

driven information hypothesis. In particular, both suggest that the distribution of external financing

choices shift towards securities of less information sensitivity or lower risk during a downturn. The

flight-to-quality hypothesis, however, contains the additional prediction that investors’ demand for safer

securities changes the relative prices between securities of different risk. If, as predicted by the flight-to-

quality models, investor demand shifts toward safer securities in response to a poor macroeconomic

environment, there should be a shift in the relative prices of securities of different quality. Confirming

this hypothesis, Figure 3 reports the time-series trend in AAA and BAA corporate bonds as well as the

difference between the two. The figure clearly indicates that credit spread increases in recessions making

higher quality debt more attractive to issue. As Baker (2009) argues, firms have an incentive to issue

these safer securities when their relative prices have dropped. Consequently, we expect the distribution of

securities issuance choices to shift towards relatively safer assets, such as from equities to bonds, similar

to the prediction of the asymmetric information hypothesis.

        One key difference between these hypotheses is that in the demand for capital-driven information

story, firms issue securities when they have a need for external financing, such as for investing in fixed

capital. In contrast, if firms are issuing securities in response to changes in relative prices due to a flight

to quality episode, firms are more likely to hold the funds as cash, rather than to invest the proceeds

immediately. Thus, one way to distinguish whether macroeconomic conditions are changing issuance

choices directly through information asymmetries or indirectly through affecting investor demand for

securities is to investigate differences in the uses of proceeds from the capital raising activities across the

business cycle.

        To examine the effect of macroeconomic conditions on the ex-post uses of funds from new

capital raised, we first aggregate all proceeds raised from different security types within a calendar

quarter. We then match the most recent fiscal quarter before the issuing quarter and the most adjacent




                                                      16
fiscal quarter after the issuing quarter. 14 We then estimate equations similar to those reported in Kim and

Weisbach (2008), using the following specification:

                 ⎡⎛ capital raised ⎞ ⎤              ⎡⎛ capital raised ⎞ ⎤
 Y = β 0 + β1 ln ⎢⎜⎜               ⎟⎟ + 1⎥ + β 2 ln ⎢⎜⎜               ⎟⎟ + 1⎥ × RecessionDummy + β3 ln[total assets0 ] + ε (2)
                 ⎣⎝ total assets0 ⎠ ⎦               ⎣⎝ total assets0 ⎠ ⎦

where Y = ln[((Vt − V0 ) total assets 0 ) + 1] , V is quarterly cash and short term investments, and t is the

number of fiscal quarters subsequent to the issuing quarter . We estimate the uses of capital from proceeds

raised depending on both firm quality and macroeconomic conditions.                              We classify a firm as

noninvestment-grade if it never issued an investment-grade public bond during the whole sample period

based on Moody’s ratings. We define a calendar quarter as being in a recession if that quarter includes a

recession month based on NBER classification. We estimate equation (2) for intervals of one quarter, four

quarters and eight quarters following the issuing quarter.

         We present estimates of equation (2) for noninvestment grade and investment grade issuers

separately in Table VI.         The first four columns report the coefficient estimates and t-statistics for

noninvestment grade firms and the remaining columns present the corresponding numbers for investment

grade firms. The results reported in the first three row aggregates all sources of external capital raised in

a given calendar quarter. The remaining lines report the results separately for each different sources of

financing.

         The coefficient β1 measures the proportion of proceeds raised in an issue used to increase cash

(including short-term investments) during expansions while β2 captures the incremental impact of a

recession on the fraction held in cash. 15 A direct implication of the flight-to-quality arguments comes

from the effect of proceeds raised on increases in cash and short-term investments. In expansions, lower

quality firms save a substantially higher portion of the capital raised than high quality firms, consistent

with the usual precautionary savings motive (see Almeida et al. 2004). That is, β1 for noninvestment-


14
   For March, June, September, December firms, the most adjacent fiscal quarter would be the same as the issuing
calendar quarter.
15
   Cash excluding short-term investments is often missing in quarterly Compustat, which is the main reason why we
resort to cash including short-term investments.


                                                              17
grade firms are higher than those for investment-grade firms in most cases. However, in recessions, low

quality firms save much less of the capital they raise for all sources of financing taken together, as well as

for vast majority of different financing sources, regardless of the intervals. In contrast, during down

cyles, investment-grade firms save substantially more from all financing sources as a whole and

especially from SEOs and public bonds than they do in expansions. This pattern is consistent with the

flight-to-quality arguments: In recessions the cost of raising capital for low-quality firms is relatively

high, so they raise capital only when it is absolutely necessary to fund investments. In contrast, the price

of capital is abnormally low for high quality issuers during recessions, so they will actually increase their

issuances beyond what is necessary to fund investments and save the proceeds as cash.



5. Market Conditions and the Design of Debt Contracts

         An additional testable implication provided by both demand-based and supply-based hypotheses

is that, conditional on the type of security used, firms will alter the structure of those securities depending

on macroeconomic conditions. Regardless of the type of security used, we expect to observe that as

market-wide conditions weaken, firms will adjust the design of their securities either to minimize their

sensitivity to information or in response to relative price changes as investors’ demand for safer assets

increases. 16

A. Publicly-traded Bonds

         We first examine how the characteristics of public bonds vary over the business cycle. Both the

information-sensitivity and risk profile of a bond increases in the bond’s maturity and decreases when a

bond is secured with real assets, holding all other factors constant. Therefore, we expect to observe that,

all other things equal, firms are more likely to use shorter maturity bonds or secured bonds when market

conditions are relatively poor.


16
  A related implication of this argument is that lenders should impose tighter covenants on borrowers during
recessions. Zhang (2008) examines this hypothesis on a sample of large US firms and finds that covenants are
stricter when set during downturns and they lead to higher recovery rates later. Similarly, Santos and Winton (2008)
find that loan spreads rise in recession more so for those without public debt market access.


                                                        18
         We estimate equations predicting whether the bond is short term and whether the bond is secured,

conditional on an issuance of public debt. We restrict the sample to those firm-months for which there is

a bond issue, so there are two possible outcomes, either short-term or long-term, and either secured or

non-secured and estimate the following logit models. 17          18



                                                    e β ′X
         Pr(bond maturity = short term) =                                                      (3)
                                                  1 + e β ′X

                                                e β ′X
         Pr(bond security = secured ) =                                                       (4)
                                              1 + e β ′X

where β is a vector of coefficients for short-term debt in equation (4) and secured debt in equation (5), and

X is a vector of firm characteristics and financial conditions.

         Panel A of Table VII contains estimates of these equations. The first three columns of this table

report the estimates for equation (3). The results suggest that financial conditions and the maturity of

publicly-traded bonds are negatively related.              The coefficients on the variables representing poor

conditions are all positive and statistically significant. This finding is consistent with the notion that weak

macroeconomic conditions exacerbate asymmetric information problems, since shorter maturity

securities’ value fluctuates less with changes in information about firm value than does longer maturity

securities’ value. However, to the extent that short-term bonds are less risky-than long-term bonds the

results can also be explained by a flight to quality within this asset class.

         Additionally, consistent with the Diamond (1991) liquidity-risk arguments, we find that short-

term debt issuers tend to be larger, have stronger growth opportunities, and less cash on the balance sheet

than firms that can issue long-term debt. The large effect of growth opportunities, as measured by the


17
   There are some months for which a firm issues more than one bond. In these cases, we define short-term firm-
months as those with proceeds-weighted initial maturity of less than or equal to five years. Similarly, secured firm-
months are defined as those with proceeds-weighted secured dummy greater than or equal to 0.5.
18
   We have estimated a number of alternative specifications that we have reported in previous drafts. In particular,
we have estimated two-stage models in which we first estimate the likelihood of a bond issue, and then estimate,
conditional on the issue, the factors that affect the structure of the issue. We have also estimated multinomial logit
models in which firms face a choice of not to issue, to issue short-term, or to issue long-term (and similarly with
security). As the results from each specification are similar, we choose to report results from the simpler
specification.


                                                            19
market-to-book ratio, is also consistent with Myers (1977) and Barnea, Haugen and Senbet (1980), in

which firms with better growth opportunities issue on shorter term maturities to help minimize potential

agency conflicts. The results are also largely consistent with the Flannery (1986) signalling model in that

short-term debt issuers seem to be of higher quality being older, larger and having more growth options

compared to long-term debt issuers.

        Columns (4), (5), and (6) report estimates of equation (4), which contains the factors that affect

the likelihood that a particular bond is secured. These estimates for bond security are more difficult to

interpret than those for maturity. For the low-growth dummy, the coefficient is positive and significantly

different from zero.     However, the coefficients on the other financial condition variables are

insignificantly different from zero with opposite signs from one another.

        In addition, the results from Panel A of Table VII document the firm-level factors that affect the

decision to use secured debt. These results suggest that firms issuing secured debt tend to be smaller and

much more highly levered than unsecured issuers. Firms also tend to issue secured debt when they have

high fixed asset ratios and after periods of poor stock returns. They tend to hold more cash, which

indicates that firms issuing secured debt are concerned about liquidity constraints in the future. These

findings are consistent with the ‘banking’ view of secured debt (Berger and Udell (1990)), which focuses

more on the effect of (limited) supply of capital and catering to investors’ demands on financial choices.

Here, poor quality firms have little choice but to issue secured debt as investors are more likely to require

direct collateral when the firm is nearing bankruptcy. On the other hand, they do not support the

traditional demand-driven ‘corporate finance’ view, in which high quality firms issue secured debt to

avoid underinvestment problems associated with the priority of existing debt claims (Stulz and Johnson

(1985), Smith and Warner (1979), and Berkovitch and Kim (1990)).

B. Private Loans

        We next examine the way in which macroeconomic conditions and firm-specific factors affect the

structure of private loans. As with our analysis of public debt offerings, we classify private loans by

maturity and security level. As before, we consider a loan or collection of loans to be short-term if the


                                                     20
weighted maturity is less than five years, and classify the loans as secured if the proceeds-weighted

secured dummy is larger than or equal to 0.5. We then estimate equations predicting the factors that affect

whether a loan is short or long-term, and whether or not it is secured. Similar to the equations (3) and (4)

estimated for bonds, we restrict our sample to those firm-months for which a loan was issued, and

estimate the equations using a logit model.

        Panel B of Table VII presents estimates of these equations. The first three columns report

estimates of the factors that affect the choice between short-term and long-term loans. Similar to public

bonds, the conditional probability of obtaining a short-term loan increases during economic downturns

and tightening credit markets, consistent with the hypothesis that firms turn away from more information-

sensitive or risky loans during downturns. In addition, firms that get short-term private loans tend to be

smaller, have lower debt levels, and are less likely to have obtained a credit rating than firms that obtain

long-term loans. These findings are in contrast to those for short-term bond issuers, who tend to be larger

firms that have credit ratings.

        The last three columns of Panel B of Table VII report estimates of equations predicting whether a

given loan will be secured or unsecured. The coefficients on the three indicators of financial market

conditions are positive and statistically significant. These results suggest that weak credit conditions are

associated with a higher use of secured relative to unsecured loans.

        The effect of macroeconomic conditions on security appears to be different for loans, where

market downturns clearly increase the likelihood of security, than for bonds, where this effect is

significant only for one of three measures of financial conditions. One possible explanation is that

secured public debt is relatively rare, with only 5 percent of issues being secured. In contrast, 79% of

private loans in our sample are secured. Thus, it is not surprising that the results for security are more

clear cut for the sample of loans, where security is a common feature, than for bonds, where it is not.

        In addition, the same firm-level factors that lead firms to issue secured public debt lead firms to

use secured private loans. In particular, firms obtaining secured loans tend to be younger, smaller, highly

levered with low interest coverage and weak cash flows. Similar to the results from the public debt, this


                                                    21
pattern strongly supports the supply of capital–driven ‘banking view’ of secured debt, in which firms tend

to use secured debt in situations in which lenders are unwilling to lend absent security. It is counter to the

demand for capital-driven ‘corporate finance’ view, in which firms use secured debt as a way of finessing

future agency problems.



6. Discussion

        Macroeconomic conditions are widely believed to affect the way in which firms raise capital, and

indeed their very ability to do so. There are a number of theories that predict a relation between the way

in which firms raise capital and macroeconomic conditions. These theories can broadly be categorized

into demand for capital-based theories, which are usually based on information asymmetries, and supply

of capital based theories, which argue that recessions decrease the supply of capital, especially to poorly

rated firms, through a combination of a credit crunch and a flight to capital. Both demand and supply-

based theories have predictions for the types of securities that are offered at different points in the

business cycle, the way that securities are structured at different points in the business cycle, and the types

of firms that issue securities at different points in the business cycle.

        We evaluate the way in which macroeconomic conditions affect capital raising using a sample of

capital-raising activities by US corporations, including 7,746 seasoned equity offerings, 21,657 public

debt offerings, 12,048 private placements of equity and debt, and 40,097 private loans. Using these data,

we obtain a set of stylized facts about the types of securities issued at different points in the business

cycle, the way these securities are structured at different times, and the financial soundness of the firms

that issue at those times.

        When interpreting these findings, there are two main questions to be asked. First, do

macroeconomic conditions affect capital raising at all? Second, which theories best explain which of the

particular patterns of a particular type of capital raising?

        The answer to the first question is clear: Macroeconomic conditions are an important determinant

of capital raising. They impact the types of securities used by firms, the way these securities are


                                                       22
structured, and perhaps most importantly, the types of firms that are able to receive financing at different

points in time.

         The effect of macroeconomic conditions on capital raising differs substantially depending on the

financial soundness of the firm in question. For lower-rated, noninvestment-grade firms, the likelihood

that it raises capital decreases when overall market conditions worsen, regardless of whether we measure

this worsening by an NBER-defined recession, the growth rate of GDP, or credit tightness due to a

Federal Reserve Survey of bankers. For these firms, the likelihood they receive a loan, issue a bond, or

issue public equity all decline with poor macroeconomic conditions. The only manner of capital raising

that increases for these firms in poor economic times is private placements of equity and debt. These

results are consistent with the view that when macroeconomic conditions worsen, the supply of capital

shifts and relatively poor quality firms cannot issue capital publicly but instead have to rely on private

placements.

         However, the supply of capital does not appear to decline for higher-rated firms during poor

macroeconomic conditions. For higher-rated, investment-grade firms, public equity issues have no

relation with the business cycle, while public bond issuances and private loans actually increase with poor

financial conditions. These results are consistent with “flight to quality” arguments, in which uncertainty

about the economic environment increases in downturns, leading investors to prefer lower risk

investments. In addition, they are consistent with “credit crunch” stories like Holmstrom and Tirole

(1997), in which capital becomes scarce during an economic slowdown and is rationed to higher quality

firms.

          An implication of these arguments is that during poor economic times, high quality firms’ cost

of capital should be relatively low, and they should raise capital to replenish their liquidity. In contrast,

lower-rated firms face substantial costs to raising capital in poor economic times, so they should only

raise it when necessary and spend whatever capital they raise right away. We examine these predictions,

and find that, consistent with the flight to quality arguments, highly rated firms hold a relatively high




                                                     23
proportion of proceeds from the issuance in the form of cash during recessions.. In contrast, low-rated

firms tend to spend most of the capital they raise during poor economic times.

        In addition to the choice of securities, we also consider the possibility that macroeconomic factors

affect the structure of securities. In particular, we examine how macroeconomic conditions affect the

maturity and security of the public and private debt issuances. Our results indicate that, holding other

factors fixed, a downturn tends to decrease the expected maturity of both public bonds and private loans

and to increase the likelihood that these loans are secured. These findings can be explained both by

demand-based stories, in which less information-sensitive securities are issued during poor economic times,

and by supply-based ones, in which suppliers of capital require a shorter maturity and more security when

macroeconomic conditions are worse.

        Overall, our results are consistent with the view that macroeconomic conditions are important

determinants of the structure of securities issued, and, equally importantly, of the ability of firms to raise

capital at all. The supply of capital available to firms as well as investors’ demand for certain types of

securities appear to be important determinants of the manner in which firms raise capital. These findings

appear to justify the concerns of Passov (2003) that firms without investment-grade bond ratings could

conceivably be shut out of the capital markets during down cycles. Indeed, in the well-known Graham and

Harvey (2001) survey of Chief Financial Officers, the two most common concerns in debt policy were

maintaining financial flexibility and bond ratings (p. 210). Consistent with this survey evidence are

Kisgen (2008) and Hovakimian et al. (2009), who document that firms appear to target bond ratings rather

than debt levels. Our findings suggest that the concern about bond ratings is potentially warranted, since

firms with poor bond ratings potentially are shut out of the capital markets during downturns.




                                                     24
REFERENCES

Almeida, Heitor, Murillo Campello and Michael S. Weisbach, 2004, The Cash Flow Sensitivity of Cash,
Journal of Finance, 59, 1777-1804.

Almeida, Heitor, Murillo Campello and Michael S. Weisbach, 2009, Corporate Financial and Investment
Policies when Future Financing is not Frictionless, Journal of Corporate Finance, forthcoming.

Baker, Malcolm, 2009, Capital Market Driven Corporate Finance, Annual Review of Financial Economics,
Vol. 1, 181-205.

Barnea, Amir, Robert A. Haugen and Lemma W. Senbet, 1980, A Rationale for Debt Maturity Structure
and Call Provisions in the Agency Theoretic Framework, Journal of Finance, 35, 1223-1234.

Berger, A. N., and G. F. Udell, 1990, Collateral, Loan Quality and Bank Risk, Journal of Monetary
Economics 25, 21-42.

Berkovitch, Elazar and E. Han Kim, 1990, Financial Contracting and Leverage Induced Over- and Under-
Investment Incentives, Journal of Finance, 45, 765-794.

Bolton, Patrick and Freixas, Xavier, 2000, Equity, bonds and bank debt: capital structure and financial
market equilibrium under asymmetric information. Journal of Political Economy 108, 324-351.

Caballero, Ricardo J. and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2008, Collective Risk Management in a Flight to
Quality Episode, Journal of Finance 63, 2195-2230.

Chava, Sudheer and Michael R. Roberts, 2008, How does financing impact investment? The role of debt
covenants. Journal of Finance, 63, 2085-2121.

Choe, H., R. Masulis, and V. Nanda, 1993, Common Stock Offerings Across the Business Cycle: Theory
and Evidence, Journal of Empirical Finance, 1, 3-31.

Diamond, Douglas W., 1991, Debt Maturity Structure and Liquidity Risk, Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 106, 709-737.

Flannery, Mark J., 1986, Asymmetric Information and Risky Debt Maturity Choice, Journal of Finance,
41, 19-37.

Graham, John R. and Campbell R. Harvey, 2001, The theory and practice of corporate finance: evidence
from the field, Journal of Financial Economics, 187-244.

Greene, W. H., 2000, Econometric Analysis, Prentice Hall.

Gomes, Armando and Gordon Phillips, 2007, Private and Public Security Issuance by Public Firms: The
Role of Asymmetric Information, Working Paper, University of Maryland.

Hertzel, M., Smith, R.H., 1993. Market discounts and shareholder gains for placing equity privately.
Journal of Finance 48, 459-485.




                                                  25
Hickman, W. Braddock, 1953, The Volume of Corporate Bond Financing, National Bureau of Economic
Research, New York.

Holmstrom, Bengt and Jean Tirole, 1997, Financial Intermediation, loanable funds, and the real sector,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 663-691.

Hovakimian, Armen, Ayla Kayhan, and Sheridan Titman, 2009, Crediting Rating Targets, Working Paper,
University of Texas.

Jung, Kooyul, Yong-Cheol Kim, and Rene Stulz, 1996, Timing, investment opportunities, managerial
discretion, and security issue decisions, Journal of Financial Economics, 159-185.

Kahle, Kathleen M., and Rene M. Stulz, 2010, Financial Policies and the Financial Crisis: How Important
Was the Systemic Credit Contractions for Industrial Corporations?, Dice Center Working Paper 2010-13.

Kim, Woojin and Michael S. Weisbach, 2008, Motivations for public equity offers: An international
perspective, Journal of Financial Economics, 87, 281-301.

Kisgen, Darren J., 2008, Do firms target credit ratings or leverage levels?, Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis.

Korajczyk, Robert A. and Amnon Levy, 2003, Capital structure choice: Macroeconomic conditions and
financial constraints, Journal of Financial Economics, 68, 75-109.

Lewis, Craig, Richard Rogalski, and James Seward, 1999. Is convertible debt a substitute for straight debt
or for common equity? Financial Management 28, 5-27.

Lown, Cara S., Donald P. Morgan, and Sonali Rohatgi, 2000. Listening to loan officers: the impact of
commercial credit standards on lending and output, Economic Policy Review, Federal Reserve Bank of
New York Jul, 1-16.

Moore, Goeffrey H., 1980, Business Cycles, Inflation and Forecasting, National Bureau of Economic
Research Studies in Business Cycles, No. 24, Ballinger Publishing Company.

Myers, Stewart C., 1977, Determinants of Corporate Borrowing, Journal of Financial Economics, 5, 147-
176.

Passov, Richard, 2003, How Much Cash Does your Company Need?, Harvard Business Review,
November, 1-8.

Santos, Joao, A.C., and Andrew Winton, 2008, Bank Loans, Bonds, and Information Monopolies
across the Business Cycle, Journal of Finance 63, 1315-1359.

Smith, Clifford and Jerold Warner, 1979, On Financial Contracting: An Analysis of Bond Covenants,
Journal of Financial Economics, 7, 117-161.

Stein, Jeremy, 1992, Convertible Bonds as Backdoor Equity Financing, Journal of Financial Economics,
32, 3-21.




                                                   26
Stulz, Rene M. and Herb Johnson, 1985, An Analysis of Secured Debt, Journal of Financial Economics,
14, 501-521.

Vayanos, Dimitri, 2004, Flight to Quality, Flight to Liquidity, and the Pricing of Risk, NBER Working
Paper 10327.

Zhang, Zhipeng, 2008, Recovery Rates and Macroeconomic Conditions: The Role of Loan Covenants,
Working Paper.




                                                  27
                                                                  Table I
                                                         Sample Descriptive Statistics

The sample includes all SEOs, convertible bonds, other public debt, private loans, and private placements of equity and debt issued by US
industrial firms that have corresponding accounting information in Compustat as of the fiscal year-end immediately prior to the issue. Sample
period is between 1971 and 2007, except for private loans (1988 to 2007) and private placements (1981 to 2007). We divide the sample into six
expansion periods and five recession periods based on the NBER classification. For each sub-period, we report the averages of proceeds raised per
month in constant 2000 $US for each of the six security types.

                                                           Average Proceeds per Month (constant 2000 $US mil)
                                              SEOs        Convertibles Public Bonds Private Loans       Private Placements
                                                                                                       Equity         Debt
January 1971-October 1973                      395.3           29.5         936.1          -             -              -
November 1973-March 1975 (recession)           137.2           16.9       1,632.1          -             -              -
April 1975-December 1979                       308.0           35.8       1,096.3          -             -              -
January 1980-July 1980 (recession)             393.1           42.0       2,937.7          -             -              -
August 1980-June 1981                        1,085.1          141.3       1,626.2          -             55.3          477.3
July 1981-November 1982 (recession)            413.6           76.7       1,498.2          -             22.6          526.4
December 1982-June 1990                        710.9          477.6       3,965.5      11,915.9         194.1        2,584.9
July 1990-March 1991(recession)                391.9          955.3       4,000.6       7,504.1         180.9        2,167.5
April 1991-February 2001                     2,090.5        1,984.5      16,451.4      28,078.9         221.7          815.0
March 2001-November 2001(recession)          1,677.9        8,264.4      35,598.8      48,832.1         503.2          766.8
December 2001-December 2007                  1,680.4        4,948.9      19,623.0      38,876.3         532.3          569.1
All                                            844.0        1,543.0       8,124.2      12,291.6         155.5          718.8




                                                                       28
                                               Table II
                               Macroeconomic Conditions and Security Issues

This table presents the averages of relative proportions of proceeds raised through six types of securities within
each calendar month. The sample includes all SEOs, convertible bonds, other public debt, private loans, and
private placements of both equity and debt issued by US industrial firms that have corresponding accounting
information in Compustat as of the fiscal year-end immediately prior to the issue. Sample period is between
1971 and 2007 for SEOs, convertibles, and other public bonds, 1988 to 2007 for private loans, and 1981 to
2007 for private placements. Expansions and recessions are based on the NBER classification. A month is
defined as low growth if GDP growth in that particular quarter is below the 25th percentile of economic growth
over the entire sample period. A month with weak credit supply takes a value of one if the net percentage of
senior loan officers tightening standards for loans to large and medium firms is positive for that particular
quarter. This classification is based on a Federal Reserve survey available since the 2nd quarter of 1990. For
each calendar month, we first calculate the relative proportions of each of the six security types within that
month. Panel A reports the monthly averages between 1971 to 1987 where private placements are treated as
missing prior to 1981, while panel B reports the corresponding numbers from 1988 to 2007, respectively.

Panel A: 1971 to 1987

                           Number of               Averages of Relative Proceeds within Month (%)
                            months         SEOs      Convertibles Public Bonds          Private Placements
                                                                                      Equity          Debt
Expansion                         162       23.4%          3.4%          63.1%           1.9%         22.7%
Recession                          41       15.2%          2.1%          70.5%           1.9%         27.4%
   t-stat(difference)                        -2.22        -1.32           1.66           0.03           0.92

High GDP growth                   144          22.7%            3.6%           61.5%        1.8%       23.5%
Low GDP growth                     59          19.3%            2.1%           71.9%        2.2%       24.0%
   t-stat(difference)                           -1.06          -1.58            2.64        0.27        0.08

Panel B: 1988 to 2007

                        Number of                  Averages of Relative Proceeds within Month (%)
                         months         SEOs      Convertibles Public Bonds Private Loans Private Placements
                                                                                            Equity     Debt
Expansion                   222          3.8%         5.1%         28.5%         58.0%       0.7%      3.9%
Recession                    18          2.2%         7.6%         31.9%         49.4%       1.0%      7.8%
  t-stat(difference)                    -1.91         2.27           1.05         -2.22      1.10      2.25

High GDP growth             180          3.9%           5.0%           28.6%       57.8%      0.7%       4.0%
Low GDP growth               60          3.1%           5.9%           29.4%       55.9%      0.9%       4.8%
  t-stat(difference)                    -1.71           1.25            0.39        -0.79     1.68       0.81

Strong Credit Supply        108         3.8%            4.0%           26.0%       64.1%      0.5%       1.6%
Weak Credit Supply          105         4.1%            7.0%           33.4%       51.3%      0.8%       3.3%
  t-stat(difference)                    0.69            5.09            4.16       -6.54      3.85       3.18




                                                         29
                                                                Table III
                                          Macroeconomic Conditions and Types of Public Debt Issues

This table presents the averages of relative proportions of proceeds raised through public debt issues with various characteristics. Short-term
months are those firm-months with proceeds-weighted initial maturities shorter than or equal to 5 years. Short-term debts are only available since
1985. Secured months are those firm-months with proceeds-weighted issue-level secured dummy greater than or equal to 0.5. We group all public
debt into five categories based on credit ratings from Moody’s; not rated, C's(C to Caa1), speculative B's (B3 to Ba1), investable B's (Baa3 to
Baa1), and A's (A3 to Aaa). Expansions and recessions are based on the NBER classification. A month is defined as low growth if GDP growth in
that particular quarter is below the 25th percentile of economic growth over the entire sample period. A month is defined as with weak credit
supply if the net percentage of senior loan officers tightening standards for loans to large and medium firms is positive for that particular quarter,
and is based on Federal Reserve survey. For each calendar month, we first calculate the relative proportions of each of the bond types out of total
proceeds raised from public debt within that month. Panel A reports the monthly averages for the full sample period, while panel B reports the
monthly averages since the 2nd quarter of 1990, when the Federal Reserve survey became available.
Panel A: Full Sample Period
                      Number of                                                   Averages of Relative Proceeds within Month (%)
                       months    Short term          Secured      Non Rated       C's(C to Caa1) Speculative B's Investable B's A's (A3 to Aaa)
Expansion                   381       13.2%               5.3%             6.2%              3.7%           25.8%            18.7%            45.6%
Recession                     58      22.9%               4.8%             2.7%              1.2%           14.4%            15.7%            66.0%
 t-stat(difference)                     2.80             -0.24            -2.12             -2.57           -3.97            -1.35             5.70
High GDP growth                 321        13.1%          4.6%             6.5%              3.8%           26.2%            18.6%            45.0%
Low GDP growth                  118        16.3%          6.8%             3.8%              2.4%           19.0%            17.7%            57.2%
 t-stat(difference)                         1.53          1.65            -2.09             -1.88           -3.31             -0.52            4.40
Panel B: 1990 2nd Quarter to Dec. 2007
                     Number of                                                    Averages of Relative Proceeds within Month (%)
                       months      Short term        Secured      Non Rated       C's(C to Caa1) Speculative B's Investable B's A's (A3 to Aaa)
Expansion                     195       14.3%             3.9%             3.1%              2.8%           32.8%            23.2%            38.0%
Recession                      18       22.9%             0.7%             1.2%              0.5%           14.5%            26.8%            56.9%
 t-stat(difference)                       2.45           -3.01            -1.87             -2.60           -4.76             1.12             3.96
High GDP growth                 156        14.2%          4.0%             3.2%              2.8%           34.2%            22.6%            37.2%
Low GDP growth                   57        17.1%          2.7%             2.3%              2.1%           23.2%            26.1%            46.3%
 t-stat(difference)                         1.28         -1.85            -1.51             -1.35           -4.51             1.74             3.02
Strong Credit Supply            108        11.2%          3.8%             3.6%              3.4%           36.4%            22.8%            33.7%
Weak Credit Supply              105        18.9%          3.5%             2.3%              1.8%           25.9%            24.3%            45.7%
 t-stat(difference)                         3.98         -0.61            -2.35             -3.41           -4.94             0.87             4.54


                                                                         30
                                                 Table IV
                        Firm Characteristics by Security Issues: Univariate Analysis

This table presents the averages of firm characteristics for each non-issuing months as well as issuing months
over the entire sample period. We also report the results separately for six security types. These characteristics
are natural logarithm of the total assets, market leverage, market to book, cash flow, cash, the inverse of interest
coverage, a debt-rating dummy, sales growth, and the stock return. Inverse interest coverage is defined as the
natural logarithm of (1+interest/EBIT) and stock return is calculated over the previous twelve months. Detailed
definition of each characteristic is provided in the Appendix Table 1. Sample period is between 1971 and 2007
for SEOs, convertibles, and other public bonds, 1988 to 2007 for private loans, and 1981 to 2007 for private
placements.

                                                  Averages per Firm-Months Observations
                            No Issue     Issue     SEOs        CBs     Bonds      Loans       Private Placements
                                                                                              Equity       Debt
Firm Age                       13.283    16.229      9.862     15.963     21.997     16.289      9.804     17.932
Log(Total Assets)               4.541     5.700      4.337      6.076      7.520      5.492      3.214      6.390
Leverage                        0.278     0.323      0.278      0.305      0.395      0.321      0.247      0.331
Market to Book                  1.711     1.751      2.468      2.199      1.261      1.443      3.860      1.356
Fixed Asset Ratio               0.308     0.344      0.316      0.275      0.429      0.322      0.242      0.419
Cash Flow                      -0.028    -0.002      -0.010     0.014      0.070      0.036      -0.507     0.017
Cash                            0.155     0.120      0.187      0.209      0.059      0.093      0.324      0.078
Inverse Interest Coverage       0.182     0.235      0.183      0.155      0.306      0.245      0.039      0.300
Rated Firm Dummy                0.164     0.439      0.163      0.547      0.834      0.409      0.087      0.394
Sales Growth                    0.180     0.268      0.500      0.362      0.191      0.232      0.299      0.186
Stock Return                    0.174     0.357      0.970      0.582      0.221      0.193      0.416      0.174
Term Spread                     1.065     1.214      1.158      1.325      1.242      1.186      1.402      1.221

Recession Dummy                 0.109     0.078      0.074      0.078      0.087      0.068      0.081      0.108
Low Growth Dummy                0.248     0.215      0.194      0.222      0.215      0.213      0.258      0.223
Weak Credit Dummy               0.490     0.472      0.437      0.526      0.482      0.464      0.518      0.489
N                           1,585,431    45,980      7,170      2,546     10,400     20,322      2,957      4,547




                                                        31
                                                                          Table V
                                                    A Multinomial Logit Model of Security Choice
This table reports coefficient estimates for a multinomial logit model. The dependent variable includes six different types of security issuance: bank
loan, public bond, convertible debt, SEO, and private placements of equity and debt. The base outcome is not issuing any type of security. Variables
are defined in Appendix Table 1. The sample period is from 1988 to 2007. Panel A is for all firms; Panel B is for noninvestment-grade firms only;
and Panel C is for investment grade firms only. We define noninvestment-grade firms as those that never issued an investment-grade public bond
during the entire sample period based on Moody’s ratings.All regressions, except for the ones in Panel C, include industry fixed effects. Standard
errors, corrected for clustering of observations at the firm level, are in parentheses. The symbols ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the
1, 5, and 10% levels, respectively.
Panel A: All Firms
                                                              (1)                                                                                 (2)
                                                                                    Private Placements                                                                Private Placements
                                 Loan       Bond        Convert        SEO         Equity           Debt         Loan       Bond        Convert         SEO         Equity            Debt
Firm Age                    -0.00351*** 0.00773***   -0.0188***   -0.0444***   -0.0196*** -0.00853***       -0.00342*** 0.00773***   -0.0189***    -0.0441***   -0.0199*** -0.00860***
                             (0.00111)   (0.00229)    (0.00386)    (0.00288)    (0.00409)       (0.00273)     (0.00111)  (0.00230)    (0.00387)     (0.00288)    (0.00409)        (0.00272)
ln(Total Assets)              0.137***   0.365***     0.316***     0.0329**     -0.168***        0.409***     0.138***    0.366***    0.316***      0.0344**     -0.170***        0.410***
                             (0.00977)    (0.0260)     (0.0268)     (0.0135)     (0.0246)        (0.0196)    (0.00978)    (0.0259)     (0.0268)      (0.0135)     (0.0246)         (0.0196)
Market Leverage               -0.122**    0.549***      -0.0301       -0.138      0.00635          0.141       -0.116**   0.566***      -0.0186        -0.141       0.0112           0.166
                              (0.0556)     (0.161)      (0.178)     (0.0959)      (0.168)         (0.144)      (0.0556)    (0.161)      (0.178)      (0.0960)      (0.168)          (0.144)
Market-to-Book                 0.00476  0.0972***      0.00993    0.0567***       -0.0104        0.000887      0.00503   0.0991***      0.0108     0.0574***       -0.0100         0.00248
                             (0.00749)    (0.0224)     (0.0131)    (0.00701)     (0.0101)        (0.0200)    (0.00751)    (0.0224)     (0.0131)     (0.00700)     (0.0101)         (0.0201)
Fixed-Assets Ratio           -0.414***   0.571***     -0.762***      0.237*        0.116         0.888***    -0.420***    0.563***    -0.760***       0.233*        0.124          0.882***
                              (0.0696)     (0.173)      (0.235)      (0.121)      (0.224)         (0.166)      (0.0696)    (0.172)      (0.235)       (0.121)      (0.224)          (0.166)
Cash Flow                     0.392***     0.0368       -0.0663     0.152**     -0.954***       -0.827***     0.391***     0.0467       -0.0614      0.148**     -0.948***        -0.830***
                              (0.0743)     (0.237)      (0.124)     (0.0679)     (0.0474)        (0.0867)      (0.0743)    (0.239)      (0.124)      (0.0679)     (0.0475)         (0.0872)
Cash                         -2.314***   -2.855***    1.066***       -0.0342    0.586***        -2.182***    -2.308***   -2.851***    1.064***        -0.0309    0.582***         -2.189***
                              (0.0945)     (0.426)      (0.192)      (0.109)      (0.151)         (0.264)      (0.0944)    (0.426)      (0.193)       (0.109)      (0.151)          (0.264)
Inverse Interest Coverage       0.0132     -0.0667     -0.174**    0.112***      -0.122**         0.0790*       0.0129     -0.0676     -0.175**     0.112***      -0.122**         0.0787*
                              (0.0189)    (0.0430)     (0.0697)     (0.0405)     (0.0480)        (0.0459)      (0.0189)   (0.0431)     (0.0701)      (0.0405)     (0.0479)         (0.0460)
Debt Rating Dummy             0.349***   2.742***     1.087***      0.150**      -0.268**       -0.435***     0.347***   2.739***     1.085***       0.149**      -0.264**        -0.438***
                              (0.0306)     (0.111)      (0.119)     (0.0596)      (0.128)        (0.0879)      (0.0306)    (0.111)      (0.119)      (0.0596)      (0.128)         (0.0879)
Sales Growth                  0.306***   0.573***     0.316***     0.375***     0.106***        0.325***      0.305***   0.570***     0.315***      0.374***     0.106***         0.321***
                              (0.0156)    (0.0423)     (0.0343)     (0.0175)     (0.0341)        (0.0407)      (0.0156)   (0.0422)     (0.0343)      (0.0175)     (0.0341)         (0.0410)
Stock Return                 0.0349***   0.162***     0.200***     0.234***     0.148***          -0.0114    0.0321***    0.156***    0.198***      0.235***     0.147***           -0.0246
                              (0.0104)    (0.0205)     (0.0213)     (0.0128)     (0.0141)        (0.0416)      (0.0105)   (0.0211)     (0.0214)      (0.0128)     (0.0140)         (0.0431)
Term Spread                     0.0111   0.0828***     0.172***     0.146***     0.278***        0.000944      0.00252   0.0747***     0.179***     0.131***     0.293***           0.00200
                             (0.00695)    (0.0158)     (0.0266)     (0.0151)     (0.0284)        (0.0229)    (0.00711)    (0.0167)     (0.0262)      (0.0154)     (0.0280)         (0.0228)
Recession Dummy                -0.0371     0.0624      0.203**     -0.300***    0.254***         0.275***
                              (0.0293)    (0.0552)     (0.0988)     (0.0786)     (0.0935)        (0.0770)
Low Growth Dummy                                                                                             -0.123***   -0.130***     0.0512      -0.204***    0.214***         -0.0599
                                                                                                              (0.0194)    (0.0371)    (0.0577)      (0.0440)     (0.0600)       (0.0519)
Constant                     -4.159***   -9.723***   -8.896***    -5.138***    -7.436***     -8.911***       -4.128***   -9.692***   -8.902***     -5.103***    -7.481***      -8.877***
                              (0.165)     (0.315)     (0.680)       (0.335)     (0.977)        (0.526)         (0.165)     (0.315)     (0.680)       (0.335)      (0.976)        (0.526)
Observations                                                728,639                                                                            728,639
Pseudo R2                                                     0.093                                                                             0.093

                                                                                            32
Table V – continued
Panel B: Noninvestment-Grade
Firms
                                                                  (1)                                                                     (2)
                                                                                 Private Placements                                                      Private Placements
                                 Loan        Bond       Convert        SEO      Equity          Debt         Loan        Bond     Convert     SEO       Equity          Debt
Firm Age                    -0.00912***   -0.00851*   -0.0109**   -0.0468*** -0.0189*** -0.00480        -0.00897***   -0.00819* -0.0107** -0.0464*** -0.0193***      -0.00481
                              (0.00139)   (0.00460)   (0.00501)    (0.00350) (0.00444)      (0.00320)     (0.00139)   (0.00461) (0.00501) (0.00349) (0.00444)       (0.00320)
ln(Total Assets)              0.162***    0.459***     0.542***    0.0699*** -0.190***       0.319***     0.163***     0.464*** 0.543*** 0.0720*** -0.191***         0.320***
                               (0.0104)    (0.0290)    (0.0264)     (0.0133) (0.0225)        (0.0195)      (0.0104)    (0.0293)  (0.0265) (0.0132) (0.0225)          (0.0195)
Market Leverage                 -0.0328    2.038***      0.0209    -0.365***    -0.159       -0.360**      -0.0315     2.053***    0.0144 -0.372***     -0.150       -0.344**
                               (0.0581)     (0.170)     (0.196)      (0.101)   (0.170)        (0.152)      (0.0581)     (0.170)   (0.196)    (0.101)   (0.170)        (0.152)
Market-to-Book                 0.00207    0.0574***     0.0268*    0.0594*** -0.0112           0.0153      0.00226    0.0616*** 0.0263* 0.0601*** -0.0107             0.0160
                              (0.00789)    (0.0200)    (0.0139)    (0.00699) (0.0101)        (0.0190)     (0.00792)    (0.0200)  (0.0139) (0.00700) (0.0100)         (0.0191)
Fixed-Assets Ratio            -0.395***     0.0903     -0.569**        0.168   0.0815        0.872***    -0.400***      0.0709   -0.571**     0.163    0.0896        0.867***
                               (0.0757)     (0.220)     (0.280)      (0.124)   (0.234)        (0.180)      (0.0758)     (0.222)   (0.280)    (0.125)   (0.233)        (0.180)
Cash Flow                     0.400***       0.314       -0.150      0.156** -0.932*** -0.765***          0.396***       0.305     -0.156   0.151** -0.926***       -0.769***
                               (0.0775)     (0.231)     (0.127)     (0.0696) (0.0470)        (0.0857)      (0.0775)     (0.232)   (0.126)   (0.0696) (0.0472)        (0.0861)
Cash                          -2.335***   -1.139***   0.851***        -0.153  0.519***      -2.167***    -2.330***    -1.135*** 0.853***     -0.150   0.514***      -2.166***
                               (0.0986)     (0.419)     (0.213)      (0.109)   (0.153)        (0.269)      (0.0985)     (0.417)   (0.213)    (0.109)   (0.152)        (0.269)
Inverse Interest Coverage       0.0318     -0.00941     -0.152*     0.101** -0.133***         0.0564        0.0315     -0.00933   -0.151*   0.101** -0.133***          0.0564
                               (0.0199)    (0.0442)    (0.0793)     (0.0421) (0.0470)        (0.0532)      (0.0199)    (0.0440)  (0.0791) (0.0421) (0.0470)          (0.0535)
Sales Growth                  0.291***     0.529***    0.302***     0.363*** 0.0998***       0.282***     0.290***     0.523*** 0.303*** 0.362*** 0.100***           0.279***
                               (0.0162)    (0.0374)    (0.0363)     (0.0178) (0.0342)        (0.0445)      (0.0162)    (0.0374)  (0.0363) (0.0178) (0.0342)          (0.0447)
Stock Return                 0.0420***     0.191***    0.194***     0.229*** 0.145***         -0.0484    0.0405***     0.189*** 0.195*** 0.231*** 0.144***            -0.0578
                               (0.0105)    (0.0182)    (0.0223)     (0.0126) (0.0139)        (0.0509)      (0.0106)    (0.0187)  (0.0223) (0.0126) (0.0139)          (0.0522)
Term Spread                   -0.000214    -0.00341   0.153***      0.124*** 0.294***         0.00996      -0.0112     -0.0461* 0.144*** 0.106*** 0.309***            0.00815
                              (0.00825)    (0.0266)    (0.0300)     (0.0158) (0.0289)        (0.0271)     (0.00844)    (0.0279)  (0.0301) (0.0161) (0.0283)          (0.0271)
Recession Dummy              -0.0964***   -0.305***      -0.203    -0.352*** 0.288***         0.184*
                               (0.0370)     (0.114)     (0.136)     (0.0857) (0.0940)        (0.0996)
Low Growth Dummy                                                                                         -0.147***    -0.627***    -0.0884 -0.236*** 0.216***        -0.0840
                                                                                                          (0.0230)     (0.0674)    (0.0678) (0.0467) (0.0608)       (0.0657)
Constant                     -4.282*** -8.427*** -9.102*** -4.934*** -7.260***             -9.126***     -4.246***    -8.301***   -9.086*** -4.894*** -7.303***    -9.096***
                              (0.211)   (0.711)   (0.507)    (0.327)   (0.969)               (1.032)       (0.211)      (0.706)     (0.506)   (0.327)   (0.969)      (1.031)
Observations                                            616,184                                                                          616,184
Pseudo R2                                                     0.06                                                                       0.061




                                                                                          33
Table V – continued
Panel C: Investment-Grade Firms

                                                                 (1)                                                                     (2)
                                                                                 Private Placements                                                          Private Placements
                                 Loan        Bond      Convert        SEO      Equity           Debt         Loan        Bond      Convert        SEO      Equity           Debt
Firm Age                    0.00629***    0.00546*    -0.00799   -0.0251*** -0.0385*** -0.0170***       0.00624***    0.00533*    -0.00907   -0.0252*** -0.0381*** -0.0173***
                             (0.00238)   (0.00315)   (0.00582)    (0.00571) (0.00946)       (0.00457)    (0.00238)   (0.00315)   (0.00577)    (0.00570) (0.00940)       (0.00454)
ln(Total Assets)             0.168***     0.465***    0.185***    -0.155*** 0.343***         0.313***     0.168***    0.465***    0.180***    -0.155*** 0.346***         0.311***
                              (0.0231)    (0.0387)    (0.0479)     (0.0501)   (0.124)        (0.0387)     (0.0231)    (0.0388)    (0.0475)     (0.0500)   (0.124)        (0.0389)
Market Leverage                  0.187     0.682**       0.384     1.403***     1.405        1.572***        0.204     0.689**       0.489     1.411***     1.357        1.622***
                               (0.159)     (0.295)     (0.456)      (0.364)   (1.031)         (0.357)      (0.159)     (0.294)     (0.452)      (0.364)   (1.027)         (0.354)
Market-to-Book                 0.00258    0.113***      0.0376      -0.0666 -1.117*** -0.365***            0.00368    0.114***      0.0480      -0.0655 -1.101***       -0.365***
                              (0.0242)    (0.0316)    (0.0379)     (0.0728)   (0.388)         (0.117)     (0.0242)    (0.0315)    (0.0371)     (0.0728)   (0.381)         (0.118)
Fixed-Assets Ratio             -0.239*    0.607***      -0.467     1.191*** 1.165**           0.600**      -0.243*    0.606***      -0.478     1.187*** 1.207**           0.581**
                               (0.144)     (0.182)     (0.403)      (0.324)   (0.549)         (0.282)      (0.144)     (0.182)     (0.401)      (0.324)   (0.545)         (0.283)
Cash Flow                       -0.184      0.535    -2.072***    -2.115***    2.777         4.375***       -0.161      0.552    -1.935***    -2.100***    2.590         4.516***
                               (0.382)     (0.735)     (0.594)      (0.614)   (2.447)         (1.256)      (0.384)     (0.735)     (0.587)      (0.613)   (2.421)         (1.251)
Cash                         -1.955***   -4.935***     1.264**      0.0375    3.031**       -2.082***    -1.954***   -4.963***     1.209**       0.0270   3.070**       -2.151***
                               (0.325)     (0.661)     (0.509)      (0.910)   (1.372)         (0.803)      (0.325)     (0.660)     (0.515)      (0.911)   (1.344)         (0.807)
Inverse Interest Coverage      -0.0710     -0.0341    -0.372**       0.181    0.268*           0.158       -0.0708     -0.0339    -0.375**       0.180    0.270*           0.157
                              (0.0501)    (0.0898)     (0.183)      (0.168)   (0.152)         (0.129)     (0.0500)    (0.0898)     (0.178)      (0.168)   (0.154)         (0.126)
Sales Growth                 0.483***    0.467***    0.616***      0.851*** 1.078***         0.566***     0.478***    0.462***    0.617***     0.849*** 1.106***         0.546***
                              (0.0714)    (0.0869)     (0.178)      (0.139)   (0.290)         (0.119)     (0.0710)    (0.0869)     (0.172)      (0.140)   (0.287)         (0.119)
Stock Return                   0.0128       0.0799   0.519***      0.595*** 0.421**            0.0786     0.00312       0.0827    0.499***     0.595*** 0.448***          0.0537
                              (0.0388)    (0.0611)    (0.0639)     (0.0618)   (0.173)        (0.0948)     (0.0395)    (0.0607)    (0.0656)     (0.0621)   (0.166)        (0.0965)
Term Spread                  0.0286**    0.0931***   0.231***      0.334***    -0.168         -0.0120     0.0262*     0.100***    0.267***     0.339***    -0.170        -0.00699
                              (0.0133)    (0.0202)    (0.0553)     (0.0529)   (0.155)        (0.0421)     (0.0135)    (0.0212)    (0.0516)     (0.0532)   (0.163)        (0.0414)
Recession Dummy               0.0935**     0.134**    1.030***       0.183     -1.320        0.405***
                              (0.0457)    (0.0648)     (0.149)      (0.200)   (1.023)         (0.124)
Low Growth Dummy                                                                                         -0.0505      0.0758*     0.453***    0.105     0.157          -0.0160
                                                                                                         (0.0364)     (0.0430)     (0.113)   (0.134)   (0.352)         (0.0850)
Constant                    -4.582*** -7.547*** -7.155*** -5.425*** -9.428***             -7.509***     -4.563***    -7.559***   -7.180*** -5.438*** -9.573***        -7.464***
                             (0.193)   (0.321)   (0.429)    (0.467)   (1.133)               (0.365)       (0.193)      (0.322)     (0.421)   (0.465)   (1.155)          (0.367)
Observations                                           112,512                                                                          112,512
Pseudo R2                                                    0.044                                                                      0.043




                                                                                          34
                                                      Table VI
                                     Cash Holdings from Capital Raising Activities

This table presents the estimation results from the following regression specification:
                 ⎡⎛ capital raised ⎞ ⎤              ⎡⎛ capital raised ⎞ ⎤
 Y = β 0 + β1 ln ⎢⎜⎜               ⎟⎟ + 1⎥ + β 2 ln ⎢⎜⎜               ⎟⎟ + 1⎥ × RecessionDummy + β3 ln[total assets0 ] + ε ,
                 ⎣⎝ total assets0 ⎠ ⎦               ⎣⎝ total assets0 ⎠ ⎦
where Y = ln[((Vt − V0 ) total assets 0 ) + 1] , and V = quarterly cash and short term investments. t = 1, 4, 8
corresponds to the fiscal quarter following the issuing quarter. In the first three rows, all new issues regardless
of type of security are aggregated within a calendar quarter and these quarters are matched with the NBER’s
expansion/recession dates. In the remaining row, we estimate the result separately for each of the security
types. We report the results separately for noninvestment-grade firms and investment-grade firms.
Noninvestment-grade firms are defined as those that never issued an investment grade public bond during the
entire sample period.

Dependent Variable:                         Noninvestment-Grade Firms                            Investment-Grade Firms
Cash &                                        β1                 β2                              β1                  β2
Short-term Investments         t       Coeff       t-stat      Coeff       t-stat        Coeff      t-stat      Coeff          t-stat
All Sources                   1Q       0.381      101.48      -0.077       -7.14         0.089      18.42      -0.015          -1.17
                              4Q       0.324       69.01      -0.064       -4.70         0.069      12.43       0.050           3.30
                              8Q       0.285       50.45      -0.086       -5.36         0.084      13.61       0.079           4.66
SEOs                          1Q       0.917      103.31      -0.013       -0.57         0.822      28.48       0.008           0.12
                              4Q       0.816       66.95       0.027        0.84         0.653      14.14       0.869           8.62
                              8Q       0.647       38.32      -0.005       -0.12         0.716      14.34       0.471           4.35
CBs                           1Q       0.637        27.15      0.152        2.83         0.275        8.44     -0.101          -2.16
                              4Q       0.568        19.35      0.029        0.42         0.187        4.85     -0.055          -1.00
                              8Q       0.525        13.93     -0.139       -1.60         0.168        3.20     -0.061          -0.82
Bonds                         1Q       0.475        38.87     -0.145       -3.81         0.076      11.30      -0.029          -2.22
                              4Q       0.472        36.13     -0.160       -3.84         0.102      10.52      -0.004          -0.20
                              8Q       0.485        29.66     -0.166       -3.20         0.116       9.36       0.093           3.81
Loans                         1Q       0.097        28.64     -0.057       -5.41         0.087      10.41      -0.019          -0.69
                              4Q       0.072        13.94     -0.054       -3.40         0.053       6.25       0.022           0.80
                              8Q       0.074        12.06     -0.075       -4.06         0.062       6.74       0.030           1.01
Private Placements:           1Q       0.688        52.52     -0.187       -6.35         0.378        4.18     -1.239          -3.98
Equities                      4Q       0.621        30.41     -0.146       -3.16         1.303        7.98     -0.223          -0.40
                              8Q       0.530        20.66     -0.139       -2.46         0.878        6.98     -0.624          -1.46
Private Placements:           1Q       0.161        18.18     -0.064       -2.42         0.078        4.84      0.004           0.11
Debt                          4Q       0.097         8.86     -0.070       -2.06         0.031        1.36     -0.134          -2.61
                              8Q       0.094         6.23     -0.125       -2.80         0.014        0.50      0.288           4.59




                                                                 35
                                                    Table VII
     Factors affecting the Maturity and Security of Public Bonds and Bank Loans: Logit Model
This table reports coefficient estimates for a logit model. Panel A includes only public bond issuances and
their characteristics from 1985 to 2007 in the first three columns (since there is no short-term bond issue
before 1985 in our sample) and from 1971 to 2007 in the last three columns. Panel B includes bank loans
only and the sample period is from 1988 to 2007. In columns (3) and (6) of both panels A and B, where
we include weak credit dummy, the sample period is from the second quarter of 1990 to 2007. The
dependent variable is equal to one if the public debt or bank loan is short-term in columns (1) through (3),
or secured in columns (4) through (6). All regressions include industry fixed effects. Standard errors,
corrected for clustering of observations at the firm level, are in parentheses. The symbols ***, ** and *
indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10% levels, respectively.

Panel A: Public Bond Issues

                                  Short-term vs. Long-term Bond              Secured vs. Unsecured Bond
                                 (1)             (2)           (3)         (4)             (5)          (6)
Firm Age                    0.0166***       0.0159***     0.0183***    -0.00681        -0.00666     0.00138
                            (0.00489)       (0.00487)     (0.00489)    (0.0124)        (0.0124)     (0.0130)
ln(Total Assets)             0.275***       0.275***       0.254***    -0.244**       -0.263***    -0.543***
                             (0.0396)        (0.0396)      (0.0420)    (0.0972)         (0.102)      (0.120)
Leverage                       0.183           0.205         0.199     4.471***        4.482***     4.233***
                              (0.516)         (0.509)       (0.575)     (0.679)         (0.681)      (0.697)
Market-to-Book               0.218***       0.228***       0.186***      -0.185          -0.180      -0.187
                             (0.0571)        (0.0565)      (0.0621)     (0.270)         (0.263)      (0.243)
Fixed-Assets Ratio           -0.765**        -0.772**      -0.766**   2.987***        3.024***        1.126
                              (0.352)         (0.351)       (0.382)     (0.790)         (0.789)      (1.127)
Cash Flow                    -1.431**        -1.414**       -1.302*      -0.591          -0.652       -0.825
                              (0.668)         (0.658)       (0.680)     (1.131)         (1.099)      (1.124)
Cash                          -1.615*        -1.714**       -1.524*     2.688**        2.879***     2.845**
                              (0.858)         (0.858)       (0.871)     (1.066)         (1.061)      (1.125)
Inverse Interest Coverage    -0.00550        -0.00796      0.00675      -0.0682         -0.0761     0.00699
                              (0.149)         (0.147)       (0.148)     (0.154)         (0.156)      (0.185)
Debt Rating Dummy              -0.343          -0.335       -0.510*      -0.270          -0.178        0.363
                              (0.232)         (0.232)       (0.293)     (0.203)         (0.212)      (0.428)
Sales Growth                  -0.376*        -0.390**      -0.490**      0.160            0.159       0.228
                              (0.195)         (0.196)       (0.223)     (0.197)         (0.189)      (0.202)
Stock Return                -0.384***       -0.384***      -0.249**   -0.566***       -0.527***    -0.562***
                              (0.139)         (0.139)       (0.125)     (0.138)         (0.134)      (0.149)
Term Spread                 -15.38***       -13.55***     -13.85***      6.016            8.957       15.94
                              (4.667)         (4.622)       (5.038)     (8.991)         (8.753)      (9.745)
Recession Dummy              0.405***                                    -0.362
                              (0.124)                                   (0.228)
Low Growth Dummy                              0.148*                                   0.373**
                                             (0.0844)                                   (0.157)
Weak Credit Dummy                                          0.430***                                    0.123
                                                            (0.102)                                  (0.203)
Constant                    -3.676***       -3.696***     -3.632***   -4.489***       -4.597***    -2.843***
                              (0.553)         (0.550)       (0.603)     (1.181)         (1.193)      (1.061)
Observations                   7,523           7,523         6,664       8,314            8,314       6,664
           2
Pseudo R                      0.111         0.110          0.120        0.250         0.251         0.287



                                                        36
Table VII – continued

Panel B: Bank Loans

                                   Short-term vs. Long-term Loan                Secured vs. Unsecured Loan
                                  (1)             (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)
Firm Age                      0.00224         0.00211        0.00237    -0.0143*** -0.0146*** -0.0143***
                             (0.00214)       (0.00214)      (0.00220)    (0.00319)       (0.00320)    (0.00325)
ln(Total Assets)            -0.0569*** -0.0566***           -0.0497**    -0.778***      -0.784***     -0.800***
                              (0.0205)        (0.0205)       (0.0211)     (0.0327)        (0.0330)     (0.0338)
Leverage                       0.0427           0.0729        -0.111      3.498***       3.497***      3.429***
                               (0.134)         (0.133)        (0.138)      (0.232)         (0.233)      (0.232)
Market-to-Book              0.0693***        0.0722***       0.0517**    -0.0506**      -0.0528**       -0.0423
                              (0.0237)        (0.0238)       (0.0238)     (0.0257)        (0.0256)     (0.0262)
Fixed-Assets Ratio              -0.227          -0.230        -0.181     -0.688***      -0.686***     -0.717***
                               (0.150)         (0.150)        (0.155)      (0.228)         (0.228)      (0.230)
Cash Flow                    -1.564***       -1.555***      -1.687***    -3.366***      -3.360***     -4.096***
                               (0.287)         (0.285)        (0.279)      (0.512)         (0.516)      (0.434)
Cash                           -0.0667         -0.0857        0.0257      0.721**         0.721**        0.651*
                               (0.210)         (0.210)        (0.218)      (0.327)         (0.327)      (0.337)
Inverse Interest Coverage    -0.0947**       -0.0941**       -0.0804*      0.137**        0.139**       0.156**
                              (0.0426)        (0.0426)       (0.0450)     (0.0682)        (0.0684)     (0.0710)
Debt Rating Dummy            -0.403***       -0.406***      -0.462***     0.442***       0.451***      0.463***
                              (0.0663)        (0.0663)       (0.0687)     (0.0960)        (0.0960)     (0.0985)
Sales Growth                 -0.195***       -0.209***      -0.200***       0.129          0.141*        0.145*
                              (0.0476)        (0.0476)       (0.0495)     (0.0807)        (0.0816)     (0.0853)
Stock Return                 -0.105***       -0.108***     -0.0872***     0.0832**       0.0923**      0.0787*
                              (0.0242)        (0.0243)       (0.0245)     (0.0395)        (0.0398)     (0.0408)
Term Spread                   26.80***       28.78***        29.18***       1.069           3.220        2.560
                               (1.811)         (1.860)        (1.928)      (2.675)         (2.725)      (2.744)
Recession Dummy               0.655***                                      0.0961
                              (0.0839)                                     (0.109)
Low Growth Dummy                              0.102**                                    0.302***
                                              (0.0437)                                    (0.0701)
Weak Credit Dummy                                            0.599***                                   0.130**
                                                             (0.0397)                                  (0.0569)
Constant                      0.823**         0.815**         0.677*      4.856***       4.807***      4.987***
                               (0.336)         (0.344)        (0.366)      (0.631)         (0.629)      (0.646)
Observations                   15,356           15,356        14,627        10,149         10,149        9,798
           2
Pseudo R                      0.0634         0.0602        0.0741         0.296         0.297         0.306




                                                         37
                                                 Appendix Table 1

This data appendix describes the primary variables of interest. All firm characteristics, unless noted otherwise,
represent beginning-of-year values. Data sources, included in the last column, include Compustat, CSRP, Loan
Pricing Corporation's Dealscan, Mergent Fixed Income Securities Database, SDC Global New Issues Database, US
Bureau of Economic Analysis, National Bureau of Economic Research, and the US Federal Reserve Board.

Variable                                                   Definition                                Source

Bond Issuance Proceeds              Total proceeds raised through a public bond offering in      Mergent FISD
                                    a given month
Bond Maturity Dummy                 Set equal to one if the proceeds-weighted initial            Mergent FISD
                                    maturity of bonds issued in a given month is less than
                                    5 years, zero otherwise
Bond Security Dummy                 Set equal to one if the proceeds-weighted initial            Mergent FISD
                                    secured bond dummy a given month is greater than
                                    0.5, zero otherwise
Cash                                Cash and short-term investments, scaled by total assets        Compustat
Cash Flow                           Income before extraordinary items plus depreciation,           Compustat
                                    scaled by the book value of total assets
Convertible Bond Proceeds           Total proceeds raised through a convertible bond             Mergent FISD
                                    offering in a given month
Credit Quality                      Obtained from Moody's credit ratings and classified as       Mergent FISD
                                    follows: 0 - not rated, 1 - C to Caa1, 2 - B3 to Ba1, 3 -
                                    Baa3 to Baa1, 4 - A3 to Aaa
Equity Issuance Proceeds            Total proceeds raised through a seasoned equity               SDC Global
                                    offering in a given month
Financing Choice Variable for the   Classified as following for each firm-month: 0 - No         Dealscan, Mergent
Multinomial and Ordered Logit       issue, 1 - Loan, 2 - Bond, 3 - Convertible, 4 - Seasoned    FISD, SDC Global
Models                              equity offering. In months with multiple issues, the
                                    classification is determined by the largest issue in
                                    terms of proceeds raised
Fixed Asset Ratio                   Net property, plant and equipment scaled by the book           Compustat
                                    value of total assets
Inverse Interest Coverage           log(1+(Interest Expense/EBIT))                                 Compustat
Loan Maturity Dummy                 Set equal to one if the proceeds-weighted initial               Dealscan
                                    maturity of loans obtained in a given month is less than
                                    5 years, zero otherwise
Loan Proceeds                       Total proceeds raised through a bank loan in a given            Dealscan
                                    month
Loan Security Dummy                 Set equal to one if the proceeds-weighted initial               Dealscan
                                    secured loan dummy a given month is greater than 0.5,
                                    zero otherwise
Log(Total Assets)                   Natural logarithm of the book value of assets in               Compustat
                                    constant 1994 dollars




                                                         38
Low Growth Dummy     Set equal to one in quarters in which GDP growth was            BEA
                     below the 25th percentile of growth between 1971 and
                     2007, zero otherwise
Market leverage      Long-term debt plus debt in current liabilities, scaled      Compustat
                     by the market value of assets (total assets - book value
                     of equity + market value of equity)
Market to Book       Book value of total debt plus the liquidating value of       Compustat
                     preferred stock plus the market value of equity, scaled
                     by the book value of total assets
Rated Firm Dummy     Indicator set equal to 1 if a firm has an S&P domestic       Compustat
                     long-term issuer credit rating, zero otherwise
Recession Dummy      Set equal to one in months designated as recession by          NBER
                     the NBER
Sales Growth         Percentage change in sales over the previous year           Compustat
Secured Bond Dummy   Set equal for to one if an issued bond is classified as    Mergent FISD
                     secured
Secured Loan Dummy   Set equal for to one if a bank loan is classified as          Dealscan
                     secured
Stock Return         Previous 12-month stock return                                 CRSP
Term Spread          Difference in the yields on ten-year treasuries and one-   Federal Reserve
                     year treasuries.
Weak Credit Dummy    Set equal to one in months when the net percentage of      Federal Reserve
                     senior loan officers tightening standards for large to
                     medium firms is positive, zero otherwise




                                          39
                                                                   Appendix Table 2
                            A Multinomial Logit Model of Security Choice using Weak Credit Dummy for Downturns
This table reports coefficient estimates for a multinomial logit model as in Table V but using weak credit dummy for downturns. The dependent
variable includes six different types of security issuance: bank loan, public bond, convertible debt, SEO, private placements of equity and debt. The
base outcome is not issuing any type of security. Variables are defined in Appendix Table 1. The sample period is from the second quarter of 1990
to 2007. Panel A is for all firms; Panel B is for noninvestment-grade firms only; and Panel C is for investment grade firms only. All regressions,
except for the ones in Panel C, include industry FEs. Standard errors, corrected for clustering of observations at the firm level, are in parentheses.
The symbols ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10% levels, respectively

                                                         PANEL A                                                                            PANEL B                                                                          PANEL C
                                                                                   Private Placements                                                                 Private Placements                                                               Private Placements
                              Loan        Bond       Convert         SEO          Equity           Debt        Loan         Bond        Convert        SEO           Equity          Debt         Loan        Bond       Convert        SEO           Equity           Debt
Firm Age                 -0.00400*** 0.00746***   -0.0188*** -0.0444***       -0.0230*** -0.00603**        -0.00956***   -0.00821*    -0.0113**    -0.0471***    -0.0216***        -0.00425   0.00624***   0.00533*     -0.00907    -0.0252***    -0.0381*** -0.0173***
                           (0.00109)  (0.00227)    (0.00386)      (0.00294)    (0.00431)       (0.00296)    (0.00139)    (0.00450)    (0.00505)     (0.00360)     (0.00451)       (0.00350)    (0.00238)   (0.00315)   (0.00577)     (0.00570)     (0.00940)       (0.00454)
ln(Total Assets)            0.137***   0.351***     0.319***       0.0269*     -0.228***        0.392***     0.157***     0.451***     0.539***    0.0627***      -0.237***        0.294***    0.168***    0.465***     0.180***     -0.155***      0.346***        0.311***
                           (0.00986)   (0.0262)     (0.0273)       (0.0141)     (0.0248)        (0.0211)     (0.0104)     (0.0287)     (0.0266)      (0.0138)      (0.0226)        (0.0208)     (0.0231)    (0.0388)    (0.0475)      (0.0500)       (0.124)        (0.0389)
Market Leverage              -0.102*  0.583***       0.0317        -0.0334       -0.0530          -0.205     -0.00778    2.135***        0.0696     -0.239**         -0.169       -0.680***       0.204     0.689**        0.489     1.411***         1.357         1.622***
                            (0.0566)    (0.166)      (0.183)       (0.0988)      (0.170)         (0.151)     (0.0592)      (0.169)      (0.201)       (0.105)       (0.171)         (0.164)      (0.159)     (0.294)     (0.452)       (0.364)       (1.027)         (0.354)
Market-to-Book              -0.00184 0.0908***       0.00429     0.0587***       -0.0129          0.0204     -0.00262     0.0514**     0.0236*     0.0618***        -0.0133         0.0201      0.00368    0.114***       0.0480      -0.0655      -1.101***       -0.365***
                           (0.00781)   (0.0231)     (0.0134)      (0.00711)     (0.0101)        (0.0190)    (0.00822)     (0.0211)     (0.0141)     (0.00713)      (0.0101)        (0.0193)     (0.0242)    (0.0315)    (0.0371)      (0.0728)       (0.381)         (0.118)
Fixed-Assets Ratio         -0.362***  0.597***     -0.726***       0.268**        0.125        0.788***     -0.366***       0.103       -0.514*        0.207          0.121        0.879***     -0.243*    0.606***       -0.478     1.187***        1.207**         0.581**
                            (0.0692)    (0.174)      (0.241)        (0.125)      (0.231)         (0.190)     (0.0751)      (0.217)      (0.283)       (0.129)       (0.237)         (0.203)      (0.144)     (0.182)     (0.401)       (0.324)       (0.545)         (0.283)
Cash Flow                   0.461***     0.0979     -0.00283       0.169**     -0.873***       -0.889***     0.463***       0.326        -0.120      0.171**      -0.864***       -0.805***      -0.161       0.552    -1.935***     -2.100***        2.590         4.516***
                            (0.0775)    (0.249)      (0.129)       (0.0689)     (0.0482)        (0.0793)     (0.0802)      (0.236)      (0.130)      (0.0706)      (0.0479)        (0.0823)      (0.384)     (0.735)     (0.587)       (0.613)       (2.421)         (1.251)
Cash                       -2.285***  -2.750***     1.075***      -0.00523      0.537***       -2.441***    -2.324***    -1.126***     0.873***       -0.118       0.498***       -2.276***    -1.954***   -4.963***     1.209**       0.0270        3.070**       -2.151***
                            (0.0954)    (0.430)      (0.194)        (0.111)      (0.151)         (0.287)     (0.0995)      (0.423)      (0.214)       (0.111)       (0.152)         (0.284)      (0.325)     (0.660)     (0.515)       (0.911)       (1.344)         (0.807)
Inverse Interest Coverage 0.0161        -0.0596     -0.169**      0.111***     -0.137***          0.0510      0.0358*      -0.0134      -0.145*      0.102**      -0.144***         0.0100      -0.0708     -0.0339     -0.375**        0.180        0.270*           0.157
                            (0.0194)   (0.0437)     (0.0753)       (0.0422)     (0.0486)        (0.0584)     (0.0204)     (0.0449)     (0.0832)      (0.0438)      (0.0480)        (0.0669)     (0.0500)    (0.0898)     (0.178)       (0.168)       (0.154)         (0.126)
Debt Rating Dummy           0.344***   2.750***     1.020***      0.166***      -0.302**       -0.587***
                            (0.0307)    (0.113)      (0.122)       (0.0612)      (0.141)        (0.0944)
Sales Growth                0.307***   0.562***     0.318***      0.375***      0.104***        0.284***     0.291***     0.532***     0.301***      0.362***    0.0979***       0.249***      0.478***     0.462***    0.617***      0.849***     1.106***       0.546***
                            (0.0159)   (0.0427)     (0.0348)       (0.0179)     (0.0340)        (0.0487)     (0.0166)     (0.0372)     (0.0370)       (0.0182)    (0.0342)       (0.0515)      (0.0710)     (0.0869)     (0.172)        (0.140)     (0.287)        (0.119)
Stock Return                0.0223**   0.156***     0.191***      0.230***      0.135***         -0.0649   0.0327***      0.189***     0.191***      0.227***     0.133***        -0.0874       0.00312      0.0827     0.499***      0.595***     0.448***         0.0537
                            (0.0109)   (0.0205)     (0.0212)       (0.0126)     (0.0143)        (0.0535)     (0.0110)     (0.0184)     (0.0222)       (0.0126)    (0.0142)       (0.0623)      (0.0395)     (0.0607)    (0.0656)       (0.0621)     (0.166)       (0.0965)
Term Spread               -0.0209*** 0.0592***      0.158***      0.120***      0.274***        0.147***   -0.0315***    -0.0654**     0.131***     0.0950***     0.274***       0.102***       0.0262*     0.100***    0.267***      0.339***      -0.170        -0.00699
                           (0.00722)   (0.0171)     (0.0267)       (0.0158)     (0.0291)        (0.0240)    (0.00864)     (0.0285)     (0.0306)       (0.0165)    (0.0293)       (0.0283)      (0.0135)     (0.0212)    (0.0516)       (0.0532)     (0.163)       (0.0414)
Weak Credit Dummy          -0.100***    -0.0364     0.135**      -0.219***     0.248***          -0.0125    -0.109***    -0.310***      -0.0519     -0.264***    0.245***         -0.0564       -0.0505     0.0758*     0.453***         0.105       0.157         -0.0160
                            (0.0160)   (0.0386)     (0.0548)       (0.0367)     (0.0566)        (0.0538)     (0.0189)     (0.0548)     (0.0618)       (0.0387)    (0.0572)       (0.0631)      (0.0364)     (0.0430)     (0.113)        (0.134)     (0.352)       (0.0850)
Constant                   -4.010***  -9.580***    -8.823***     -4.976***     -7.081***       -9.806***    -4.140***    -8.246***    -8.946***     -4.759***    -6.976***      -8.882***     -4.563***    -7.559***   -7.180***     -5.438***    -9.573***      -7.464***
                             (0.173)    (0.303)      (0.688)        (0.376)      (0.977)         (1.024)      (0.219)      (0.702)      (0.506)        (0.375)     (0.970)        (1.027)       (0.193)      (0.322)     (0.421)        (0.465)     (1.155)        (0.367)
Observations                                               658,727                                                                            559,147                                                                          112,512
Pseudo R2                                                    0.094                                                                              0.062                                                                            0.043




                                                                                                                                     40
Figure 1. Proceeds Raised from Different Types of Securities over Time
This figure presents the log of proceeds raised in real terms (constant 2000 $US millions) by each types of security issues for each calendar month
from 1971 to 2007. To smooth out the series, we plot the 11-month moving averages around a specific calendar month. The shaded areas
correspond to recessions as defined by the NBER.
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ln(total real proceeds, constant 2000 $US million)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      12.00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      10.00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      8.00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      6.00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4.00



                                                                                                                       ``
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2.00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.00
1971

       1972

              1973

                     1974

                            1975

                                   1976

                                          1977

                                                 1978

                                                        1979

                                                               1980

                                                                      1981

                                                                             1982

                                                                                    1983

                                                                                           1984

                                                                                                  1985

                                                                                                         1986

                                                                                                                1987

                                                                                                                       1988

                                                                                                                                1989

                                                                                                                                       1990

                                                                                                                                              1991

                                                                                                                                                     1992

                                                                                                                                                            1993

                                                                                                                                                                   1994

                                                                                                                                                                          1995

                                                                                                                                                                                 1996

                                                                                                                                                                                        1997

                                                                                                                                                                                               1998

                                                                                                                                                                                                       1999

                                                                                                                                                                                                              2000

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2001

                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2002

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2005

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2006

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2007
                Recessions                   SEOs               Convertibles                  Public Debt                     Private Loans                 Private Placements of Equity                             Private Placements of Debt




                                                                                                                                       41
Figure 2. Proceeds Raised from Public Bonds by Credit Quality over Time
This figure presents the log of proceeds raised in real terms (constant 2000 $US millions) by public bonds of various quality for each calendar month
from 1971 to 2007. To smooth out the series, we plot the 11-month moving averages around a specific calendar month. The shaded areas
correspond to recessions as defined by the NBER.
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ln(total real proceeds, constant 2000 $US million)
  1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         12.00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            10.00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            8.00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6.00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4.00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2.00




  0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.00
      1971
             1972
                    1973
                           1974
                                   1975
                                          1976
                                                 1977
                                                        1978
                                                                1979
                                                                       1980
                                                                              1981
                                                                                     1982
                                                                                            1983
                                                                                                   1984
                                                                                                          1985
                                                                                                                 1986
                                                                                                                        1987
                                                                                                                               1988
                                                                                                                                      1989
                                                                                                                                             1990
                                                                                                                                                    1991
                                                                                                                                                           1992
                                                                                                                                                                   1993
                                                                                                                                                                          1994
                                                                                                                                                                                 1995
                                                                                                                                                                                        1996
                                                                                                                                                                                               1997
                                                                                                                                                                                                      1998
                                                                                                                                                                                                             1999
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2005
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2007
                                  Recession                    A's (A3 to Aaa)                     Investable B's (Baa3 to Baa1)                                  Speculative B's (B3 to Ba1)                              C's and Non Rated




                                                                                                                                             42
Figure 3. Credit Spread over Time
This figure presents the yields of AAA and BAA corporate bonds as well as the spread between the two for each calendar month from 1971 to 2008.
The shaded areas correspond to recessions as defined by the NBER.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %
  1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               17.5



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  15.5



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  13.5



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  11.5



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  9.5



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  7.5



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  5.5



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3.5



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1.5



  0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -0.5
      1971
             1972
                    1973
                           1974
                                  1975
                                         1976
                                                1977
                                                       1978
                                                              1979
                                                                     1980
                                                                            1981
                                                                                   1982
                                                                                          1984
                                                                                                 1985
                                                                                                        1986
                                                                                                               1987
                                                                                                                      1988
                                                                                                                             1989
                                                                                                                                    1990
                                                                                                                                           1991
                                                                                                                                                  1992
                                                                                                                                                         1993
                                                                                                                                                                1994
                                                                                                                                                                       1995
                                                                                                                                                                              1997
                                                                                                                                                                                     1998
                                                                                                                                                                                            1999
                                                                                                                                                                                                   2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                          2001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2005
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2007
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2008
                                                                                     Recession                         AAA                   BAA                   Credit Spread




                                                                                                                                       43
