                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE EFFECTIVENESS OF ALTERNATIVE MONETARY POLICY TOOLS IN A
                    ZERO LOWER BOUND ENVIRONMENT

                                          James D. Hamilton
                                           Jing Cynthia Wu

                                         Working Paper 16956
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16956


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2011




We thank Christiane Baumeister for assistance with obtaining some of the data for this project, and
thank Michael Bauer, John Cochrane, Gregory Duffee, Gauti Eggertsson, Jeff Hallman, Monika Piazzesi,
Eric Swanson, Dimitri Vayanos, Kenneth West, Michael Woodford, anonymous referees, and seminar
and conference participants at the University of Chicago, Michigan State University, UCSD, Bank
of Canada, ECB, the Federal Reserve Board, and Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Chicago, New
York, and San Francisco for helpful comments on earlier versions of this paper. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by James D. Hamilton and Jing Cynthia Wu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Effectiveness of Alternative Monetary Policy Tools in a Zero Lower Bound Environment
James D. Hamilton and Jing Cynthia Wu
NBER Working Paper No. 16956
April 2011
JEL No. E43,E52,G12,H63

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper reviews alternative options for monetary policy when the short-term interest rate is at the
zero lower bound and develops new empirical estimates of the effects of the maturity structure of publicly
held debt on the term structure of interest rates. We use a model of risk-averse arbitrageurs to develop
measures of how the maturity structure of debt held by the public might affect the pricing of level,
slope and curvature term-structure risk. We find these Treasury factors historically were quite helpful
for predicting both yields and excess returns over 1990-2007. The historical correlations are consistent
with the claim that if in December of 2006, the Fed were to have sold off all its Treasury holdings
of less than one-year maturity (about $400 billion) and use the proceeds to retire Treasury debt from
the long end, this might have resulted in a 14-basis-point drop in the 10-year rate and an 11-basis-point
increase in the 6-month rate. We also develop a description of how the dynamic behavior of the term
structure of interest rates changed after hitting the zero lower bound in 2009. Our estimates imply
that at the zero lower bound, such a maturity swap would have the same effects as buying $400 billion
in long-term maturities outright with newly created reserves, and could reduce the 10-year rate by
13 basis points without raising short-term yields.


James D. Hamilton
Department of Economics, 0508
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
and NBER
jhamilton@ucsd.edu

Jing Cynthia Wu
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S Woodlawn Ave
Chicago, IL 60637-1610
Cynthia.Wu@chicagobooth.edu
1         Introduction.

The key instrument of monetary policy is the interest rate on overnight loans between banks,

which in normal times is quite sensitive to the quantity of excess reserves.        However, since

December 2008, the Fed’s target for the fed funds rate has been essentially zero. The level

of reserves, which had typically been around $10 billion prior to the financial crisis, has been

maintained in the neighborhood of a trillion dollars. Trying to lower the short-term interest

rate or increase the volume of reserves any further offers little promise of boosting aggregate

demand.         With the Fed’s traditional tools incapable of providing further stimulus to the

economy, it is of considerable interest to ask what other options might be available to the

central bank.

        Our study begins by briefly reviewing some of the available options and the Fed’s experience

with using them. That analysis leads us to focus on one strategy in particular, which is to try

to influence the term structure of interest rates through the maturity structure of securities

acquired by open-market purchases.

        A number of previous studies have reported evidence that the relative supplies of Treasury

securities of different maturities are correlated with yield spreads; see for example Roley

(1982), Bernanke, Reinhart, and Sack (2004), Kuttner (2006), Gagnon, Raskin, Remache,

and Sack (2010), Doh (2010), Greenwood and Vayanos (2010), D’Amico and King (2010), and

Swanson (2011).1 But using those correlations to infer potential effects of nonstandard open-

market operations raises questions from the perspective of both economic theory, in terms of
    1
   Other closely related research includes Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2010), Baumeister and
Benati (2010), Kitchen and Chinn (2010), and Hancock and Passmore (2011).




                                                   3
the proposed mechanism whereby the effects could possibly be generated, as well as from the

perspective of econometric methodology, in terms of whether it is reasonable to place a causal

interpretation on the correlations. Our paper makes contributions in both areas.

   Our theoretical motivation follows Vayanos and Vila (2009), who developed a promising

framework for understanding how the supplies of assets of different maturities might influence

their respective yields. Vayanos and Vila postulate the existence of two groups of investors.

The willingness of preferred-habitat investors to buy securities of maturity n is presumed to

be an increasing function of the yield on that asset. A second group, known as arbitrageurs,

is willing to hold any assets based on a simple tradeoff between expected return and risk. The

behavior of the second group generates no-arbitrage conditions relating the yields on different

securities. We show that bond yields in this framework must be consistent with the first-order

conditions for portfolio optimization by the arbitrageurs, and use these as the basis for our

empirical analysis.

   Our empirical analysis follows Doh (2010) and Greenwood and Vayanos (2010) in using

the Vayanos and Vila (2009) framework to try to quantify the ability of nonstandard open-

market operations to change the yields on assets of different maturities.       We differ from

these earlier researchers in making more use of the details of the framework to inform the

empirical estimates, developing a discrete-time version of the model and relating it directly

to maximum-likelihood estimates of the dynamic behavior of the term structure of interest

rates. We develop specific historical measures of how the maturity structure of debt issued to

the public might be expected to affect the pricing of level, slope, and curvature risk according

to this framework, and show that our inferred Treasury risk factors were historically quite


                                               4
helpful in predicting yields and excess returns. For example, we find that over 1990-2007, the

excess one-year return from holding 2-year Treasuries over 1-year Treasuries can be predicted

with an R2 of 71% on the basis of traditional term-structure factors along with our proposed

Treasury risk factors.

   One of the challenges for estimating potential policy effects on the basis of historical

correlations is the problem of endogeneity, in that the correlation between bond supplies and

interest rates may reflect the response of the Treasury or the Fed to interest rates.         We

try to minimize this endogeneity bias by looking at forecasting rather than contemporaneous

regressions and including the current level, slope, and curvature as additional explanatory

variables in the regression. Our impact estimates are based on the incremental contribution

of the Treasury maturity structure to a one-month-ahead forecast of interest rates beyond the

information already contained in the current term structure, so that insofar as the maturities of

debt issued by the Treasury or purchased by the Fed are responding to current interest rates,

that response could not account for our estimated effects.       Our dynamic formulation also

avoids the potential spurious regression problem that could arise in simple contemporaneous

regressions that make no allowance for near-unit-root dynamics.

   We use our estimated forecasting relations to analyze the outcome of the following policy

change. Suppose the Federal Reserve were to sell off all of its holdings of Treasury securities of

less than one-year duration, and use the proceeds to buy up all the outstanding Treasury debt

it could at the long end of the yield curve. For example, in 2006 this would have involved

a $400 billion asset swap that would have retired all Treasury debt of more than 10-years

duration. Our estimates imply that, in an environment not affected by the zero lower bound,


                                                5
this would have decreased the 10-year yield by 14 basis points and increased the 6-month yield

by 11 basis points.

   We next develop a framework for analyzing the behavior of interest rates when the short-

term interest rate hits the zero lower bound. Our basic approach is to postulate that move-

ments in longer-term yields in such a setting are explained by arbitrageurs’ assumption that

the economy will eventually break out of the zero lower bound, and that, once it does, short-

term interest rates would again fluctuate in response to the same kind of forces as they did

historically. We propose a very parsimonious description in which arbitrageurs assume that,

apart from a possible downward shift in the average level, the post-ZLB dynamics will be the

same as those observed in the pre-ZLB experience. Given an exogenous probability of exiting

the ZLB in any given period, we then develop a no-arbitrage theory of how the term structure

evolves dynamically when at the ZLB. We find this model provides a reasonable empirical

description of the behavior of the term structure during 2009 and 2010.

   We then use this model to revisit the question analyzed for the pre-2007 data. We find

that, at the ZLB, an asset swap could continue to depress long-term yields by the same amount

that it would in normal times, without producing any rise in short-term yields. Thus, whereas

swapping short-term for long-term assets has no consequences for the overall level of interest

rates in normal times, it is an available tool for lowering the overall level at the ZLB. Moreover,

since at the ZLB newly created reserves are essentially equivalent to short-term T-bills, direct

large-scale asset purchases are a feasible tool that the Fed could use to lower long-term interest

rates when at the ZLB.

   The plan of the paper is as follows. Section 2 reviews alternative mechanisms whereby


                                                6
monetary policy might still be able to influence interest rates for an economy at the ZLB, and

explains our reason for focusing in particular on the possible effects arising through changes

in the maturity composition of outstanding debt. Section 3 develops a discrete-time version

of the Vayanos and Vila (2009) framework for analyzing the nature of preferred-habitat asset

markets and the pricing of term-structure risk. Section 4 provides details of our method for

obtaining maximum-likelihood estimates of parameters, while Section 5 reviews the data set

assembled for this study.   In Section 6 we analyze the effects of nonstandard open-market

operations in an environment of fluctuating short-term interest rates, while Section 7 extends

the analysis to an economy in which the short-term rate is temporarily stuck at some lower

bound. Section 8 compares our results with other recent estimates, discusses the implications

for non-Treasury yields, and looks at details of the particular policies implemented by the

Federal Reserve in November of 2010. Section 9 concludes.




2    Options for monetary stimulus at the zero lower bound.

When the short-term interest rate gets all the way to zero, an open-market purchase of a short-

term Treasury security with newly created base money represents an exchange of essentially

equivalent assets. Such an exchange is obviously incapable of lowering the short-term rate

any further, and it’s not clear how the exchange could affect any economic magnitude of

interest. Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) described this as a situation in which the demand

for money is completely satiated. With over a trillion dollars in excess reserves, the United

States presently appears to be well past the satiation point for Federal Reserve deposits.



                                              7
   Even if the demand for reserve balances is presently satiated, as long as the situation

is not permanent, at some future date the Fed will regain its ability to influence overnight

rates. Thus even at the zero lower bound, Krugman (1998) and Eggertsson and Woodford

(2003) proposed that the central bank could mitigate the current problems by successfully

communicating its commitment to reverse any decreases in the price level, embracing the

higher future inflation rates necessary to achieve that. Although such a strategy holds appeal

in theory, in practice it appears to be quite hard to achieve. For example, the top panel of

Figure 1 plots the 5-year expected inflation rate implied by the difference between nominal

and inflation-indexed U.S. Treasuries. This plunged in the fall of 2008, and has yet to recover

to its pre-crisis levels. Five-year expected inflation has also declined according to the average

response to the Survey of Professional Forecasters (bottom panel).       The failure of the Fed

to follow the theoretical policy prescription of trying to increase inflationary expectations in

response to the crisis is not so much an indictment of the Fed as it is a clear demonstration

that these expectations are far more difficult to control in practice than simple theoretical

treatments might sometimes suppose.

   If buying T-bills with newly created reserves has no effect, the Fed could buy some other

assets which clearly are not perfect substitutes for cash.      One obvious class of assets to

consider purchasing would be those denominated in foreign currencies. If the Fed announced

a commitment to buy such assets without limit until the dollar depreciated, it is hard to

imagine real-world market forces that could prevent the goal from being achieved. In terms

of theoretical models, the ability of the Fed to make good on such a commitment could arise

from a portfolio balance effect (McCallum (2000)), or the announcement could serve as an


                                               8
expectations coordinating mechanism (Svensson (2001)).           In either case, it certainly seems

one practical tool for preventing deflation even if no others are available.

      In the actual U.S. experience over 2008-2010, the Federal Reserve doubled the size of

its balance sheet, buying two broad classes of assets (see Figure 2).           In the first year of

the crisis, the Fed was aggressively extending loans through a variety of new facilities such

as the Term Auction Facility (essentially a term discount window open to all depository

institutions on an auction basis), foreign currency swaps (used to assist foreign central banks

in lending dollars), and the Commercial Paper Funding Facility (which helped provide loans

for issuers of commercial paper). These measures could matter both in terms of making these

markets more liquid (in the sense of reducing bid-ask spreads) as well as potentially absorbing

some default risk onto the Fed’s balance sheet. Christensen, Lopez, and Rudebusch (2009),

McAndrews, Sarkar, and Wang (2008), Taylor and Williams (2009), Adrian, Kimbrough,

and Marchioni (2010) and Duygan-Bump, Parkinson, Rosengren, Suarez, and Willen (2010)

provided empirical assessments of the effectiveness of such measures.

      Beginning in March 2009, these lending facilities began to be unwound and replaced by

the gradual purchase of up to $1.1 trillion in mortgage-backed securities, along with $160B in

agency debt and $300B in new holdings of Treasury bonds with greater than one year maturity.

Although rates on MBS and agency debt might be argued to include a default premium, with

the de facto nationalization of Fannie and Freddie, it seems most natural to regard the effect

of these purchases as coming from a change in the relative supply of longer-term assets.2 As

this has become the most important tool going forward, our analysis in this paper focuses on
  2
    Hancock and Passmore (2011) and Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2010) nevertheless found evi-
dence that the MBS purchases did lower the premium on MBS relative to Treasury securities.



                                                  9
the potential of such operations to alter the term structure of interest rates.

   The mechanism by which such asset purchases might have an effect is very different from

that characterizing traditional open-market operations. The Federal Reserve is the monopoly

supplier of reserves held by depository institutions and currency held by the public, and

the supply it creates of these assets unquestionably has consequences under normal economic

conditions. However, when the demand for these assets is satiated, it is not clear that anything

the Fed does could affect the pricing kernel determining other yields. While the Fed could

buy longer-term bonds instead of T-bills, Woodford (2010) noted that if the operations have

no affect on the bond’s state-contingent income stream or on the state-contingent aggregate

supply of goods available for consumption, they should have no effect on the price of the

bond. Wallace (1981) presented a model in which the maturity composition of government

debt has no effects on any real or nominal variables, and Eggertsson and Woodford (2003)

provided a stronger neutrality result for an economy at the zero lower bound. These neutrality

results arise from the assumption that any changes in the timing of payments made to the

government’s creditors would be paid for with nondistortionary changes in taxes, and that any

increase in the private wealth of bond-holders are exactly offset in the sense of Barro (1974)

and Ricardo (1820) by an increase in the liabilities of taxpayers.

   And yet, we can clearly observe that government bonds of different maturities have different

risk characteristics, and these differences are priced by the market.    The government pays

a higher average cost when it borrows long term rather than short term, which would make

no sense to do if the above neutrality conditions actually held. Our interpretation is that a

different maturity composition of the government debt does in fact commit the government


                                               10
to a different time path for spending, distortionary taxes or inflation.    When it borrows

long, the Treasury is opting to pay a premium for the privilege of passing this risk on to its

creditors rather than absorb it in the form of future contingent changes in spending, taxes,

or inflation.   Replacing long-term debt with short-term debt then unquestionably has the

potential to exert real effects; see Auerbach and Obstfeld (2005) on the interaction between

distortionary taxation and the potential effectiveness of monetary policy at the zero lower

bound. There is of course also a large empirical literature that has reported a good deal of

evidence inconsistent with the Barro-Ricardian equivalence claim; see for example the survey

in Stanley (1998).

    In this paper we suggest an empirical approach to the question of what effects, if any,

changes in the maturity composition of government debt may have on yields.        In the next

section we develop a discrete-time version of the framework recently proposed by Vayanos and

Vila (2009). This exercise both clarifies the mechanism whereby relative debt supplies could

affect the term structure, and also suggests particular empirical measures that we will use in

the subsequent section to summarize the historically observed consequences of changes in the

maturity composition of publicly-held debt.




3     Preferred-habitat investing and market arbitrage.

Vayanos and Vila (2009) proposed that the investors we will refer to as “arbitrageurs” care

only about the mean and variance of rt,t+1 , the rate of return between t and t + 1 on their




                                              11
total portfolio3 :

                                     Et (rt,t+1 ) − (γ/2)Vart (rt,t+1 ).                              (1)


       If y1t denotes the return on a risk-free asset, arbitrageurs will choose portfolio weights such

that for any asset with a risky yield ri,t,t+1 ,



                                        y1t = Et (ri,t,t+1 ) − γϑit                                   (2)



where ϑit is (1/2) the derivative of total portfolio variance with respect to holdings of asset i.

       Consider a pure-discount n-period bond that is free of default risk, the log of whose price

at date t (denoted pnt ) is conjectured to be an affine function of a vector of J different

macroeconomic factors (denoted ft ),


                                                           0
                                             pnt = an + bn ft .                                       (3)



The risk-free one-period rate is a function of the same factors,



                                             y1t = a1 + b01 ft ,                                      (4)



where y1t = −p1t , a1 = −a1 , and b1 = −b1 . Although these bonds have no default risk, the

future pricing factors ft+s are not known with certainty at date t, and so there is an uncertain

one-period holding yield associated with buying the n-period bond at date t and selling the
   3
    Vayanos and Vila (2009) assumed that arbitrageurs maximize an objective function that is quadratic in
the change in wealth rather than in the rate of return as here. Although their specification may have more
theoretical appeal, their parameterization would be more difficult to bring to the data in the manner we
propose here for an economy in which there is a trend in the level of wealth.


                                                     12
resulting (n − 1)-period bond at date t + 1 given by


                                                 0                      0
                                                                                 
                        rn,t,t+1 = exp an−1 +    bn−1 ft+1     − an −   bn f t       − 1.           (5)



Suppose that the pricing factors follow a VAR(1) process,



                                     ft+1 = c + ρft + Σut+1                                         (6)



with ut ∼ i.i.d. N (0, IJ ), and that the arbitrageurs hold a fraction znt of their portfolio in the

bond of maturity n, so that the return on their portfolio is given by


                                                 N
                                                 X
                                      rt,t+1 =         znt rn,t,t+1 .
                                                 n=1



Then, as we detail in Appendix A, an approximation to the portfolio optimization problem

results in the following implication of (2) for each maturity n:


                 0              0                          0                                0   0
        −a1 − b1 ft = an−1 + bn−1 (c + ρft ) + (1/2)bn−1 ΣΣ0 bn−1 − an − bn ft − bn−1 Σλt           (7)



                                            λt = γΣ0 dt                                             (8)

                                                 N
                                                 X
                                          dt =         znt bn−1 .                                   (9)
                                                 n=2


   If the number of maturities N is greater than the number of factors J, equation (7) implies

a set of restrictions that bond prices must satisfy as a result of the actions of arbitrageurs,



                                                  13
who will price factor j risk the same way no matter which bonds it may be reflected in.

   Vayanos and Vila closed the model by postulating that other credit market participants

may have a particular preference for bonds of a given maturity. They presented examples in

which the borrowing demand from these participants for bonds of maturity n, denoted ξnt , is

a decreasing affine function of the yield ynt . In our application, we will express these demands

relative to Wt , the net wealth of the arbitrageurs:



                                     ξnt /Wt = ζnt − αn ynt .



Thus ζnt reflects the overall level of preferred-habitat borrowing of bonds of maturity n and

αn the sensitivity of this demand to the interest rate. Equilibrium then requires that the net

borrowing by the preferred-habitat sector equals the net lending from the arbitrage sector:



                                       znt = ζnt − αn ynt .                                 (10)



Suppose that ζnt is also an affine function of ft . We show in Appendix B that in equilibrium,



                                               λt = λ + Λft .                               (11)


Substituting (11) into (7), we see that


                                           0       0
                                          bn = bn−1 ρQ − b01                                (12)



                                               ρQ = ρ − ΣΛ                                  (13)

                                                       14
                                           0                  0
                           an = an−1 + bn−1 cQ + (1/2)bn−1 ΣΣ0 bn−1 − a1                             (14)


                                                cQ = c − Σλ.                                         (15)




4     Estimation of Affine Term Structure Models.

Equations (12) through (15) will be recognized as the no-arbitrage conditions for a standard

affine term structure model (e.g., equations (17) in Ang and Piazzesi, 2003).                  Thus the

Vayanos-Vila formulation can be viewed as one explanation for the origins of affine prices of

risk. In this section we describe how we estimated parameters for this class of models; for

further details see Appendix C.

    Let ynt denote the yield and pnt the log price on an n-period pure discount bond, which

are related by ynt = −n−1 pnt . From (3),



                                               ynt = an + b0n ft                                     (16)


with an = −an /n and bn = −bn /n. In the models we estimate, the factors ft are represented

by a (J × 1) vector of observed variables, whose dynamic parameters c and ρ can be obtained

from OLS estimation of (6). We suppose that we have available a set of M different observed

yields Y2t = (yn1 ,t , yn2 ,t , ..., ynM ,t )0 whose values differ from the theoretical prediction (16) by

measurement error

                                        Y2t = A + Bft + Σe uet                                       (17)


with uet ∼ N (0, IM ). We assume that the measurement error uet is independent of the fac-


                                                      15
tor innovation ut in (6), but otherwise the structure of Σe does not affect the estimation

procedure– full-information maximum-likelihood estimates of all parameters other than Σe

will be numerically identical regardless of whether the matrix Σe is assumed to be diagonal.

    Our estimates come from the minimum-chi-square estimation algorithm proposed by Hamil-

ton and Wu (2010a) which allows OLS to do the work of maximizing the joint likelihood func-

tion and uses the theoretical model to translate those OLS estimates back into the asset-pricing

parameters of interest.      Note that the structure of (6) and (17) implies that OLS equation

by equation is the most efficient procedure for estimation of these reduced-form parameters.

In the special case of a just-identified model (such as that used for our baseline analysis) in

which the number of observed yields M is one more than the number of factors J, there is

an exact solution for the parameters of interest in terms of these OLS coefficients, and the

resulting estimates are numerically identical to those that would be obtained by maximization

of the joint likelihood function f (Y2T , fT , Y2,T −1 , fT −1 , ..., Y21 , f1 |Y20 , f0 ) with respect to the

parameters of the affine term structure model, namely, c, ρ, Σ, cQ , ρQ , b1 , a1 and Σe .

    Among other advantages, this approach allows us to recognize instantly whether estimates

represent a local rather than a global maximum to the likelihood function, and makes it feasible

to calculate small-sample confidence intervals for any function of the parameters of interest,

by simulating a thousand different samples for{ft , Y2t }Tt=1 from a postulated structure and

calculating the estimates that result from the proposed procedure on each separate artificial

sample.




                                                     16
5         Data.

Our baseline estimates use weekly observations for ynt , based on constant-maturity Treasury

yields as of Friday or the last business day of the week as reported in the FRED database of

the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.4 We supplement this with monthly analysis of holding

yields on securities of nonstandard maturities, for which we construct constant-maturity yields

from the daily term-structure parameterization of Gürkaynak, Sack, and Wright (2007) as of

the last day of the month.5

        We also constructed estimates of the face value of outstanding U.S. Treasury debt at each

weekly maturity as of the end of each month between January 1990 and December 2009 as

detailed in Appendix E. For purposes of the pure theory sketched above, we would want to

interpret each semiannual coupon on a given bond as its own separate zero-coupon security

(paying $C at some time t + s) and construct the market value of the bond as the sum

of the market value of its individual components, each coupon viewed as a separate pure-

discount bond. However, converting the face value into a market value by this device would

be quite unsatisfactory for our larger purpose of identifying exogenous sources of variation in

the supply of outstanding securities at different maturities. The true market value of a given

security would be highly endogenous with respect to changes in interest rates, whereas the
    4
     The 30-year yields are unavailable for 2002/2/19 to 2006/2/8. Over this interval we used instead the
20-year rate minus 0.21, which is the amount by which the 20-year rate exceeded the 30-year rate both
immediately before and after the gap.
   5
     Specifically, we calculated ynt from their equations (6) and (9) as

                ynt   = β0t + n−1 β1t τ1t [1 − exp(−n/τ1t )] + β2t τ1t {1 − [1 + (n/τ1t )] exp(−n/τ1t )}
                          +β3t τ2t {1 − [1 + (n/τ2t )] exp(−n/τ2t )}

using    daily    values     for    the     parameters      {β0t , β1t , β2t , τ1t , τ2t }     downloaded   from
http://www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/researchdata.htm.



                                                          17
face value, by construction, is not.6 Note moreover that, when issued, the face value of the

original coupon bond should be close to the market value of the sum of its individual stripped

components.      For these reasons, we regard the face value as reported by the Treasury and

the Fed to be the better measures to use for our purposes, and simply use the number of

remaining weeks to maturity on any given series as the value for n.

      We separately constructed rough estimates of how much of the security of each maturity

was held by the Federal Reserve, as detailed in Appendix E. The resulting data structures for

outstanding Treasury debt and Fed holdings take the form of (240 × 1577) matrices, with rows

corresponding to months (ranging from January 31, 1990 to December 31, 2009) and columns

corresponding to maturity in weeks up to 30 years. Figure 3 displays the information from the

December 31, 2006 rows of these two matrices. Figure 4 provides a sense of some of the time-

series variation, plotting the average maturity of debt held by the public for each month.7

Average maturity dropped temporarily in the mid-1990s and began a more significant and

sustained decrease after 2001. Average maturity dropped sharply between September 2007

and October 2008, but has since reverted back to September 2007 levels.
  6
     Greenwood and Vayanos (2010) dealt with this issue by stripping coupons off and converting from face
value to present value using the historical average short rate.
   7
                     PN
     The graph plots n=1 nznt for each t.




                                                   18
6       The term structure of interest rates prior to the fi-

        nancial crisis.

In our baseline specification, we took the J = 3 observed factors to be the deviations from the

sample mean of the level, slope, and curvature of the term structure implied by the 6-month,

2-year, and 10-year Treasuries8 , sampled weekly from January 1990 through the end of July,

2007. These yields and the 3 implied factors are plotted in Figure 5. The level factor trended

down over this period, with pronounced dips after the recessions of 1990-91 and 2001. During

these episodes, the term structure also sloped up more than usual and the curvature increased

as the 2-year yield fell away from the 10-year. The parameters c, ρ and Σ reported in Table 1

were estimated by OLS regressions of each factor on a constant and lagged values of the other

three factors. We chose M = 4 other yields9 (the 3-month, 1-year, 5-year, and 30-year) in the

vector Y2t in order to estimate the parameters cQ , ρQ , a1 , b1 and Σe from equation (17). We
    8
     That is, if maturities were measured in weeks, prior to demeaning we would have f1t = (1/3)(y26,t +
y104,t + y520,t ), f2t = y520,t − y26,t , and f3t = y520,t − 2y104,t + y26,t .
   9
     Note that this approach does not make full use of all the available information, in that we do not impose
any connection between the model-implied value for

                                   y520,t − y26,t = a520 − a26 + b0520 ft − b026 ft

and the observed value of f2t itself. However, the smooth structure of the ATSM causes these restrictions to
be approximately satisfied even without imposing them, that is, the estimates reported below are characterized
by
                                                        −1                              
                       b̂26      (1/3)      (1/3)    (1/3)       1          −(1/2)     (1/6)
                     b̂104  ≈  −1          0        1  = 1                0      −(1/3)  .
                      b̂520        1         −2        1         1           (1/2)     (1/6)
Hamilton and Wu (2010b) showed how to apply the minimum-chi-square algorithm to a system imposing
restrictions such as the above equation directly. The effect of adding this restriction (along with the analogous
expressions for level and curvature) is to fix the values of ρQ and b1 up to the eigenvalues of ρQ , which
eigenvalues are then estimated from (17). We applied this approach to several of the systems examined below
and obtained almost identical results to those from the simpler approach that ignores these restrictions. To
minimize the computational and expositional burden, we only report here the estimates from the unrestricted
version of the model.



                                                         19
measured ft in annual percentage points to keep reporting units natural and measured ynt in

weekly discount units so that the asset-pricing recursions all hold as written; for example, a

5.2% continuously compounded annual rate would correspond to f1t = 5.2 and ynt = 0.001.

   The model described in Section 3 implies that an objective forecast (sometimes referred to

as the P -measure expectation) of the 3 factors is given by



                                      EtP (ft+1 ) = c + ρft .



However, as a result of risk aversion, arbitrageurs value assets the way a risk-neutral investor

would if that investor believed that the forecast was instead characterized by the Q-measure

expectation

                                    EtQ (ft+1 ) = cQ + ρQ ft .


The risk premium is the difference between these two forecasts,



                          EtP (ft+1 ) − EtQ (ft+1 ) = Σλ + ΣΛft = Σλt .                     (18)



   We next consider how the term-structure risk factors would be priced according to the

Vayanos-Vila framework under the following special case.         Suppose that (1) the preferred-

habitat sector consisted solely of the U.S. Treasury and Federal Reserve, (2) the arbitrageurs

comprise the entire private sector, and (3) U.S. Treasury debt is the sole asset held by arbi-

trageurs.   These are obviously extreme assumptions, but they have the benefit of implying

a clear answer to how changes in the maturity structure of outstanding Treasury debt would



                                                20
influence the price of risk in one highly stylized case. Under these conditions, the arbitrageurs’

portfolio weights znt could be measured directly from the ratio of debt held by the public of

maturity n to the total outstanding publicly held debt at that date. From equations (8) and
                                                  PN
(9), we would then predict that Σλt = γΣΣ0            n=2 znt bn−1 .   Our empirical results reported

below are based on
                                                     N
                                                     X
                                                 0
                                     qt = 100ΣΣ            znt bn−1                              (19)
                                                     n=2


where a value of γ = 100 was assumed in order to bring the series roughly on the same scale as

Σλt . This series for qt was calculated with the values bn calculated from equation (12) for ρQ

and b1 reported in Table 1. The values for the 3 elements of qt are highly correlated, though

as we shall see shortly, there is statistically useful information in the difference between them.

   If the strong assumptions detailed above were literally true, then the vector qt would be

proportional to the corresponding series in (18), and indeed the level, slope, and curvature of

the term structure could be described solely in terms of changes in the maturity composition

of the public debt as summarized by these three factors. Obviously the assumptions do not

hold, and the maturity composition of outstanding Treasury debt is just one of many factors

potentially contributing to interest rate moves.       However, it is interesting to look at what

connections there may be in the data between qt and pricing of interest-rate risk.            Before

doing so, we emphasize that although the above theory suggests that qt might be related to

the behavior of interest rates, in terms of how the series is constructed mechanically from the

data, the time-series variation in qt is driven solely by changes in the composition of Treasury

debt znt and not at all by changes in interest rates.          We accordingly propose the vector qt

as a possible 3-dimensional summary statistic of how the maturity composition of Treasury

                                                21
debt changes over time, where the simple theory sketched above suggests that this might be a

summary statistic of interest for purposes of analyzing changes over time in the term structure

of interest rates.

       We begin by examining the ability to predict excess holding yields for bonds of different

maturities.      Let pmt denote the log price of a pure-discount m-month bond purchased on

the last day of month t.10 The k-month holding yield for the bond (quoted at an annual

rate) is (12/k)(pm−k,t+k − pmt ). This compares with the holding yield for a k-month bond of

(12/k)(p0,t+k − pkt ) = (12/k)(−pkt ). Let hmkt denote the excess holding yield for an m-month

relative to a k-month bond:



                                  hmkt = (12/k)(pm−k,t+k − pmt + pkt ).



We explored regressions to predict these holding yields on the basis of information available

at date t:

                                                 0        0
                                   hmkt = cmk + βmk ft + γmk xt + umkt .                                     (20)


If investors were risk-neutral, all the coefficients in (20) would be zero. Our finding of nonzero

elements for λ and Λ in Table 1 (and a huge literature before us) suggests nonzero values for

cmk and βmk , though if the market pricing of risk were fully captured by the 3-factor affine

term structure model, no other variables xt should enter statistically significantly.11

       Table 2 reports the results from OLS estimation of (20), giving the R2 of the regression and
  10
     We inferred these prices from the daily term-structure summaries of Gürkaynak, Sack, and Wright (2007).
  11
     Although unkt is uncorrelated with the regressors in (20), it is not independent of the regressors, and
thus OLS is subject to the small-sample problems highlighted by Stambaugh (1999). Moreover, given that
risk-neutrality does not hold, both the left-hand and right-hand variables in (20) are highly serially correlated,
raising potential spurious regression concerns if these are near-unit-root processes.


                                                       22
Newey and West (1987) tests of the hypothesis that γmk or subsets of γmk are zero for various

specifications of xt .12 The first row reproduces the well-known result that the traditional level,

slope, and curvature factors ft can predict a significant amount of the excess holding yield

on assets of assorted maturities, with for example an R2 of 0.33 in the case of predicting the

excess returns from holding a 2-year bond for one year.                  The second row adds the average

maturity of outstanding debt,
                                                         N
                                                         X
                                               ztA   =         nznt ,                                       (21)
                                                         n=1


which was one of the summary statistics examined by Greenwood and Vayanos (2010),13 but

which we find in our sample usually does not have statistically significant additional predictive

power beyond that contained in ft . On the other hand, the other measure they propose, the

fraction of outstanding debt of more than 10-year maturity,


                                                         N
                                                         X
                                               ztL   =           znt ,                                      (22)
                                                         n=521



does statistically significantly predict excess returns.

       One could consider various other linear combinations of {znt }N
                                                                     n=1 as possible predictors,


such as the first three principal components. We find in the fourth row of Table 2 that these

are helpful for forecasting the holding returns on short-maturity assets, but are generally
  12
     Note that even though the excess holding yield would follow an M A(k−1) process under the null hypothesis
of risk neutrality, one would still need to let the Newey and West (1987) lag parameter go to infinity as the
sample size grows in order to get a consistent estimate. The Newey-West approach is helpful under the
alternative hypothesis of a possibly more complex serial correlation, and generates a positive-definite variance-
covariance matrix by construction. We also performed these calculations using Hansen and Hodrick (1980)
standard errors based on k − 1 lags. These produced the same results except for one case in which the
Hansen-Hodrick standard error was negative.
  13
     Greenwood and Vayanos (2010) use duration rather than maturity.




                                                         23
inferior to ztA or ztL .

       The theory sketched above suggests three particular linear combinations of {znt }N
                                                                                        n=1 that


should matter for term premia, namely the three elements of the vector qt in (19).                       The

sixth row of Table 2 shows that these turn out to be incredibly useful for predicting holding

returns, with an R2 as high as 0.71 in the case of predicting the 2-over-1 excess return. The

contribution of qt is statistically significant for every maturity, even if the regression already

includes both ft and the first three principal components of {znt }N
                                                                   n=1 .


       Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005) proposed a particular yield pricing factor that they have

found very helpful for forecasting excess holding returns. In our application, we confirm that

this factor14 provides a statistically significant improvement over using just ft alone (row 5 of

Table 2). Nevertheless, our Treasury factors qt still provide a very dramatic improvement in

forecasting ability beyond that contained in ft and the Cochrane-Piazzesi factor vt (row 8).

       We next examine the ability of the Treasury factors qt to help predict the yields themselves,

examining OLS regressions of the form



                                       ft+1 = c + ρft + φqt + εt+1                                       (23)



for φ a (3 × 3) matrix. The first column of Table 3 reports that the vector qt makes a useful

contribution to predicting each of the term-structure factors, with the hypothesis that the ith

row of φ is zero being rejected for each i.

       It is then tempting to use (23) to draw tentative conclusions about what the effects on yields
  14
    In our application, we constructed vt from the fitted value of a regression of (1/4)(h24,12,t + h36,12,t +
h48,12,t + h60,12,t ) on a constant and the 1- through 5-year forward rates at date t.



                                                     24
of different maturities might be of a change in the composition of publicly held debt. Such

calculations are subject to a well-understood endogeneity problem: historical variations in znt

may have represented a response by the Treasury or the Fed to overall economic conditions

or to term-structure developments in particular. Although this is also a potential concern for

(23), our formulation has three advantages over traditional regressions which simply examine

the contemporaneous correlations. First, any contemporaneous response of qt to ft could not

account for a nonzero value of φ in (23). We are explicitly asking about the ability of qt to

forecast future ft+1 over and above any information contained in ft itself.15 Second, because

the statistics we report represent the answer to well-posed forecasting questions, the results

have independent interest as objective summaries of those forecasting relations, regardless of

what the underlying dynamic structural relations may be. Third, because we include lags of

the dependent variable in the regression, we avoid the potential spurious regression problem

that could plague other popular approaches such as trying to use OLS to estimate a relation

of the form ft = α + βztA .

       For purposes of focusing on a particular forecasting question that might be of interest to

policy makers, we consider the following exercise. Suppose that at the end of month t, the

Federal Reserve were to sell all its Treasury securities with maturity less than 1 year, and

use the proceeds to buy up all of the outstanding nominal Treasury debt of maturity greater

than n1t , where n1t would be determined by the size of the Fed’s short-term holdings and

outstanding long-term Treasury debt at time t. For example, if implemented in December of

2006, this would result in the Fed selling about $400 B in short-term securities and buying
  15
     On the other hand, if qt only matters for ft+1 through its effect on ft , we might understate the contribution
of qt using our approach.



                                                        25
about $400 B in long-term securities, effectively retiring all the federal debt of ten-year and

longer maturity. We then calculated what qtA would be under this counterfactual scenario,

and calculated the average historical value of qtA − qt , which turns out to be

                                                               
                                              0.026101 
                                                       
                                                       
                                           ∆=
                                              0.022712 .
                                                                                                         (24)
                                                       
                                                       
                                               −0.00780


We then asked, by how much would one expect ft+1 to change according to (23) if qt were to

change by ∆? As should be clear from the description of the exercise, we are talking about a

quite dramatically counterfactual event. If one considers the analogous forecasting equations

of the form qt+1 = cq + ρq ft + φq qt + εq,t+1 , a change of qt of the size of ∆ would represent

a 36σ event, obviously something so far removed from anything that was attempted during

the historical sample as to raise doubts about interpreting the parameter estimates as telling

policy makers what would happen if they literally implemented a change of this size.

       The second column of Table 3 reports how a forecast of the traditional term-structure

factors would be affected by this change.            We find that changing qt by this amount could

flatten the slope of the yield curve by 25 basis points, with no effect on the level of interest rates

themselves. If it reduces the slope but has no effect on the level, that means it would reduce

long-term yields and raise short-term yields. Indeed, our 3-factor ATSM has a prediction16 as

to how much any given interest rate would change if the factors were to change by the amount

specified in Table 3, which predicted responses we plot as the solid curve in Figure 6. Yields
  16
    The predicted change in ynt is given by b0n φ̂∆ for bn = −bn /n, bn calculated from equation (12) using the
values of ρQ and b1 reported in Table 1, φ̂ the OLS estimates from equation (23), and ∆ given by (24).


                                                      26
on maturities longer than 2-1/2 years would fall, with those at the long end decreasing by up

to 17 basis points. Yields on the shortest maturities would increase by almost as much.17

   One might wonder whether our Treasury factors qt could be picking up some other fac-

tors relevant for predicting yields that are not captured by the traditional level, slope, and

curvature. As a test for the robustness of our inference, we also estimated the following gen-

eralization of (23), in which vt denotes the Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005) yield pricing factors

described in footnote 14:

                                  ft+1 = c̃ + ρ̃ft + φ̃qt + ψ̃vt + ε̃t+1 .                           (25)


The estimated effects of the Fed swapping all its short-term debt for long-term debt as implied

by the value of φ̃ in (25) are plotted as the dashed curve in Figure 6. The effects are quite

similar to those estimated in our baseline specification, with short-term yields rising a little

less and long-term yields falling a little more.

   There is a potential inconsistency between equation (23) or (25) and the 3-factor specifi-

cation (6) that we used to calculate qt in (19) and the smoothed curves in Figure 6. We do

not believe either of these issues are of material importance. If we simply treated the qt as

directly observed factors, equation (23) or (25) would correspond to the first three equations

of a perfectly well-specified 6- or 7-factor VAR, respectively. Estimation of such equations by

OLS, as we have done, rather than imposing the cross-equation restrictions of the complete

6- or 7-factor affine term structure model has been shown to make little difference for the

resulting forecasts in other applications (Duffee (2011)). And while one could try to solve a
  17
     Our estimates would also allow us in principle to answer dynamic questions, though we are much less
comfortable with using the framework for this purpose. One problem is that the standard errors for dynamic
responses turn out to be quite large. Another challenge is trying to infer the permanent consequences of
changes whose time-series variation has been transitory.


                                                    27
fixed-point problem in which the qt are calculated using the weights of a 6- or 7-factor ATSM

rather than the weights for a 3-factor model as was done here, that would be substantially

more involved technically than the approach we have followed, and we see little benefit from

such an effort given that the underlying assumption that Treasury debt is the sole risky asset

held by arbitrageurs is surely not true. Instead we have used the simple 3-factor ATSM as

a tool to assist in identifying which summary statistics of the maturity structure of Treasury

debt might matter for bond prices, and posed as an empirical question what effect these may

have on yields. For this purpose, unrestricted OLS estimation of (23) seems to us to be the

preferred estimation method. As for using the 3-factor ATSM rather than a 6- or 7-factor

ATSM to perform the smoothing in Figure 6, we again think this is a very minor matter.

Three points on the plotted curve (namely, the 6-month, 2-year, and 10-year yields) are es-

timated completely robustly by the argument just made, and the primary role of the ATSM

has been to interpolate between this points. The overwhelming conclusion of researchers in

this area is that a 3-factor ATSM can do a quite good job of summarizing the cross-section

of returns.   We would expect little difference if the interpolations in Figure 6 were instead

performed using a larger dimensional model. Duffee (forthcoming) provided formal examples

in which a 3-factor model can exactly summarize the cross-section of yields and yet additional

factors, not spanned by the cross-section of yields, are helpful for forecasting, and argued that

these may be a good approximation to what one finds in the data. Our two-step approach

could be viewed as an example of such a system.

   A separate question from the feasibility for the Federal Reserve to achieve these effects on

yields is the desirability of its attempting to do so. Although we have described this as a Fed


                                               28
operation, it is probably more natural to think of it as a Treasury operation, implemented by

the Treasury doing more of its borrowing at the shorter end of the yield curve. According

to the simple framework that motivated our definition of qt , the average slope of the yield

curve arises from the preference of the U.S. Treasury for doing much of its borrowing with

longer-term debt. For reasons presumably having to do with management of fiscal risks, the

Treasury is willing to pay a premium to arbitrageurs for the ability to lock in a long-term

borrowing cost. If the Treasury has good reasons to avoid this kind of interest-rate risk, it is

not clear why the Federal Reserve should want to absorb it.

    Our conclusion is that, although it appears to be possible for the Fed to influence the slope

of the yield curve in normal times through the maturity of the System Open Market Account

holdings, very large operations are necessary to have an appreciable immediate impact.         If

there is no concern about a zero-lower-bound constraint, this potential tool should clearly be

secondary to the traditional focus of open-market operations on the short end of the yield

curve.




7     The term structure of interest rates at the zero lower

      bound.

The above analysis ended prior to the first stages of the financial crisis in August 2007. As

discussed in Section 2, we divide subsequent developments into two phases. The first phase

was characterized by high default premiums, failures of some leading financial institutions, and

serious disruption of traditional lending patterns. Gürkaynak and Wright (2010) documented


                                               29
that under the financial strains, significant arbitrage opportunities between yields on different

Treasury securities often persisted between October 2008 and February 2009.           We will not

attempt to address the many important issues having to do with monetary policy under those

circumstances, but instead begin our analysis here with the second phase which began in

March of 2009, and during which policy makers have confronted the longer-term issue of how

to provide stimulus to aggregate demand when the short-term interest rate had essentially

reached zero.

   Figure 7 plots assorted yields over this period.      The 3-month yield has remained stuck

near zero over this period, and the 1-year, although higher, has also displayed little variability.

Nonetheless, there has continued to be considerable fluctuation in longer-term yields. What

is the nature of the developments driving long-term yields in this environment?

   The natural answer is that investors do not believe the U.S. will remain at the zero lower

bound forever.    When the U.S. escapes from the ZLB, interest rates at all maturities will

again respond as they always have to changes in economic fundamentals. Any news today

that leads to revisions in the expectations of those future fundamentals shows up as changes

in those longer-term yields.

   We propose that one way to interpret current long-term yields is to postulate the existence

of latent factors, denoted ft , which would determine what interest rates would currently be

doing if the ZLB were not binding, along with probabilities that arbitrageurs assign to escaping

from the ZLB at various future dates. For the first task, what should we assume about the

dynamic behavior of these latent factors? The most parsimonious hypothesis would obviously

be that, when the economy escapes from the ZLB, the factor dynamics would revert to their


                                                30
historic behavior as represented by equations like (6) or (23). The difference is that, when

we originally introduced these equations, we were treating the factors ft as directly observed

from the level, slope, and curvature of the term structure, whereas we are proposing now to

interpret them as latent factors characterizing what the level, slope, and curvature would be

if we were not stuck at the ZLB. For the second task, we again adopt the simplest possible

hypothesis, which is that arbitrageurs assign a constant Q-measure probability π Q that the

economy will remain at the ZLB next week.

   To develop this idea in more detail, we postulate that, once the economy escapes from the

ZLB, the short rate will return to being determined by the factors according to the structure



                                         ỹ1t = a1 + b01 ft


                                                         0
                                        p̃nt = an + bn ft


where the sequences {an , bn }N
                              n=1 can be calculated as before using the recursions (12) and (14).


However, as long as the economy remains at the ZLB, we instead have



                                              ∗
                                             y1t = a∗1


                                                         ∗0
                                        p∗nt = a∗n + bn ft .


If the zero lower bound were interpreted literally, then a∗1 would be zero.      We represent it

instead with some number slightly above zero to match the U.S. experience in which an interest

rate paid on reserves has prevented the rate from falling all the way to zero.


                                                31
     Let qn,t+1 denote the holding return on an n-period bond purchased at t and sold at t + 1.

Note that if t is characterized by the ZLB, the Q-measure expectation of this return is given

by


                                                
                               (Pn−1,t+1 − Pnt )
       EtQ (qn,t+1 )   =   EtQ
                                      Pnt
                                  ∗                                  "                       #
                                                 ∗                                      ∗
                                  (P n−1,t+1 − P nt )                   (P̃ n−1,t+1  − P    )
                       = π Q EtQ           ∗
                                                      + (1 − π Q )EtQ              ∗
                                                                                         nt
                                          Pnt                                    Pnt
                             h         ∗0
                                                       i              h           0
                                                                                                i
                       ≈ π Q a∗n−1 + bn−1 (cQ + ρQ ft ) + (1 − π Q ) an−1 + bn−1 (cQ + ρQ ft )

                                           ∗0        ∗                     0                ∗0
                           +(1/2)π Q bn−1 ΣΣ0 bn−1 + (1/2)(1 − π Q )bn−1 ΣΣ0 bn−1 − a∗n − bn ft .



No-arbitrage requires the Q-measure expected one-period holding yield for an n-period bond

to equal y1t ,

                                                a∗1 = EtQ (qn,t+1 ).


This requires
                                      ∗0        ∗0                     0
                                     bn = π Q bn−1 ρQ + (1 − π Q )bn−1 ρQ                               (26)



                                                                ∗0             0
                 a∗n = π Q a∗n−1 + (1 − π Q )an−1 + π Q bn−1 cQ + (1 − π Q )bn−1 cQ

                                           ∗0        ∗                     0
                           +(1/2)π Q bn−1 ΣΣ0 bn−1 + (1/2)(1 − π Q )bn−1 ΣΣ0 bn−1 − a∗1 .               (27)


                                                                                                    ∗
Given cQ , ρQ , a1 , b1 , Σ we can calculate {an , bn }N
                                                       n=1 from (12) and (14). Given these and b1 = 0,

                           ∗
we can calculate {a∗n , bn }N                    Q     ∗
                            n=1 as functions of π and a1 . Predicted bond yields under the ZLB




                                                         32
are then given by

                                            ∗
                                           ynt = a∗n + b∗0
                                                        n ft                                      (28)

                                   ∗
where a∗n = −a∗n /n and b∗n = −bn /n.

   As a first pass, we propose to use the same values for cQ , ρQ , a1 , b1 , Σ as estimated from the

earlier historical sample. Note that even though these parameters are the same as before, the

implied mapping from factors ft into observed yields has changed. Let Y1t = (y26,t , y104,t , y520,t )0

denote the 6-month, 2-year, and 10-year yields observed at time t. In our historical sample,

these were related to the factors ft according to



                                           Y1t = A1 + B1 ft                                       (29)

                                                                        
                                      a26                        b026   
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                A1 = 
                                      a104
                                               
                                                       B1 = 
                                                              b0104
                                                                           .
                                                                           
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                       a520                    b0520

Because we treated the factors in normal times as directly observed from the 6-month, 2-year,

and 10-year level, slope, and curvature, and because of the smoothness of the ATSM term

structure, our estimates were characterized by

                                                  −1                           
                        (1/3) (1/3) (1/3)                1 −(1/2) (1/6) 
                                                                         
                                                                         
                  B1 ≈  −1
                                0     1               = 1
                                                               0    −(1/3) 
                                                                            
                                                                         
                                                                         
                           1    −2     1                    1 (1/2)  (1/6)


where the approximation would have been exact if we had imposed the restriction that Y1t is


                                                   33
observed without error.

   By contrast, under the ZLB, the relation is



                                          Y1t = A∗1 + B1∗ ft                           (30)

                                                                        
                                     a∗26                       b∗0
                                                                 26
                                                                          
                                                                         
                                ∗
                                                          B1∗ = 
                                                               ∗        
                               A1 = 
                                     a∗104
                                                 
                                                                   0
                                                                 b104
                                                                           .
                                                                           
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                      a∗520                       b∗0
                                                                   520


   Let Y2t denote the four other yields used in the estimation, namely the 3-month, 1-year,

5-year, and 30-year yields. The model implies that



                                       Y2t = A∗2 + B2∗ ft + εet                        (31)

                                                                         
                                         a∗13                     b∗0
                                                                      13    
                                                                         
                                                              ∗          
                                    a∗                        b0         
                               ∗
                                    52                   ∗
                                                                52         
                              A2 = 
                                   
                                                 
                                                         B2 = 
                                                               
                                                                            
                                                                            
                                    a∗                        b∗0        
                                    260                       260        
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                     a∗1560                      b∗0
                                                                  1560


where εet ∼ N (0, Ωe ) denotes measurement error. Substituting (30) into (31),



                                      Y2t = A†2 + B2† Y1t + εet                        (32)



                          A†2 = A∗2 − B2∗ (B1∗ )−1 A∗1        B2† = B2∗ (B1∗ )−1 .     (33)


We applied the minimum-chi-square estimation approach developed by Hamilton and Wu


                                                     34
(2010a) to weekly interest rate data from March 6, 2009 to August 4, 2010 to infer the values

of π Q and a∗1 from the OLS estimates of Â†2 and B̂2† , taking cQ , ρQ , a1 , b1 , Σ as given by the

pre-2007 parameter estimates, as detailed in Appendix D.

   This procedure resulted in estimates 5200â∗1 = 0.037 and π̂ Q = 0.9834, implying that the

ZLB is characterized by a one-week interest rate of 4 basis points (at an annual rate) and

that arbitrageurs expect the ZLB to persist for 1/(1 − π Q ) = 60 weeks. We used these two

parameters along with the pre-crisis values for cQ , ρQ , a1 , b1 , Σ reported in Table 1 to calculate

b∗n and a∗n from (26) and (27), and used these to infer a value for ft on the basis of the

observed 6-month, 2-year, and 10-year yield using (30). With this ft we then have from (31)

predicted values for each week’s 3-month, 1-year, 5-year, and 30-year yields, which predictions

are plotted as dashed lines of Figure 7.       The R2 for each relation is reported in the first

column of Table 4. We might compare these with the best possible fit as represented by an

unrestricted OLS regression of each yield on a constant and the 6-month, 2-year, and 10-year

yields, whose R2 is reported in the second column of Table 4. Particularly for the longer-term

yields, the predictions from our simple restricted parameterization are not far from what is

actually observed during the ZLB period.

   A tougher test of the framework is whether it can successfully predict yields in advance.

Here we used the ft constructed as above, formed the one-week-ahead forecast EtP (ft+1 ) =

c + ρft again on the basis of the pre-crisis parameters reported in Table 1, and calculated the

implied yields yn,t+1 using (28). Again, particularly for the longer maturities, these forecasts

are reasonably close to the best possible in-sample fit as represented by an unrestricted OLS

regression of yn,t+1 on a constant and Y1t (see columns 3 and 4 of Table 4).


                                                 35
   Although the post-sample fit is good, the model could nevertheless still be improved.

Hamilton and Wu (2010a) proposed a test of the overidentifying restrictions, which is basically

a test of the statistical significance of the difference in R2 between the first and second columns

of Table 4. This leads to quite strong rejection, with a χ2 (14) test statistic of 344.5.

   We made one further simple adjustment to improve the fit further. We postulated that

when the economy escapes from the ZLB, arbitrageurs anticipate a different average level of

interest rates (as governed by the parameter a1 ) compared to that observed in the pre-crisis

episode. The estimated value of 5200a1 is 2.19, meaning arbitrageurs expect the post-ZLB

average short rate to be below the 4.12 level observed over 1990-2007. The new estimate of

5200a∗1 is 0.068 and of π Q is 0.9907, implying an expected ZLB duration of 108 weeks. These

changes improve the fit relative to that of the model summarized in Figure 7 and Table 4,

though the specification would still be rejected (χ2 (13) = 176.0).

   Although one could relax other restrictions of the model until a perfect fit is achieved,

we regard this as an attractive parsimonious framework that successfully captures the broad

features of how interest rates have been observed to behave under the ZLB regime to date.

Another benefit is that this framework gives us an immediate basis for drawing conclusions

about how the effects of monetary policy differ under the ZLB from normal times.

   Figure 8 plots the factor loadings, which summarize how the yield of any maturity n is

predicted to respond to changes in any of the three factors. The main difference is that, under

the ZLB, short-term yields are essentially unresponsive to any macroeconomic developments,

with all three elements of b∗n near zero for small n. This is because arbitrageurs see very little

probability of escaping from the ZLB over most of the term of the security. As n increases, the


                                                36
response of the yield to macroeconomic factors becomes larger and approaches the response

observed in normal conditions, because there is an increasing probability that the economy

will be away from the ZLB for most of the security’s duration.

   This framework allows us to revisit the consequences of a shift in the maturity of the

Fed’s Treasury holdings. Given our assumption that the latent factors ft are responding in

the same way as they would when away from the ZLB, we can still use the prediction that

a change in the maturity composition of publicly held debt that changes the Treasury risk

factor vector by ∆ would change ft+1 by φ∆. But whereas in normal times we premultiplied

this vector by b0n to see what the change ∆ implied for a yield of maturity n, at the ZLB

we would instead premultiply φ∆ by b∗0
                                    n . These predicted impacts are compared in Figure


9. The policy continues to depress long-term yields by the same amount as in normal times,

but, because of the ZLB, it has very little effect on short-term yields. Cumulative effects on

short-term yields are also negligible, while the ability to bring long yields down is the same

as without the ZLB, as seen in Figure 9.

   We have analyzed here the effects of a swap by the Federal Reserve of short-term assets

for longer-term assets. An alternative strategy, which might be characterized as quantitative

easing, is for the Fed to buy longer-term assets outright with newly created reserves. At the

ZLB, interest-bearing reserves are essentially indistinguishable from zero-risk 1-week bonds.

The effect of quantitative easing is to reduce the available supply of longer-term securities

without changing the private-sector’s exposure to the risk associated with holding short-term

securities. But at the ZLB, changes in the supply of short-term securities have essentially no

effects. Thus, the economic consequences of quantitative easing would be identical to those


                                             37
of the maturity swap just described if the economy were at the ZLB.




8        Discussion.

8.1       Comparison with other estimates.

Here we compare our estimates with those obtained by other researchers. For this purpose,

we standardize on the basis of the two scenarios analyzed above.                  The first scenario is a

simultaneous sale by the Fed of $400 B in securities at the short end and purchase of $400 B

in securities at the long end, implemented in December of 2006. The second scenario is an

outright purchase of $400 B in long-term securities, implemented at the zero lower bound.

       Gagnon, Raskin, Remache, and Sack (2010) used as an explanatory variable the face value

of privately-held debt of more than one-year maturity as a percent of GDP, and as dependent

variable the 10-year yield or 10-year term premium.                They estimated the effect of debt

supply on yields using regressions estimated 1986:M12 to 2008:M6 that included several other

explanatory variables, and obtained a coefficient relating the 10-year yield to bond supply of

0.069.     Since $400 B would represent about 2.9% of U.S. GDP in 2006:Q4, their estimates

imply a predicted decline in the 10-year yield under scenario 1 of (2.9)(0.069) = 20 basis

points. This is close to our estimate of a decline of 14 basis points, as reported in the first

row of Table 5.18
  18
    Gagnon, Raskin, Remache, and Sack (2010)’s regressions in which the term premium rather than the
yield is the left-hand variable would imply estimates as low as 12 basis points. However, these are harder to
compare directly with those for our scenario. In our conception of the question being asked, we assume that
the supply of securities with maturity less than one year increases by $400 B, driving up the yield on those
securities and making the decrease in the term premium larger than the decrease in the yield. This effect is
not captured by the Gagnon, Raskin, Remache, and Sack (2010) regressions.




                                                     38
   In the analysis of Greenwood and Vayanos (2010), the right-hand variable was the fraction

of privately-held debt with duration greater than 10 years, and the left-hand variable was

assorted yield spreads. They found that a one-percentage-point increase in the share resulted

in a 4-basis-point increase in the 5-year-1-year spread over the period 1952-2006. In the sample

we studied (1990-2007), a maturity swap of the size contemplated in scenario 1 would have

lowered the share of debt with maturity greater than 10 years by 9.8 percentage points. This

gives an effect implied by the Greenwood-Vayanos estimates of (9.8)(4) = 39 basis points. For

comparison, our estimate of the size of the effect is 17 basis points for scenario 1, but only 9

basis points for scenario 2. The reason for the difference between the two scenarios is that,

in our framework, part of the drop in the spread if the policy had been implemented over

the period studied by Greenwood and Vayanos (2010) would have come from an increase in

short-term yields, something that would not happen if the same purchase were implemented

at the zero lower bound.

   Another recent analysis comes from D’Amico and King (2010), who looked at the change

in yields of different maturities during the Fed’s purchase of $300 billion in long-term securities

between March and October of 2009. They concluded that these purchases lowered the yield on

10-year Treasuries by about 50 basis points, which would translate into an effect of (4/3)(50)

= 67 basis points for the $400 B purchase analyzed in Table 5, a somewhat larger effect

than implied by our estimates. However, the 10-year yield was where these purchases were

concentrated and where D’Amico and King found the biggest effects, and large standard errors

are associated with any of these estimates.

   Deutsche Bank (2010) attempted to synthesize the estimates of Gagnon, Raskin, Remache,


                                                39
and Sack (2010), Macroeconomic Advisers, and their own research staff, and estimated that $1

trillion in long-term purchases in the current setting might produce a 50-basis-point decline

in long-term yields, which we’ve translated as a 20-basis-point decline for the $400 billion

purchase reported in Table 5.

   In 1961, the U.S. attempted to use Treasury and Fed operations to lower the fraction of

publicly-held long-term debt in what was referred to as “Operation Twist.” Swanson (2011)

used a daily event study of announcements pertaining to the Operation Twist and found

effects on bond yields that, when scaled by the change in size of outstanding Treasury debt,

are broadly consistent with those summarized in our Table 5.

   Although our estimates of the effects are the smallest in this group, they are generally in

the same ballpark, which is somewhat surprising given the very different ways in which these

estimates are derived. There is overall agreement that sufficiently large asset purchases could

achieve a modest reduction in long-term yields. There is nevertheless considerable uncertainty,

both in terms of the econometric standard errors and possible specification errors, in any of

the estimates reported.



8.2    Effects on non-Treasury securities.

Here we sketch a generalization of the theoretical framework in Section 3 to allow arbitrageurs

also to hold other securities with a nonzero probability of default.




                                              40
       Let P1t‡ denote the price paid at t for a one-period bond whose value next period will be

                                                  
                                                  
                                                   1
                                                           with probability exp(−ψt )
                                      ‡
                                     P0,t+1 =                                                       .
                                                  
                                                   0 with probability 1 − exp(−ψt )
                                                  


                                     ‡
If the arbitrageurs hold a fraction z1t in the risky asset and if the probability of default ψt

is independent of risk factors ft , then using a similar approach to that in Appendix A, the
                                                                          ‡2
contribution of the risky asset to the variance can be approximated19 by z1t ψt and the no-

arbitrage condition (2) becomes


                                                       ‡                    ‡
                                                      y1t = y1t + ψt (1 + γz1t ).                                       (34)



In the absence of risk aversion (γ = 0), in equilibrium the risky security will offer the same

expected return as the risk-free security, which requires a premium of ψt to compensate for

the probability of default. With risk aversion (γ > 0) and a positive exposure of arbitrageurs
               ‡
to this risk (z1t > 0), the risky asset will offer a higher expected return to compensate for the

risk.
                                                                ‡
       If the factors that govern ψt and determine equilibrium z1t are independent of the factors
                                             ‡0
                                                                       
  19
       If we conjecture that p‡1t = h a‡1 + b1 ft + c‡ψ ψt + c‡ζ ψt ζ1t
                                                                     ‡         ‡
                                                                          for ζ1t independent factors affecting the supply

of risky assets,

                    "          ‡
                                            !#2
                         ‡    P0,t+1                    ‡2                                  ‡0
               Et       z1t     ‡
                                       −1         =    z1t {exp(−ψt h) exp[−2h(a‡1 + b1 ft + c‡ψ ψt + c‡ζ ψt ζ1t
                                                                                                              ‡
                                                                                                                 )]
                               P0t
                                                                                       ‡0
                                                       −2 exp(−ψt h) exp[−h(a‡1 + b1 ft + c‡ψ ψt + c‡ζ ψt ζ1t
                                                                                                           ‡
                                                                                                              )] + 1}
                                                        ‡2
                                                  =    z1t ψt h + o(h).




                                                                    41
ft that determine the risk-free yield, the one-period risky rate would have identical loadings

as y1t on fluctuations in the level, slope, and curvature factors, as well as additional loadings

on separate default-risk factors.        A parallel result can be derived for risky assets of longer

maturity, with p‡nt loading on ft with the same coefficients bn as for risk-free bonds, along with

separate loadings on the default-risk factors.

       Although the independence of Treasury and default risk factors is a highly stylized as-

sumption, there is no question that risky yields of different maturities respond in a similar

way to the factors driving Treasury yields. Figure 10 displays the comovement between the

10-year Treasury rate and that on 30-year mortgages and Aaa-rated and Baa-rated corporate

debt20 .

       Rather than impose a particular loading of non-Treasury yields on the level, slope, and

curvature factors, we can estimate the empirical loading directly by OLS estimation of


                                            ‡
                                           yjt = a‡j + b‡0
                                                        j ft + ut




over t = 1990:M1 to 2007:M7 for assorted securities j. Note that if there is a correlation

between the default risk factors and ft , this will be incorporated in the estimated values

of b‡j . Table 6 reports the empirical factor loadings for these three risky yields, which, not

surprisingly given Figure 10, turn out to be similar to those for 10-year Treasury bonds.

       In the next-to-last column we use these estimated values of b‡j to calculate the predicted

effect in normal times of a shift in the maturity composition of Fed holdings.21                   Based on
  20
     Aaa and Baa yield represent values as of the last day of the month, while the 30-year mortgage rate is for
the last week of the month, from the FRED database of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.
  21
     These were calculated as b‡0
                               j φ∆ for φ the matrix of OLS coefficients in (23) and ∆ given by (24).



                                                      42
the historical correlations between bond yields, in the pre-crisis period, if the Fed were to sell

$400 billion of short-term Treasuries and buy $400 billion in long-term Treasuries, the 10-year

T-bond and the Aaa and Baa corporate yields would each be expected to decline by 14 basis

points, and the 30-year fixed mortgage rate by 11 basis points.

   We can also get a quick impression of what might be expected at the zero lower bound as

follows. The predicted change in the 6-month, 2-year, and 10-year yields of this $400 billion

maturity swap when at the ZLB are given by the corresponding elements of the vector B1∗ φ∆.
    ‡
If yjt tracks these as estimated historically (namely, by b‡0 −1
                                                           j B1 ), then we get a predicted effect

    ‡
on yjt at the ZLB of b‡0 −1 ∗
                      j B1 B1 φ∆. These estimates are reported in the last column of Table


6. Interestingly, buying long-term Treasuries might if anything have an even bigger effect on

risky yields when at the ZLB than it does in normal circumstances. Again, at the ZLB, in

our framework the effects are the same whether the Fed finances the purchases with sales of

short-term T-bills or with newly created reserves.

   If the Fed were instead to purchase risky securities directly, the resulting reduction in
                                            ‡
arbitrageurs’ holdings of these securities znt would both reduce the default risk premium

(through equation (34)) as well as affect the pricing of Treasury level, slope or curvature risk

(because by holding these risky securities an investor is also exposed to the conventional term

structure factors). For example, the Fed’s MBS purchases could both flatten the slope of the

Treasury yield curve and narrow the spread between MBS and Treasury yields.

   We should also comment on how arbitrageurs’ holding of risky securities would influence our

empirical estimates of the matrix φ itself. If Treasuries represent only a subset of arbitrageurs’

holdings, then Treasury holdings as a fraction of their total wealth znt would be a smaller


                                               43
number than we have assumed.        If, for example, each znt were divided by 2, our vector qt

and therefore the magnitude ∆ would be divided by two, while the OLS estimates φ̂ would

be multiplied by two. Notice that a change in scale of this type would leave the estimated

product φ∆ unchanged and have no effect on any of the estimates reported. This invariance

results from the fact that ultimately our estimates are simply an empirical summary of the

historical relations between observed yields and maturity shares znt defined as a percentage of

total publicly held federal debt, and it is the historical covariation of yields with outstanding

Treasury debt that determined these estimates. If we were trying to make an inference about

structural coefficients such as the risk aversion parameter γ, getting the scale right would be

important. But for the purposes for which the estimates are used here, the scale of znt does

not matter for any of the reported results.



8.3    Application: Evaluation of QE2.

On November 3, 2010, the Federal Reserve announced its intention to implement additional

measures to stimulate the economy, which was described in the financial press as a second

round of quantitative easing (QE2). The plan was to purchase an additional $600 billion of

longer-term Treasury securities by the end of the second quarter of 2011, a pace of about $75

billion per month. This differed in several details from the scenarios analyzed above.

   The first difference is that, as implemented, the purchases were concentrated not on the

longest-maturity securities, but instead focused primarily on securities between 2-1/2 and 10

years. Over the period 1990-2006, if the Fed had sold all its holdings of less than 1 year and

used the proceeds to purchase outstanding Treasury debt evenly over the 2-1/2 to 10 year


                                               44
range, the resulting average change in qt would be not the value reported in expression (24)

but instead

                            ∆2 = (0.006898, 0.004479, −0.004406)0 .                        (35)


Whereas the estimated effects of ∆ on the term structure are statistically significantly distin-

guishable from zero in our framework, those resulting from ∆2 are not. Figure 11 compares

the estimated effects on yields of ∆ and ∆2 if implemented at the zero lower bound.        The

dashed curve summarizes the predicted effects if the Fed were to sell all its holdings of less

than 1-year maturity, and use the proceeds to retire debt of the longest outstanding matu-

rities. Note this is identical to the dashed curve in Figure 9. The solid curve summarizes

the predicted effects if the Fed were to sell all its holdings of less than 1-year maturity, and

spread the proceeds evenly to purchase outstanding Treasury debt in the 2-1/2 to 10 year

range. The latter has a significantly smaller effect on long-term rates. Again we interpret

an outright purchase of a comparable quantity of securities as having similar effects to a debt

swap when the economy is at the zero lower bound.

   A second important difference between QE2 as it’s been implemented by the Fed and the

scenarios analyzed here is in the timing, with the purchases associated with QE2 spread over

a period of 8 months.     Between November 2009 and November 2010, non-TIPS Treasury

debt increased by $127.3 billion per month, of which $71.4 billion was in the 2-1/2 to 10 year

maturity range.   Hence, the proposed QE2 would barely absorb the newly issued medium-

term debt, and debt of greater than 10 years would continue to increase rather than decline.

The top panel of Figure 12 shows that the average maturity of publicly-held Treasury debt

has been higher in each of the first three months of QE2 than it had been in any month over

                                              45
the preceding 2 years.    The bottom panel shows that the fraction of publicly-held debt of

more than 10 years maturity continued to increase even as the Fed was implementing its QE2

bond purchases.    Our conclusion is that QE2 as implemented had little potential to lower

long-term interest rates via the mechanism explored in this paper.




9     Conclusion.

We have found statistically significant forecasting relations over 1990-2007 between the ma-

turity structure of Treasury debt held by the public and the behavior of U.S. interest rates.

These relations suggest that in normal times, the Federal Reserve has some potential to flatten

the yield curve, though not to reduce the overall level of interest rates, by selling short-term

securities and buying long-term securities. Our estimates of the effect on impact suggest that

quite massive operations would be necessary to have a measurable effect on interest rates.

    We proposed that altering the maturity structure of publicly held Treasury debt would be

equally effective at lowering long-term yields when the economy is at the zero lower bound.

But because there are negligible consequences for short-term yields in such a setting, the

policy of reducing public holdings of long-term bonds has the potential to bring the overall

level of interest rates down for an economy at the ZLB, whereas it could not do so in a normal

environment. Quantitative easing, defined as buying the long-term bonds with newly created

reserves, has the identical potential in this model.

    One might suppose that the potential small magnitude of the effect is not a concern as far as

the latter policy is concerned– if hundreds of billions are not enough to make much difference,



                                               46
then perhaps purchases in the trillions, such as the Fed has embarked upon with its holdings

of mortgage-backed securities, might do the trick.      However, we would emphasize that, in

the model of the ZLB proposed here, the entire ability to influence long-term yields comes

from investors’ perceptions of what fundamentals are going to be after normal conditions have

returned. A policy that only kept the supplies off the market during the ZLB episode itself

would have much more limited potential. In this sense, this particular form of nonstandard

monetary policy could end up having limited effectiveness for the same reasons as policies that

hope to influence the public’s expectation of what the target will be for short-term interest

rates once the economy escapes from the ZLB.

   Our estimated effects are linear– twice as big a purchase is predicted to have twice as big

an effect on yields. But this is simply an assumption of our empirical estimation strategy and

not a proposition we have tested directly in the data. Particularly since the magnitudes under

discussion are so different from the observed historical variations from which our estimates

were inferred, extrapolation of these effects to larger and larger policy measures is of necessity

an uncertain exercise.

   We also noted that, although we have framed the discussion here in terms of options

available to the Federal Reserve, this policy tool could naturally be implemented by the

Treasury itself altering the term structure of debt that it issues. If the Treasury has sound

reasons not to do so, it is unclear why the Federal Reserve should try to undo the Treasury’s

attempted hedging of the unified government’s balance sheet with respect to interest rate risk.

Conversely, if the Fed has good reasons to try to flatten the slope of the yield curve, it is

unclear why the Treasury should resist being the agent to implement the plan.


                                               47
References

Adrian, Tobias, Karin Kimbrough, and Dina Marchioni (2010) “The federal reserve’s commer-

  cial paper funding facility” FRBNY Economic Policy Review.


Auerbach, Alan J., and Maurice Obstfeld (2005) “The case for open-market purchases in a

  liquidity trap” American Economic Review 95, 110–137.


Barro, Robert J. (1974) “Are government bonds net wealth?” Journal of Political Economy

  82, 1095–1117.


Baumeister, Christiane, and Luca Benati (2010) “Unconventional monetary policy and the

  great recession: Estimating the impact of a compression in the yield spread at the zero

  lower bound” European Central Bank Working Paper.


Bernanke, Ben S., Vincent R. Reinhart, and Brian P. Sack (2004) “Monetary policy alterna-

  tives at the zero bound: An empirical assessment” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity

  2, 1–100.


Christensen, Jens H. E., Jose A. Lopez, and Glenn D. Rudebusch (2009) “Do central bank

  liquidity facilities affect interbank lending rates?” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco,

  Working paper 2009-13.


Cochrane, John H., and Monika Piazzesi (2005) “Bond risk premia” American Economic

  Review 95, 138–160.


D’Amico, Stefania, and Thomas B. King (2010) “Flow and stock effects of large-scale treasury

  purchases” Working paper, Federal Reserve Board.

                                             48
Doh, Taeyoung (2010) “The efficacy of large-scale asset purchases at the zero lower bound”

  Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Review Q2, 5–34.


Duffee, Gregory R. (2011) “Forecasting with the term structure: The role of no-arbitrage

  restrictions” Working Paper, Johns Hopkins University.


Duffee, Gregory R. (forthcoming) “Information in (and not in) the term structure” Review of

  Financial Studies.


Duygan-Bump, Burcu, Patrick M. Parkinson, Eric S. Rosengren, Gustavo A. Suarez, and

  Paul S. Willen (2010) “How effective were the federal reserve emergency liquidity facilities?

  evidence from the asset-backed commercial paper money market mutual fund liquidity fa-

  cility” Working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.


Eggertsson, Gauti, and Michael Woodford (2003) “The zero bound on interest rates and

  optimal monetary policy” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, 139–211.


Gagnon, Joseph, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache, and Brian Sack (2010) “Large-scale asset

  purchases by the federal reserve: Did they work?” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff

  Reports.


Greenwood, Robin, and Dimitri Vayanos (2010) “Bond supply and excess bond returns” Work-

  ing Paper, London School of Economics.


Gürkaynak, Refet S., Brian Sack, and Jonathan H. Wright (2007) “The u.s. treasury yield

  curve: 1961 to the present” Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 2291–2304.




                                              49
Gürkaynak, Refet S., and Jonathan H. Wright (2010) “Macroeconomics and the term struc-

  ture” Working Paper, Johns Hopkins University.


Hamilton, James D., and Jing Cynthia Wu (2010a) “Identification and estimation of affine-

  term-structure models” Working paper, University of California, San Diego.


Hamilton, James D., and Jing Cynthia Wu (2010b) “Testable implications of affine-term-

  structure models” Working paper, University of California, San Diego.


Hancock, Diana, and Wayne Passmore (2011) “Did the federal reserve’s mbs purchase program

  lower mortgage rates?” Working paper, Federal Reserve Board.


Hansen, Lars P., and Robert J. Hodrick (1980) “Forward exchange rates as optimal predictors

  of future spot rates: An econometric analysis” Journal of Political Economy 88, 829–853.


Kitchen, John, and Menzie D. Chinn (2010) “Financing u.s. debt: Is there enough money in

  the world– and at what cost?” Working paper, University of Wisconsin-Madison.


Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen (2010) “The aggregate demand for

  treasury debt” Working paper, Northwestern University.


Krugman, Paul R. (1998) “It’s baaack: Japan’s slump and the return of the liquidity trap”

  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, 137–205.


Kuttner, Kenneth N. (2006) “Can central banks target bond prices?” NBER Working paper

  12454.




                                            50
McAndrews, James, Asani Sarkar, and Zhenyu Wang (2008) “The effect of the term auction

  facility on the london inter-bank offered rate” Working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of New

  York.


McCallum, Bennett T. (2000) “Theoretical analysis regarding a zero lower bound on nominal

  interest rates” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 32, 870–904.


Merton, Robert C. (1969) “Lifetime portfolio selection under uncertainty: The continuous

  time case” Review of Economics and Statistics 51, 247–257.


Newey, Whitney K., and Kenneth D. West (1987) “A simple positive semi-definite, het-

  eroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix” Econometrica 55, 703–

  708.


Ricardo, David (1820) “Funding system” An article in the supplement to the fourth, fifth, and

  sixth editions of the Encyclopaedia Britannica. Reprinted in The works and correspondence

  of David Ricardo 4, 1951, edited by Piero Sraffa. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge

  pages 149–200.


Roley, V. Vance (1982) “The effect of federal debt-management policy on corporate bond and

  equity yields” Quarterly Journal of Economics 97, 645–668.


Stambaugh, Robert F. (1999) “Predictive regressions” Journal of Financial Economics 54,

  375–421.


Stanley, T. D. (1998) “New wine in old bottles: A meta-analysis of ricardian equivalence”

  Southern Economic Journal 64, 713–727.

                                             51
Svensson, Lars E.O. (2001) “The zero bound in an open economy: A foolproof way of escaping

  from a liquidity trap” Monetary and Economic Studies 19(S-1), 277–312.


Swanson, Eric T. (2011) “Let’s twist again: A high-frequency event-study analysis of operation

  twist and its implications for qe2” Working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.


Taylor, John B., and John C. Williams (2009) “A black swan in the money market” American

  Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 1, 58–83.


Vayanos, Dimitri, and Jean-Luc Vila (2009) “A preferred-habitat model of the term structure

  of interest rates” Working paper, London School of Economics.


Wallace, Neil (1981) “A modigliani-miller theorem for open-market operations” American

  Economic Review 71, 267–274.


Woodford, Michael (2010) “Comments on ashcraft, garleanu, and pedersen, ‘two monetary

  tools: interest rates and haircuts’ ” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2010, volume 25,

  edited by Daron Acemoglu and Michael Woodford University of Chicago Press, Chicago,

  IL.




                                             52
Appendix A. Details of the arbitrageurs’ portfolio optimization prob-

lem.

Let Pnt denote the price of a pure-discount n-period bond (with P0t = 1), Wt the total wealth

of the arbitrageurs, and znt the portion of their wealth allocated to each bond maturity. Then

the arbitrageurs’ wealth evolves according to


                                             N
                                             X           Pn−1,t+1
                                    Wt+1 =         znt            Wt
                                             n=1
                                                           Pnt


with associated rate of return


                                               N                  
                                   Wt+1 − Wt X          Pn−1,t+1
                        rt,t+1   =          =     znt            −1 .
                                      Wt      n=1
                                                          Pnt




                                                   53
If the change in prices between t and t + 1 is small,22 the portfolio’s mean return and variance

can be approximated


                                          N        h                                                         i
                            0             X                 0                      0                    0
  Et rt,t+1 ≈ −z1t (a1 +   b1 f t )   +         znt an−1 + bn−1 (c + ρft ) + (1/2)bn−1 ΣΣ0 bn−1 − an − bn ft
                                          n=2
                                                                                                              (36)

                                                  Vart (rt,t+1 ) ≈ d0t ΣΣ0 dt                                 (37)


where the (J × 1) vector dt summarizes exposures to each of the J factor risks associated with

holding the (N × 1) vector of bonds zt . The arbitrageurs thus choose zt so as to maximize
                                                PN
(1) subject to (36), (37), (9), and               n=1 znt      = 1, for which the first-order condition is given by

(7).
  22
       Suppose that
                                          (Pn−1,t+1 − Pnt )            √       
                           qn,t+1 ≡                         = exp µn h + hεn,t+1 − 1
                                                Pnt
where (ε1,t+1 , ..., εN,t+1 )0 ∼ N (0, Ω). Our approximation is derived from the limiting behavior as h becomes
small, analogous to those obtained when considering a continuous-time representation of a discrete-time pro-
cess. Thus as in Merton (1969) ,
                                        N
                                                    !  N
                                       X               X
                                 Et       znt qn,t+1 =    znt [µn h + Ωnn h/2 + o(h)]
                                      n=1                      n=1

                                                  N
                                                                     !
                                                  X
                                          Vart          znt qn,t+1       = zt0 Ωzt h + o(h)
                                                  n=1

 for Ωnn the row n, column n element of Ω and zt = (z1t , ..., zN t )0 . Equations (36) and (37) are obtained by
setting h = 1 and o(h) = 0. Specifically,

                                  Pn−1,t+1              0                0
                                                                               
                                           = exp an−1 + bn−1 ft+1 − an − bn ft
                                    Pnt
                                                           0                           0
                                          µn = an−1 + bn−1 (c + ρft ) − an − bn ft
                                                                0
                                                     Ωnn = bn−1 ΣΣ0 bn−1 .




                                                                    54
Appendix B. Arbitrage-free equilibrium.

                                                              0
Note that ynt = −n−1 pnt = −n−1 (an + bn ft ) and suppose that ζnt = ζn + ϑ0n ft . If we multiply

(10) by bn−1 and sum over n = 2, ..., N , we find using (9) that equilibrium requires


                                       N         h                                  i
                                       X                                      0
                               dt =          bn−1 ζn + ϑ0n ft + (αn /n)(an + bn ft ) .
                                       n=2



Equation (11) is obtained from (8) with


                                                          N
                                                          X
                                           λ = γΣ0                    bn−1 [ζn + (αn /n)an )]
                                                          n=2



                                                          N               h                i
                                                      0
                                                          X                              0
                                           Λ = γΣ                     bn−1 ϑ0n + (αn /n)bn .
                                                          n=2



Appendix C. ATSM estimation for a just-identified model.

We first estimate the parameters of (6) and (17) by OLS:

                                                                                                                     −1
                                     T
                                       X                               !      T               1                  
                                                                              X                                 
                   ĉ ρ̂       =             ft       1     0
                                                           ft−1               
                                                                              
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                            1 ft−1 
                                                                                                                   
                                       t=2                                        t=2       ft−1


                                                          T
                                                          X
                               0                   −1
                        Σ̂Σ̂ = (T − 1)                            (ft − ĉ − ρ̂ft−1 )(ft − ĉ − ρ̂ft−1 )0
                                                          t=2

                                                                                                                 −1
                                             T                               !      T
                                                                                         1 
                                           X                                                                
                                                                                  X                              
                       Â B̂           =           Y2t            1    ft0        
                                                                                  
                                                                                        
                                                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                                           1 ft0 
                                                                                                                  
                                             t=1                                    t=1   ft




                                                                             55
                                                    T
                                                    X
                               Σ̂e Σ̂0e   =T   −1
                                                          (Y2t − Â − B̂ft )(Y2t − Â − B̂ft )0 .
                                                    t=1


The predicted value for row i of B̂ is given by


                                     h                                i
                                                Q 2           Q ni −1
              B̂i0          n−1 0           Q
                                                              
                      =      i b1     IJ + ρ + ρ    + ··· + ρ                                   for i = 1, ..., M.



For the just-identified case with M = J + 1, we solve this [(J + 1) × J] system of equations

for the J(J + 1) unknowns ρQ and b1 using numerical search. Taking these values for ρQ and

b1 as given, we can then use (12) to solve for bn for any desired n along with


                                                    n                              n
                                                    X          0                   X      0
                                    an = na1 +                b`−1 cQ + (1/2)            b`−1 ΣΣ0 b`−1 .
                                                     `=1                           `=1



The J + 1 values for a1 and cQ are then found by numerical solution of the J + 1 equations



                                            Âi = −n−1
                                                    i ani                 for i = 1, ..., M.




Appendix D. ATSM estimation for an overidentified model.

We estimated (32) by unconstrained OLS,

                                                                                                             −1
                                            T                             !      T
                                                                                      1 
                                          X                                                             
                                                                               X                             
                     Â†2    B̂2†       =           Y2t       1    Y1t0        
                                                                               
                                                                                     
                                                                                     
                                                                                           
                                                                                                      1 Y1t0 
                                                                                                              
                                            t=1                                  t=1   Y1t




                                                                      56
for which the inverse of the usual variance matrix for the estimated coefficients is given by

                                                                         
                                                                T
                                                                    1 
                                                               X                
                                       R̂ =   Ω̂−1
                                                e    ⊗T   −1       
                                                                   
                                                                          1 Y0
                                                                             1t
                                                               t=1   Y1t


with Ω̂e given by diagonal elements of


                                       T
                                       X
                              T   −1
                                             (Y2t − Â†2 − B̂2† Y1t )(Y2t − Â†2 − B̂2† Y1t )0 .
                                       t=1



The minimum-chi-square estimation procedure proposed by Hamilton and Wu (2010) esti-

mates the structural parameters of interest θ = (π Q , a∗1 )0 or (π Q , a∗1 , a1 )0 by minimizing



                                                 T [π̂ − g(θ)]0 R̂[π̂ − g(θ)]                       (38)


                                  0 
where π̂ = vec        Â†2   B̂2†          and g(θ) denotes the corresponding predicted value from (33).

Under the null hypothesis that the model is correctly specified, the minimal value achieved

for (38) should have an asymptotic χ2 (k1 − k0 ) distribution, where k1 = 14 is the number of

parameters in Â†2 and B̂2† and k0 = 2 or 3 is the number of elements in θ.



Appendix E. Details of data construction.

Following Greenwood and Vayanos (2010), we started with CRSP data for outstanding Trea-

sury debt by individual CUSIP number to estimate outstanding nominal Treasury debt at

the end of each month.              We calculated n for each issue by calculating the number of days



                                                                57
between maturity and the last Friday of the month, and converted to weeks by rounding up.

The raw source for these data appears to be the Monthly Statement of the Public Debt of the

United States. We checked these data by summing all the maturities and comparing this sum

with the sum of nominal bills, bonds, and notes recorded in the Haver database,23 which also

comes from the same Monthly Statement.         We found numerous discrepancies, which came

from such factors as the CRSP files on occasion missing individual CUSIP series and at other

times having incorporated assorted data entry errors. We were able to correct CRSP data

errors so as to reduce almost all discrepancies to less than $200 M by hand comparison of the

CRSP numbers with individual copies of the Monthly Statement itself.

      Although the Federal Reserve currently reports outright Treasury holdings for the System

Open Market Account by individual CUSIP, we were unable to secure access to historical

archives of these, and settled for rough estimates constructed as follows. The Federal Reserve’s

weekly H41 release24 reports SOMA each Wednesday by rough maturity breakdowns (less than

15 days, 16-90 days, 91 days to 1 year, over 1 year to 5 years, over 5 years to 10 years, and over

10 years), and we matched up the last Wednesday of each month for SOMA holdings with the

last calendar day of the month for Treasury marketable debt. Unfortunately, the reported

SOMA maturity categories include both nominal Treasuries as well as TIPS, which we exclude

from our analysis. Our solution was to assume that Fed holdings of TIPS as a fraction of the

Fed’s total holdings of notes and bonds was the same across all maturity categories. Total

Fed holdings of notes and bonds are reported on the H41, as are total TIPS holdings (though
 23
    We thank Christiane Baumeister for sharing these Haver data.
 24
    Available in Table 2 of http://www.federalreserve.gov/datadownload/Choose.aspx?rel=H41. Prior
to June 2003, we used the end-of-calendar month data compiled by Kuttner (2006) available at
http://econ.williams.edu/people/knk1/research.



                                               58
prior to December 2002, we had to read the latter by hand from the notes section of individual

reports). We then multiplied each maturity category greater than 1 year by this ratio to get

an estimate of total TIPS holdings in those categories. For maturity categories less than 1

year, we multiplied by the product of this ratio with the ratio of the Fed’s notes and bonds of

maturity less than 1 year to the Fed’s total Treasury securities less than one year. We then

subtracted the resulting estimates of TIPS holdings within each maturity category from the

reported total holdings within each category to get our estimate of nominal Fed holdings for

each maturity category. We then allocated this ratio evenly across total outstanding Treasury

securities of each weekly maturity falling within that category to arrive at our estimate of how

much of those securities were held by the Federal Reserve’s SOMA.




                                              59
Tables

           Table 1: Parameter estimates for the weekly affine term structure model

                                   Estimated parameters                           Implied parameters
              cQ       0.0116       −0.0118 −0.0036                         λ   −0.1378 0.1604 −0.0564
                        (0.0002)     (0.0005)    (0.0007)                       (0.0717)   (0.0727)   (0.0687)
              ρQ       0.9990        0.0094     −0.0140                     Λ   −0.0867 −0.0480 −0.0948
                        (0.0001)     (0.0002)    (0.0005)                       (0.0468)   (0.0594)   (0.1203)
                       0.0027        0.9870     0.0330                          0.0847     −0.0266    0.1773
                        (0.0003)     (0.0004)    (0.0010)                       (0.0455)   (0.0825)   (0.1200)
                       −0.0018 −0.0028          0.9867                          −0.0567    0.0531     −0.1862
                        (0.0002)     (0.0002)    (0.0008)                       (0.0436)   (0.0596)   (0.1594)
               c       −0.0034      −0.0003      0.0006
                        (0.0089)     (0.0074)    (0.0066)
               ρ       0.9895        0.0042     −0.0244
                        (0.0072)     (0.0081)    (0.0157)
                        0.0083       0.9826     0.0478
                        (0.0047)     (0.0081)    (0.0123)
                       −0.0013       0.0055     0.9755
                        (0.0041)     (0.0058)    (0.0132)
           a1 × 5200   4.1158
                        (0.0074)
           b1 × 5200   1.0345       −0.6830     0.6311
                        (0.0058)     (0.0081)    (0.0189)
              Σ        0.1094           0           0
                        (0.0236)
                       0.0360        0.1027         0
                        (0.0100)     (0.0045)
                       −0.0670       0.0025     0.0968
                        (0.0188)     (0.0130)    (0.0149)
           Σe × 5200   0.0978           0           0               0
                        (0.0023)
                           0         0.0674         0               0
                                     (0.0016)
                           0            0       0.0531              0
                                                 (0.0013)
                           0            0           0            0.1171
                                                                 (0.0028)


Estimated Jan 5, 1990 to July 27, 2007. Small-sample standard errors in parentheses. Sample size:
T = 917. Bold indicates statistically significantly different from zero at the 5% significance level.
Variable definitions: c, ρ, and Σ are the intercept, AR coefficients, and square root of variance for
the VAR for factors (equation (6)); λ and Λ are the intercept and factor loadings for the price of
risk (equation (11)); cQ and ρQ are the risk-adjusted intercept and AR coefficients (equations (15)
and (13)); a1 and b1 are the intercept and factor loading for the short-term interest rate (equation
(4)); Σe is the square root of the variance matrix for the measurement error (equation (17)).




                                                            60
                         Table 2: Holding-return forecasting regressions

     Regressors 6m over 3m 1yr over 6m 2y over 1y 5y over 1y 10y over 1y
                c, ft∗  0.357    0.356     0.331      0.295       0.331
                       (0.000)  (0.000)   (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
                    A∗
          c, ft , zt    0.410     0.420     0.373      0.300       0.336
                       (0.020)  (0.119)   (0.311)    (0.728)     (0.665)
                    L∗
          c, ft , zt    0.428    0.501     0.524      0.398        0.357
                       (0.003)  (0.008)   (0.006)    (0.035)     (0.196)
                   pc∗
         c, ft , zt     0.368    0.361      0.333      0.297       0.334
                       (0.001)  (0.007)   (0.062)    (0.098)     (0.051)
                     ∗
           c, ft , vt   0.385    0.409     0.388      0.339        0.338
                       (0.016)  (0.001)   (0.006)    (0.008)     (0.227)
                     ∗
            c, ft , qt  0.444    0.568     0.714      0.617       0.549
                       (0.002)  (0.000)   (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.001)
               pc ∗
     c, ft , zt , qt    0.452    0.571     0.717      0.618       0.550
                       (0.002)  (0.000)   (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.002)
                     ∗
       c, ft , vt , qt  0.458    0.595     0.737      0.640       0.552
                       (0.001)  (0.000)   (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.002)
          A L ∗
 c, ft , zt , zt , qt   0.476    0.597     0.741      0.670        0.634
                       (0.000)  (0.001)   (0.000)    (0.002)     (0.054)

R2 and hypothesis tests for holding-return forecasting regressions. Reported numbers are the R2
for the regressions, with p-values in parentheses, for tests of the null hypothesis that coefficients on
starred variables are zero. All regressions also include a constant term and all hypothesis tests use
Newey-West variance matrix with 20 lags. Bold indicates coefficients on starred variables are
statistically significantly different from zero at the 5% significance level. Variable definitions: c is
the constant term in the regression; ft is a (3 × 1) vector consisting of the level, slope, and curvature
at time t as calculated in footnote 8; ztA is the average maturity of outstanding debt (equation (21));
ztL is the fraction of outstanding debt of 10-year maturity or longer (equation (22)); ztP C is a vector
consisting of the first 3 principal components of {z1t , ..., zN t }; vt is the Cochrane-Piazzesi factor
described in foonote 14; qt is the (3 × 1) vector of Treasury risk factors defined in equation (19).




                                                   61
                               Table 3: Factor vector autoregression

                                                F test    φ0i ∆
                                         level 3.256     0.005
                                               (0.023) (0.112)
                                        slope 4.415 −0.250
                                               (0.005) (0.116)
                                    curvature 2.672 −0.073
                                               (0.049) (0.116)

Granger-causality tests and scenario impact estimates for factor vector autoregression. First
column reports F test (p-value in parentheses) of null hypothesis that φi = 0 in regression
fit = ci + ρ0i ft−1 + φ0i qt−1 + εit for fit the ith factor described in footnote 8. Second column reports
estimate of φ0i ∆ for that regression (with standard error) for ∆ the average change in q under the
alternative scenario (equation (24)).




                                 Table 4: R2 for post-crisis sample

                               Contemporaneous               Forecast
                            restricted unrestricted restricted unrestricted
                     3m       0.625       0.668       0.522         0.602
                      1y      0.891       0.924       0.652         0.767
                      5y      0.961       0.975       0.753         0.753
                     30y      0.965       0.972       0.735         0.787

R2 for post-crisis sample (March 3, 2009 to Aug 10, 2010) for unrestricted regression of indicated
yield on current or lagged yields and R2 for regression in which coefficients are restricted to be
pre-crisis weights adjusted as in equation (26). Contemporaneous: prediction of ynt given current
6-month, 2-year and 10-year yields. Forecast: predictions of ynt given lagged 6-month, 2-year and
10-year yields.




                                                   62
                           Table 5: Comparison of different estimates

                                        Original estimates Hamilton-Wu estimates
            Study           Measure     Pre-crisis ZLB Pre-crisis       ZLB
      Gagnon, et. al.   10 yr yield        -20               -14         -13
      Greenwood-Vayanos 5yr-1yr spread     -39               -17          -9
                        20yr-1yr spread    -74               -25         -18
      D’Amico-King      10yr yield                    -67    -14         -13
      Deutsche Bank     10yr yield                    -20    -14         -13

Comparison of different estimates of the effect of replacing $400 billion in long-term debt with
short-term debt.




                                     Table 6: Risky securities

                       Yield           Factor loadings   Normal               ZLB
                                  level slope curvature effect                effect
                 10-year Treasury 1.000 0.500      0.167  -14                  -13
                 Aaa Corporate    0.883 0.453      0.379  -14                  -15
                 Baa Corporate    0.888 0.441      0.535  -14                  -17
                 30-year Mortgage 0.933 0.363      0.325  -11                  -13

Empirical loadings of selected yields on Treasury level, slope and curvature factors, and predicted
effect on yield (in basis points) of selling $400 billion in short-term Treasury debt and buying $400
billion in long-term Treasury debt.




                                                 63
Figures

                 Figure 1: Alternative measures of 5-year expected inflation
                    4

                    3

                    2

                    1

                    0

                    -1

                    -2
                     2005     2006     2007     2008    2009     2010
                     3

                   2.5

                     2

                   1.5

                     1

                   0.5

                     0
                     2005      2006    2007     2008     2009     2010

Top panel: 5-year break-even inflation rate, calculated as nominal yield of 5-year Treasury bond
minus nominal yield on 5-year Treasury Inflation Protected Security, 2005:M1-2010:M6. Data
source: FRED database of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. Bottom panel: 5-year expected
CPI inflation, from the average response of the Survey of Professional Forecasters, 2005:Q3 to
2010:Q2. Data source: Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.




                                               64
                                Figure 2: Federal Reserve assets
  3000
                                                                                        Maiden 1
                                                                                        MMIFL

  2500                                                                                  TALF
                                                                                        AIG
                                                                                        ABCP
  2000                                                                                  PDCF
                                                                                        discount
                                                                                        swaps
  1500
                                                                                        CPLF
                                                                                        TAC
                                                                                        RP
  1000
                                                                                        MBS
                                                                                        agency
    500                                                                                 misc
                                                                                        other FR
                                                                                        treasuries
       0




Federal Reserve assets, in billions of dollars, Jan 3, 2007 to Aug 4, 2010, Wednesday values,
seasonally unadjusted, from Federal Reserve H41 release. Maiden 1: net portfolio holdings of
Maiden Lane LLC; MMIFL: net portfolio holdings of LLCs funded through the Money Market
Investor Funding Facility; TALF: loans extended through Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan
Facility; AIG: sum of credit extended to American International Group, Inc. plus net portfolio
holdings of Maiden Lane II and III; ABCP: loans extended to Asset-Backed Commercial Paper
Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility; PDCF: loans extended to primary dealer and other
broker-dealer credit; discount: sum of primary credit, secondary credit, and seasonal credit; swaps:
central bank liquidity swaps; CPLF: net portfolio holdings of LLCs funded through the Commercial
Paper Funding Facility; TAC: term auction credit; RP: repurchase agreements; MBS:
mortgage-backed securities held outright; agency: federal agency debt securities held outright; misc:
sum of float, gold stock, special drawing rights certificate account, and Treasury currency
outstanding; other FR: Other Federal Reserve assets; treasuries: U.S. Treasury securities held
outright.



                                                 65
                      Figure 3: Maturity structure of U.S. federal debt
100,000


 80,000


 60,000


 40,000


 20,000


        0
            1   105 209 313 417 521 625 729 833 937 1041 1145 1249 1353 1457 1561

Maturity structure of U.S. federal debt as of December 31, 2006. Horizontal axis: maturity in
weeks. Black bars: face value of marketable nominal Treasury securities of that maturity, in
millions of dollars. Light bars: imputed holdings of the System Open Market Account of the U.S.
Federal Reserve.




                                               66
                                  Figure 4: Average maturity
  320


  300


  280


  260


  240


  220


  200


  180


  160
            1990   1992   1994    1996   1998    2000   2002   2004   2006   2008    2010


Average maturity in weeks of debt held by the public, plotted monthly from Jan 31, 1990 to Jan
31, 2011.




                                                67
                                                    Figure 5: Yields and factors
                                                                          Yields
  10.0
                                                                                                                                 Y6M             Y10Y
   7.5                                                                                                                           Y2Y


   5.0

   2.5

   0.0
            1990    1991    1992    1993    1994    1995    1996    1997    1998    1999   2000   2001   2002   2003   2004   2005     2006   2007

                                                                           Level
  9

  7

  5

  3

  1
          1990    1991     1992    1993    1994    1995    1996    1997    1998    1999    2000   2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006     2007

                                                                          Slope
   4
   3
   2
   1
   0
  -1
          1990     1991    1992    1993    1994    1995    1996    1997    1998    1999    2000   2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006     2007

                                                                     Curvature
   2.5

   1.5

   0.5

  -0.5

  -1.5
           1990     1991    1992    1993    1994    1995    1996    1997    1998   1999    2000   2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006     2007




Yields and factors used in baseline estimation, weekly from Jan 5, 1990 to July 27, 2007.




                                                                            68
                   Figure 6: Impact on yields of lengthening maturity of Fed holdings

       0.15
                                                                                 baseline
                                                                                 with vt
         0.1


       0.05


           0


      −0.05


       −0.1


      −0.15


       −0.2
               0         200      400     600      800      1000      1200     1400      1600



Solid curve: predicted change in yn,t+1 (quoted in annual percentage points) as a function of weeks
to maturity n in response to shift in qt of size ∆ using the baseline specification. Calculated from
5200b0n φ̂∆ as in footnote 16. Dashed curve: predicted change from specification in which
Cochrane-Piazzesi yield factors are also included (calculated as 5200b0n φ̃∆ with φ̃ the estimate from
equation (25)).




                                                  69
                        Figure 7: Actual and model fitted interest rates
     5

   4.5

     4

   3.5

     3

   2.5

     2

   1.5

     1

   0.5

    0
06-Mar-2009                 26-Aug-2009                 15-Feb-2010                 07-Aug-2010

Actual (solid) and predicted (dashed) behavior of selected interest rates, weekly from March 7,
2009 to August 10, 2010. Rates shown (in order from top to bottom) are the 30 year, 5 year, 1
year, and 3 month.




                                                70
                                    Figure 8: Factor loadings

        1.5

          1

        0.5

          0
              0     200       400      600       800      1000     1200      1400      1600
          1


          0


         −1
              0     200       400      600       800      1000     1200      1400      1600
          1

        0.5

          0

       −0.5
              0     200       400      600       800      1000     1200      1400      1600



Solid curves: normal loadings (plots of 5200bn as function of maturity n in weeks). Dashed curves:
zero-lower-bound loadings (5200b∗n ). Top panel: level loadings; middle panel: slope loadings;
bottom panel: curvature loadings.




                                                71
 Figure 9: Impact of lengthening maturity of Fed holdings in normal times and at the ZLB

       0.15


         0.1


       0.05


           0


      −0.05


       −0.1


      −0.15


       −0.2
               0     200       400       600       800       1000      1200      1400      1600



Predicted change in yn,t+1 (quoted in annual percentage points) as a function of weeks to maturity
n in response to shift in qt of size ∆. Solid: effect in normal times (plot of 5200b0n φ∆ as a function
of n); dashed: effect at the zero lower bound (plot of 5200b∗0n φ∆).




                                                  72
                            Figure 10: Assorted long-term yields

         11
                                                      BAA
                                                      30−Year Fixed Rate Mortgage
         10
                                                      AAA
                                                      10 year Treasury
          9


          8


          7


          6


          5


          4


         3
       Jan/1990                 Nov/1995                Sep/2001              Jul/2007



Assorted long-term yields, 1990:M1 to 2007:M7.




                                                 73
                        Figure 11: Effects of two different maturity swaps
 0.02
                                                                                   SWAP2-ZLB
     0                                                                             SWAP1-ZLB

-0.02

-0.04

-0.06

-0.08

  -0.1

-0.12

-0.14

-0.16

-0.18
         0       200         400        600         800        1000        1200       1400        1600

Effects of two different maturity swaps when implemented at the zero lower bound. Dashed curve:
Fed sells all its holdings of less than 1-year maturity and retires debt at the longest end of the
maturity structure (plot of 5200b∗0  n φ∆ as a function of n). Solid curve: Fed sells all its holdings of
less than 1-year maturity and retire debt evenly across 2-1/2 to 10 year maturities (plot of
5200b∗0
      n φ∆2 ).




                                                   74
                         Figure 12: Effects of QE2 on maturity structure
                         Average maturity of publicly-held Treasury debt
  228
  226
  224
  222
  220
  218
  216
  214
  212
             Jan   Feb    Mar   Apr   May   Jun     Jul   Aug   Sep   Oct   Nov   Dec   Jan
                                               2010


   Long-term publicly-held Treasury debt as a percent of total publicly-held Treasury debt
  8.0

  7.9

  7.8

  7.7

  7.6

  7.5

  7.4
            Jan    Feb    Mar   Apr   May   Jun     Jul   Aug   Sep   Oct   Nov   Dec   Jan
                                               2010



Top panel: average maturity of Treasury debt other than that held by the Federal Reserve (ztA ),
2010:M1-2011:M1. Bottom panel: fraction of outstanding Treasury debt not held by the Federal
Reserve that is of 10 years or longer maturity (ztL ), 2010:M1-2011:M1.




                                                 75
