                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               COUPS, CORPORATIONS, AND CLASSIFIED INFORMATION

                                           Arindrajit Dube
                                            Ethan Kaplan
                                            Suresh Naidu

                                        Working Paper 16952
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16952


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2011




We would like to thank Martin Berlin, Remeike Forbes, Nathan Lane, Zihe Liu, Ettore Panetti, Andre
Shepley, and Laurence Wilse-Samson for excellent research assistance. Frans Buelens helped us greatly
in obtaining data. Noel Maurer shared his list of U.S. multinational expropriations with us. Oliver
Boguth provided us historical data on three Fama-French factors. Marcos Chamon, Stefano DellaVigna,
Ray Fisman, Eric Freeman, David Gibbs, Lena Nekby, Torsten Persson, John Prados, Gerard Roland,
and seminar participants at CEMFI, Hampshire College, LSE, IIES, NBER Political Economy Summer
Institute, the New School, NYU, the Santa Fe Institute, the Stockholm U. Economics Department,
the Stockholm School of Economics, UC Berkeley, UC Riverside, the U. of Michigan at Ann Arbor,
the U. of Oslo, and the U. of Warwick all provided helpful comments. We acknowledge financial support
from Columbia University, the Harvard Academy for International and Area Studies, IIES, and the
University of Massachussetts at Amherst. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Arindrajit Dube, Ethan Kaplan, and Suresh Naidu. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Coups, Corporations, and Classified Information
Arindrajit Dube, Ethan Kaplan, and Suresh Naidu
NBER Working Paper No. 16952
April 2011
JEL No. F50,G14,N10

                                              ABSTRACT

We estimate the impact of coups and top-secret coup authorizations on asset prices of partially nationalized
multinational companies that stood to benefit from US-backed coups. Stock returns of highly exposed
firms reacted to coup authorizations classified as top-secret. The average cumulative abnormal return
to a coup authorization was 9% over 4 days for a fully nationalized company, rising to more than 13%
over sixteen days. Pre-coup authorizations accounted for a larger share of stock price increases than
the actual coup events themselves.There is no effect in the case of the widely publicized, poorly executed
Cuban operations, consistent with abnormal returns to coup authorizations reflecting credible private
information. We also introduce two new intuitive and easy to implement nonparametric tests that do
not rely on asymptotic justifications.


Arindrajit Dube                                      Suresh Naidu
Department of Economics                              Columbia University
1030 Thompson Hall                                   School of International and Public Affairs
University of Massachusetts-Amherst                  MC 3328¸˛r
Amherst, MA 01003                                    420 West 118th Street
adube@econs.umass.edu                                New York, NY 10027
                                                     and NBER
Ethan Kaplan                                         sn2430@columbia.edu
Stockholm University
IIES
Stockholm, SWEDEN
ekaplan@iies.su.se




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w16952
There is no eﬀect in the case of the widely publicized, poorly executed Cuban

operations, consistent with abnormal returns to coup authorizations reflecting

credible private information. We also introduce two new intuitive and easy to

implement nonparametric tests that do not rely on asymptotic justifications.

   JEL Codes: F50, G14

   Keywords: Coups, Event Studies, Political Economy



                           I     Introduction
Covert operations conducted by intelligence agencies were a key component of

superpower foreign policy during the Cold War. For the U.S., many of these

operations had the expressed goal of replacing “unfriendly” regimes - often ones

that had expropriated multinational corporate property - and were planned under

extreme secrecy. Since corporate property was always restored after a successful

regime change, these operations were potentially profitable to nationalized companies.

If foreknowledge of these operations was truly secret, then pre-coup asset prices

should not reflect the expected future gains. However, this paper shows that not

only were U.S.-supported coups valuable to partially nationalized multinationals,

but in addition, asset traders arbitraged supposedly “top-secret” information concerning

plans to overthrow foreign governments.

   Specifically, we estimate the eﬀect of secret United States, as well as allied,

government decisions to overthrow foreign governments on the stock prices of

companies that stood to benefit from regime change. We consider companies

that had a large fraction of their assets expropriated by a government that was

subsequently a target of a U.S.-sponsored covert operation aimed at overthrowing

                                         2
the regime. Using timelines reconstructed from oﬃcial CIA documents, we find

statistically and economically significant eﬀects on stock prices both from the

regime change itself and from “top secret” authorizations. Total stock price gains

from coup authorizations were 3 times larger in magnitude than price changes

from the coups themselves. We thus show that there were substantial economic

incentives for firms to lobby for these operations. While we are unable to discern

precisely who was trading, or whether these economic incentives were decisive for

US policymakers (versus political ideology or geopolitics), we do show that regime

changes led to significant economic gains for corporations that stood to benefit

from U.S. interventions in developing countries.

   Our findings complement other evidence in empirical political economy that

large, politically connected firms benefit from favorable political regimes (Faccio

2006; Fisman 2001; Knight 2006; Snowberg et al. 2007). However, we show that

firms benefit not only from publicly announced events but also from top-secret

events, suggesting information flows from covert operations into markets. Our

results are consistent with recent papers that have used asset price data to show

that companies can profit from conflict (DellaVigna and La Ferrara 2008; Guidolin

and La Ferrara 2007). We also provide evidence that private information generally

leaks into asset prices slowly over time. This is consistent with both private

information theories of asset price determination (Allen et al. 2006) and the

empirical literature on insider trading (Meulbroek 1992). We diﬀerentiate our

work from the prior work on insider trading in so far as the private information

being traded on concerns government policy, and not company decisions or other

information generated within the company.



                                        3
   The theoretical literature on coups in economics has emphasized the role of

domestic elites (Acemoglu and Robinson 2006). However, anti-democratic political

transitions have often been instigated, planned and even partially executed from

abroad, most notably by the U.S. and the former Soviet Union during the Cold

War. Operating under the threat of nuclear war, direct conflict between the two

superpowers was replaced by covert and proxy operations to install supporting

regimes (Chomsky 1986; Kinzer 2006). According to Easterly et al. (2010), 24

country leaders were installed by the CIA and 16 by the KGB since the end of the

Second World War.

   Our paper also makes a methodological contribution to hypothesis testing in

event studies. The structure of our event study allows us to improve on existing

nonparametric tests. Nonparametric tests used in event studies do not use exact

small sample distributions but rather tests with faster asymptotic convergence to

a normal distribution (Campbell et al. 1997; Corrado and Zivney 1992). We

introduce two new small sample tests motivated by Fisher’s exact test that are

valid without asymptotic justifications.

   Section 2 of this paper discusses the history of U.S. covert interventions, with

background on each of the coups in our sample. Section 3 describes the data and

our selection of companies and events. Section 4 outlines our estimation strategies

and Section 5 reports our main results along with a number of robustness checks

and small sample tests. Section 6 provides an interpretation of our main results;

we decompose coup gains to a multinational into public and private components.

We conclude in Section 7.




                                           4
               II      Background and History
The Central Intelligence Agency was created in 1947 under the National Security

Act of July 26. The act allowed for “functions and duties related to intelligence

aﬀecting the national security,” in addition to intelligence gathering (Weiner 2007).

Initially, the scope of the CIA was relegated to intelligence, though a substantial

and vocal group advocated for a more active role for the agency. This culminated

in National Security Council Directive No. 4, which ordered the CIA to undertake

covert actions against communism. In the United States, covert operations designed

to overthrow foreign governments were usually first approved by the director of the

CIA and then subsequently by the President of the United States (Weiner 2007).

   After Eisenhower’s election in 1952, Allen Dulles was appointed director of

the agency. Under Dulles, the CIA expanded its role to include planning and

executing overthrows of foreign governments using military force. All but eight

of the CIA operations listed in Table I, including four of the five studied in

this paper, began during Dulles’ reign as CIA director under the Eisenhower

administration. Allen Dulles was supported by his brother, John Foster Dulles,

who was the contemporaneous Secretary of State. The Dulles brothers together

wielded substantial influence over American foreign policy from 1952 to 1960.

   In 1974, partly due to public outcry over the U.S. involvement in the military

coup in Chile, the Hughes-Ryan Act increased congressional oversight of CIA

covert operations. In 1975, the U.S. legislature formed subcommittees to investigate

American covert action. Afterwards, the intensity and scope of U.S. covert actions

fell substantially (Johnson 1989). The height of covert CIA activity lasted slightly

more than twenty years, encompassing the period between 1952 and 1974.


                                         5
   Our sample of coups includes five such covert attempts. The first one occurred

in Iran in August, 1953, when the CIA, joint with the UK’s MI6, engineered

a toppling of Prime Minister Mossadegh. Mossadegh had nationalized the oil

fields and refinery at Abadan, which were the property of the Anglo-Iranian Oil

Company, itself a partially publicly owned company of the UK government. In

Guatemala, the CIA overthrow of Jacobo Arbenz Guzman in June, 1954 occurred

after the Arbenz government had nationalized most of United Fruit’s assets in

Guatemala. Next, in 1960 and 1961, both the United States and Belgium engaged

in independent operations to politically neutralize the government of Patrice Lumumba

in the Congo. Lumumba had refused to allow Katanga, a copper rich enclave

controlled by the Belgian multinational Union Minière, to secede and avoid taxation

and potential nationalization. In Cuba, the Castro government nationalized all US

property in 1960, one year before the failed Bay of Pigs coup attempt in April,

1961. Finally, the Chilean nationalization of copper and other foreign owned assets

began under the Frei government but proposed compensation was substantially

lower and nationalizations more frequent after the Allende government came to

power in late 1970. Allende was in oﬃce less than 3 years before he was killed

during a coup on September 11, 1973. In Online Appendix A, we provide a more

detailed synopsis of each coup, focusing on the nature of the pre-coup regime, the

motivations behind the expropriations, the foreign responses, and the resolution

of the coup.

   The qualitative evidence on links between business and coup planners is substantial.

First, much of the early CIA leadership was recruited from Wall Street. A 1945

report on the CIA’s precursor by Colonel Richard Park claimed that the “hiring



                                         6
and promotion of senior oﬃcers rested not on merit but on an old boy network from

Wall Street” (Weiner 2007, p. 7). Secondly, there was direct contact between the

companies that had been nationalized and the CIA. For example, at the time of the

coup planning against Arbenz, three high ranking members of the executive branch

of government had strong connections with the United Fruit Company. Alan

Dulles, a former member of the board of directors of the United Fruit Company,

was Director of the CIA. Thomas Dudley Cabot, held at diﬀerent times the

positions of Director of International Security Aﬀairs in the State Department and

CEO of the United Fruit Company. His younger brother, John Moore Cabot, was

secretary of Inter-American Aﬀairs during much of the coup planning in 1953 and

1954. Besides the fact that Anglo-Iranian was a majority state-owned company,

the company met with CIA agent (and later historian) Kermit Roosevelt, who

alleged in his 1954 history that the initial plan for the coup was proposed by the

Anglo Iranian Oil Company. In Belgium, the royal court and the powerful bank

Société Générale tied together a social and financial network of colonial oﬃcials

and businesses. De Witte writes that “the incontrovertible political conclusion is

that the political class, including the [Belgian] court, had a direct material interest

in the outcome of the Congo crisis” (De Witte 2001, p. 37). Most directly, the

minister of African Aﬀairs, a key instigator and planner of Operation Barracuda,

Harold d’Aspremont-Lyden was the nephew of Gobert d’Aspremont-Lyden who

was an administrator for Union Minière. The Senate Church Committee reported

that the CIA held meetings with U.S. multinationals involved in Chile on a regular

basis, even to the point of ITT (whose board included John McCone, a former

director of the CIA) notoriously oﬀering the CIA $1 million to overthrow Allende’s



                                          7
government (Weiner 2007). In short, social links between the government oﬃcials

responsible for the coups and financial interests are well-documented. Secret plans

for regime change could have easily made it into the ears of financial actors who,

even if not directly connected to the aﬀected companies, could arbitrage this

information on the market.

   Our results are consistent with the presence of both direct information leakage

between political decision makers and the companies that stood to benefit, as

well as indirect information flows to the market.     We are unable to produce

definitive evidence on the identity of the traders, or pinpoint the exact source

of the information leakage.



                                III      Data
We focused on the set of all CIA coups where a) the CIA attempted to eﬀect regime

change, b) the relevant planning documents have been declassified, and c) the

government had expropriated property from a publicly listed multinational. The

details of how we obtained a comprehensive list of coups, declassified documents,

and expropriations are described in Online Appendix B. We are left with 5 coups

where all three of our criteria are satisfied: Iran, Guatemala, Congo, Cuba, and

Chile. Online Appendix A provides detailed historical background for each of these

coups.

   We first extract all of the authorization events from the timelines. These are

restricted to events where either a coup was explicitly approved by the head of

a government or ministry (the President of the United States, Prime Minister of

the United Kingdom, or the Ministry for African Aﬀairs in Belgium), the head

                                        8
of an intelligence agency (the CIA or the MI6 ), or where US $1 million or more

was allocated to the overthrow of a foreign government. In the case of Congo, we

include the date of the assassination of Lumumba, which happened in secrecy and

was not known publicly for close to one month. Authorization events are coded

as “good”(+1) or “bad”(-1) depending on whether they increase or decrease the

likelihood of a coup. Our selection and coding of authorization events is presented

in Table II.

   We also extract public events from the oﬃcial timelines for use as controls in

some specifications. Public events are restricted to dates where company assets are

nationalized or regime transitions and consolidations occur. The public events are

coded as “good”(+1) or “bad”(-1), where “good” events are those which are likely

to increase the stock price and ”bad” events are ones which are likely to cause a

decline in the stock price. The public events and their coding are listed in Online

Appendix Table AI. Table VII lists the dates of the regime changes themselves.

   In addition to the data on the events, we also construct a dataset of daily stock

returns for publicly traded companies that were expropriated by the regimes that

were then overthrown by the CIA. Using a variety of sources, also documented in

Online Appendix A, we obtain the lists of companies expropriated in each country.

For each of these companies, we obtain the amounts expropriated from various

sources and daily stock market data, either from CRSP or from archival sources.

We define the exposure of a company to be the value of the assets expropriated

divided by the average market capitalization in the year prior to the nationalizing

regime coming into power.     We also use market-level daily Fama-French four

factors: excess return of the NYSE, high minus low (book to price ratio), small



                                        9
minus big (market capitalization), and momentum. For years prior to 1962, we

obtained the daily HML and SMB factor data series from Oliver Boguth, and we

constructed the daily momentum factor ourselves. Post 1962 data on the factors

come from Ken French’s website. Additionally, we used a Perl script to generate a

daily count of the number of New York Times articles mentioning both the name of

the country and the country’s leader in the New York Times. Summary statistics

of the main variables are presented in Table III.



                         IV       Methodology
Our main hypothesis is that authorization events result in an increase in the stock

price of the aﬀected company over the days following the event. We consider

cumulative abnormal returns after the authorization events. In contrast to public

events, we expect stock price reactions to top-secret events to potentially diﬀuse

slowly. Our benchmark specification estimates a 4-day return starting at the event

date, though we consider alternative specifications ranging from 1 to 21 days.

We employ two diﬀerent estimation strategies: a regression using the augmented

Fama-French four factor model, and a new set of distribution-free small sample

tests.


A Regression Method

For the regression method, we regress a company’s stock price return on an

indicator for authorization events interacted with the company’s exposure. We

also control for four Fama-French factors (excess return of the NYSE, SMB,

HML, and momentum):

                                        10
(1)                             = X β +    () +  


where   is the one day raw stock return for firm  between the closing price

at date  − 1 and the closing price at date  and X is the vector of factors.

  () is a variable which takes on the value of a company’s exposure for a  day

period beginning with an authorization day, and zero otherwise. The average daily

abnormal return over the  day period is  . The cumulative abnormal return is

 1 . We consider values of  ranging from 1 to 21. In our multiple country
                                                                        
                                                                           
regressions, we report the mean of the country-specific coeﬃcients       ||    Our

sample is the time period starting exactly one year before the nationalizing regime

comes to power until the day before the beginning of the coup. The standard

error for the cumulative abnormal return is given by the maximum of robust

standard errors, standard errors clustered on date, and standard errors clustered

on company.


B Small Sample Tests

One problem with the regression method as well as traditional event studies is

that the distribution of abnormal returns is often non-normal, and the number of

events is often small. As a result, use of conventional standard errors may produce

an incorrect test size. We provide two non-parametric small sample tests based on

the sign and rank tests used in the literature. Unlike the conventional rank and

sign tests, however, we use “exact” distributions that do not rely on asymptotic
  1                                                          
      Note that this is a standard approximation to (1 +  ) − 1


                                             11
justifications.

      The standard rank and sign tests are motivated by the observation that these

test statistics converge much faster to a normal distribution than the mean. Others

have noted that the sign test has an analogue to Fisher’s exact test, which uses the

binomial distribution to calculate a distribution-free test for significance, which we

also implement. We extend this idea to the rank test, noting that the rank has a

uniform distribution, and thus also permits a distribution-free test for the average

rank.

      We begin by estimating a market model with the four factors in an “estimation

window” that is prior to any coup-related events. Our estimation window is two

calendar years in length and begins three years before the nationalizing regime

comes to power. We estimate firm-specific cumulative abnormal returns for 4−day

windows starting with authorization dates. We weight these CARs by company

exposure and form country-portfolio specific CARs. The overall CAR takes a

simple average of returns over country-portfolios.

      We first generalize the sign test by considering the number of events that have

a  day  greater than a given percentile , where  is computed using 

day s in the estimation sample from country  When cumulative abnormal

returns are independently distributed across countries and events, the one-sided

probability of getting  or more abnormal returns above the  is:

                                 µ ¶
                                X   
(2)                          1−       (1 − )−
                                   
                                 =


where  is the total number of events. This is the p-value of the one-sided

Binomial sign test. Since the  percentile return is estimated based on a finite

                                          12
estimation sample, and multiple events within the same country use the same

estimated  percentile cutoﬀ, this may induce a cross-event correlation in the

measured percentiles within countries. Therefore, besides calculating the -value

analytically using equation (2), we also follow the literature on randomization

inference (Andrews 2003; Conley and Taber [forthcoming]) and simulate our test

statistic. First we draw  percentiles from a uniform distribution, where  is

the size of country ’s estimation window. We then draw  additional returns,

where  is the number of events, from a uniform distribution.2 We then estimate

the  percentile return from the  draws. Next, we count the number of 

draws above the  percentile of the  draws. We do this for all five countries

and then compute the average number of event returns above the  percentile,

and repeat this procedure 10,000 times to estimate the simulated counterpart to

equation (2).

       Finally, parallel to the Binomial test developed above, we construct an analogue

of the rank test (Corrado 1989; Campbell et al. 1997) exploiting the independence

of events in our country portfolio sample to obtain exact inference. We rank each

of our events relative to the distribution of abnormal returns in the estimation

window. We then convert the rank into a percentile. Noting that, for i.i.d.

variables, percentile is uniformly distributed, we compute the CDF for the sum

of the percentiles of  independently and uniformly distributed random variables

over the interval [0 1].3 Without loss of generality, we assume that the mean

percentile  ≥ 05. Given the symmetry of the cumulative distribution function,
   2
     Both the Binomial and the Uniform tests can be shown to be independent of the
distribution of the return draws for all distributions. A proof of this is available from the
authors upon request.
   3
     This test was suggested, but not pursued, by Corrado (1989).


                                             13
the one-sided -value of getting a percentile rank greater than  is then:



                              
                                    Ã                             !
                              X         (−1) ( − ) 1( ≥ )
(3)                      1−
                                               !( − )!
                              =0


      We derive test statistics using the analytical equation from equation (3). However,

similar to the Binomial test, we also simulate the distribution of average ranks.

We report the modified sign and rank test results by country as well for the

successful coups and the full sample. Finally, for the purpose of comparison, we

also report asymptotic standard errors using the standard deviations of returns in

the estimation window (Campbell et al. 1997).



                                    V        Results
A Baseline Results

In Table IV, we report the cumulative abnormal returns for authorization events

interacted with exposure over periods ranging from 1 to 16 days in length. We

use (0  − 1) to denote the -day period beginning with the day of the event. We

find clear evidence that stock prices react positively to authorization events. Row

1 of Table IV shows that, in the pooled sample of all companies, the average 4

day stock price return for an authorization event is 9.4% with a standard error of

2.7%. This implies that a hypothetical company that had all its assets expropriated

could be expected, on average, to experience roughly a 9.4% increase in its stock

price within the four days following the secret authorization of a CIA coup. The

cumulative abnormal returns are generally significant at the 1% level for the all

                                              14
country sample from 4 through 13 days after the event. The abnormal returns

continue to increase between days 4 and 16 after the event, consistent with the

hypothesis that private information is incorporated into asset prices with a delay.

       In Row 2, we restrict attention to the set of 4 successful coups (i.e., excluding

Cuba), and the corresponding estimates are consistently larger by around 25%-30%.

The sample size drops substantially due to the large number of expropriated firms

in Cuba. In Row 3, we restrict attention to the events that were authorizations

(and deauthorizations) of coups that were later cancelled. The mean eﬀect increases

somewhat in magnitude (13.4% after 4 days), reaching a maximum of 19.7% at

10% significance after 16 days. We interpret the results on the cancelled coups

to provide additional evidence that the stock price reactions reflected changes in

beliefs due to the authorizations themselves, and not the expected coup or trends

leading up to the coup4 .

       Rows 4-9 show the results for separately for each country. For Chile, the

eﬀect is positive by the fourth day after the authorization event, but small and

insignificant.    It also stays small through the longer horizons considered.        In

Row 5, we consider Congo, which exhibits a large 16.7% eﬀect on the day of

an authorization event. The cumulative abnormal return increases to 22.7% after

4 days and then stabilize, becoming statistically insignificant after 10 days. In

Row 6, we restrict attention to the events in the Congo sample that were decisions

made by Belgian oﬃcials, as the aﬀected company was Belgian and the operation

was independent of the United States. Eﬀects in this sample are even larger, with
   4
    Although not reported in the table, if we further restrict attention to the
deauthorization events themselves, the stock price of a fully-exposed company fell by
11.7% within four days of a deauthorization, which further confirms this interpretation.



                                            15
an immediate 27.3% eﬀect after the event, rising to a 5% significant 46.2% after

16 days.

      Row 7 shows the results for Cuba. There are two operations and thus two sets of

events in Cuba. The first is the failed Bay of Pigs invasion. The second is Operation

Mongoose which was started after the Bay of Pigs but was ultimately cancelled.

More details about the Cuban operations are available in Online Appendix A.

There is virtually no eﬀect in the Cuba subsample even after 16 days and, though

not reported in the tables, for both operations considered individually.         The

qualitative evidence suggests two possible reasons for the absence of an eﬀect

in Cuba: (1.) Due to the high degree of public aggression from the United

States towards Cuba, including numerous bombing missions, the coup was already

commonly believed to be in planning and thus information about top-secret authorizations

were not considered “news” by financial market actors.5 (2.) Traders were pessimistic

about success, partially owing to a combination of incompetence and lack of

political commitment towards the coup by the Kennedy Administration. Though

we are not able to convincingly reject either explanation, we do provide additional

evidence later in the paper that some traders did believe in the possibility of a

successful Bay of Pigs operation.

      Rows 8 and 9 show the results for Guatemala and Iran, respectively. Guatemala

shows an immediate and significant 4.9% increase, which continues to grow to

16.5% after 4 days and 20.5% after 7 days, also significant at 5% confidence. After

this, the coeﬃcient in the Guatemala subsample is not statistically significant,

although the point estimate generally remains large. In the Iran subsample, we do
  5
    “When Kennedy reads the [NYT] story he exclaims that Castro doesn’t need spies in
the United States; all he has to do is read the newspaper”.(Wyden 1979)


                                          16
not see an immediate reaction to the event, but we do see a significant 7.4% eﬀect

after 4 days, increasing to 10.3% after 7 days and continuing to increase to 20.2%

at 16 days, all significant at the 1% or 5% level. Overall, our country results shows

that in the three out of the five countries with statistically significant eﬀects, the

results were visible and clear within 4 days. However, in all these cases, the eﬀects

tended to grow over the following days, consistent with slow diﬀusion of private

information into asset prices.

   The eﬀects reported in Table IV are for a hypothetical company that was

fully nationalized. To obtain the average eﬀect for the sample of companies in a

given country, we would need to multiply the coeﬃcient by the mean exposure

for companies in that country. The average exposure in the sample was 17.9%, so

Column 2 of Table IV implies that the cumulative return in the sample companies

was 1.6% after four days. As a specific example, Union Minière had 33.8% of its

overall assets exposed, which implies that the cumulative abnormal return in the

Congo subsample was 7.6% after 4 days. Similarly, United Fruit had 14.8% of its

assets exposed, which implies a 2.4% return over 4 days. Finally, Anglo-Iranian

had 31.0% of its assets nationalized in Iran, and so the implied cumulative 4 day

increase following an authorization event for that company was 2.3%.

   Figure I provides graphical evidence, parallel with Table IV, on abnormal

returns around an authorization event, with 95% confidence intervals shown. We

compute cumulative abnormal returns () using the regression method aggregated

across events for each of the 20 days prior to as well as following an event. For

the 20 days prior to the event, we aggregate backwards starting at the event date

(date 0), so (−) is the cumulative abnormal return between dates − and



                                         17
0. For returns starting prior to date 0, we also include as a control an indicator

for a 10-day period after an authorization date, in the case when the events are

suﬃciently close together that cumulative returns prior to one authorization event

includes returns that follow another authorization event. The only country where

the windows overlap is Iran, and none of the other figures look diﬀerent if we do not

account for the overlap in () and (−) windows when cumulating over

days prior to the event. For our full sample, cumulative abnormal returns become

significant at a 5% level on the day of an event and remain significant. The rise

over this period is generally monotonic until day 16, and seems to be permanent.

Considering returns prior to the event date, however, the (−)’s show no

trends and are never significant. We conclude that there was no pre-existing trend

in the stock price prior to an event, suggesting that the CIA did not authorize coups

in response to drops in the value of connected companies or pre-existing political

trends that would also be priced into the stock return. Figure II shows the 

graphs separately by country. As expected, individual country time paths are more

imprecise due to sample size limitations, with consistently significant results only

in Congo, Guatemala and Iran. There is no evidence of a persistent and significant

pre-trend in any of the individual countries. Overall, the evidence on timing shows

that authorization events led to positive asset price movements - usually with some

lag.


B Robustness

Our benchmark specification (Column 2 of Table IV) shows that abnormal returns

were positive and significant in the four days following an authorization event.



                                         18
However, this could be due to downturns in the broad market, contemporaneous

information about public events, or positive industry-specific shocks. To show

that the positive abnormal returns reflect changes in company-specific returns,

we consider a number of robustness checks in Table V. All are estimated for the

pooled sample, the set of successful coups, and separately by country. We compute

cumulative abnormal returns over a 4 day period following an authorization event.

Except for columns 1 and 5, all specifications include the four Fama-French factors

interacted with a company dummy (or country-specific company dummies for

multi-country regressions) as controls. As in Table IV, we report the coeﬃcient on

the authorization dummy interacted with the company’s exposure, multiplied by

the number of days in the window (4 in this case); multicountry estimates average

the coeﬃcients across the countries.

   First, we regress raw returns, unadjusted by any of the market factors, on our

authorization events. We confirm that the cumulative abnormal return eﬀects were

due to increases in the aﬀected company’s stock prices, and not due to changes in

market-level movements. Column 1 of Table V shows a 4-day cumulative abnormal

return of 9.5%, virtually identical to our benchmark specification.

   Top-secret decisions to overthrow foreign governments may have coincided with

public events in the targeted countries. This could bias our estimates, reflecting the

eﬀect of public news rather than private information. In Column 2 we control for

the number of articles in the New York Times mentioning both the country and the

country leader by name, as well as other public events; these are nationalizations

of foreign owned property as well as electoral transitions and consolidations which

are also mentioned in the timelines, all listed in Online Appendix Table AI. We



                                         19
multiply these measures with company exposure and the country dummies, and

include them as controls in our main specification. The coeﬃcient in the pooled

sample is only slightly smaller than the one in the main specification, and still

shows a 7.2% 4-day return which is significant at the 1% level. In Column 3 we

drop all dates where the New York Times had at least one article mentioning

both the country and the leader by name (Meulbroek 1992). Since most days

have at least one political article about the coup countries, we lose over 2/3 of

our sample in this specification, making this a strong test. However, our eﬀect

actually becomes stronger despite the country with the largest baseline eﬀect,

Congo, dropping out of the sample. The mean eﬀect in the pooled country sample

is 12.5% return over four days and still significant at the 1% level. Congo is very

prominently covered in the news, and hence does not have any events that are not

contemporaneous with some New York Times coverage. While all the countries

lose observations from the sample restrictions, the estimates for Chile and Iran are

actually larger than in the baseline specification, and the coeﬃcients for Guatemala

and Iran are still significant at least the 5% confidence level. Cuba only has one

authorization date that has no contemporaneous New York Times articles about

Cuba and Castro, reflecting the extensive leakage of the Bay of Pigs operation as

well as general news interest in Cuba over the sample period. The scaling back of

the second operation, Mongoose, on February 2, 1962, does indeed fall on a news

free day. While not significant, the positive and relatively larger coeﬃcient on this

subsample is consistent with our interpretation that secret (de)authorizations do

cause decreases in stock prices when they actually constitute “news.”

   One potential explanation for our findings is price momentum around the



                                         20
authorization dates. This may either reflect pre-existing information flows or

trading activities unrelated to coup planning. We include a control that interacts

the exposure measure with a dummy that is equal to 1 in a 20 day window around

each authorization event. This specification tests whether the abnormal returns

are higher in the 4 days right after an authorization than in the average of the 20

day period surrounding each authorization event. Column 4 of Table V shows that

the four-day abnormal return is 9.9%, actually slightly higher than our benchmark,

and statistically significant at the 1% level. Pre-existing price trends do not explain

our results.

   We also consider two placebos. In Column 5 of Table V we regress NYSE index

returns on our private information variable, omitting the other three factors. Our

pooled estimate is equal to 0.02% and is insignificant. None of the country specific

regressions are significant at the 10% either. In column 6 of Table V, we use

daily stock returns from a matched company, where the match is constructed by

taking the company closest in the Mahalanobis metric (constructed from market

capitalization and market beta) within each 3-digit industry code, subject to

having data available for all of the authorization dates. The matched companies

are listed in Online Appendix Table AII. This placebo is also insignificant in the

pooled sample as well as all the subsamples, suggesting that our eﬀects are not

driven by industry specific shocks.

   Finally, we consider the eﬀect of authorizations on the log of trading volumes

for the set of countries for which data is available. In both the pooled samples

as well as the individual country regressions, our event variable is positive and

significant. This is true even in Chile and Cuba, where the eﬀect on returns was



                                          21
insignificant. The finding of increased trading in the four days including and just

after authorization days is consistent with theoretical predictions of heterogeneous

belief models (Wang, 1994) of stock trading as well as prior empirical work on the

volume impacts of insider trading (Cornell and Sirri 1992).


C Time-Shifted Placebos

As additional evidence that our eﬀects are not an artifact of the data, we re-estimate

our main specification on a set of placebo dates. We take our 4 day cumulative

abnormal returns and shift our authorization events forwards as well as backwards

by 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 35, and 40 days. For an  day shift, we estimate:


(4)                              = X β +   + (4) +  


As in our baseline specification, we report the mean cumulative 4-day return across
             
                   
countries:     
                 || .    We exclude all days with other authorizations, public events,

or that occur during the coup itself. We graph our estimates against the number

of days shifted in figure III.

      Out of the 19 time-shifted regressions,  is only significant for  = 0 our

benchmark specification with cumulative abnormal return of approximately 9.38%

for a fully exposed company, which is significant at the 1% level. None of the 18

other dates have a magnitude above 4% and none of them are significant at even

the 10% level. The placebo estimates reinforce that our baseline estimates are

not due to local serial correlation in returns. The pattern of no abnormal returns

before a decision, sizeable abnormal returns just after a decision, and smaller

possible abnormal returns in the medium run after a decision is consistent with


                                                22
our hypothesis of secret authorization events causing an increase in the stock price.


D        Small Sample Tests

In Table VI, we present the results from our small sample tests. First, we present

the four day s of country portfolios, based on out-of-sample estimates. The

s here represent the actual (exposure weighted) change in stock prices for

aﬀected companies in a given sample, while the regression coeﬃcients represent

the eﬀects for a hypothetical company that was fully exposed. For comparability,

the regression coeﬃcients would need to be multiplied by mean exposure levels,

although the comparability is inexact due to how exposures are treated in the two

cases. The results are listed in Row 1 of Table VI. For the full sample, the average

four day weighted  was 2.6%. The estimate is statistically significant at the

1% level using asymptotic standard errors.

        Turning to our small sample tests, we find that 18 out of the 22 events

in the full country sample have returns greater than the median return in the

“estimation window” (i.e., the year prior to any nationalization event), producing

a one-sided probability value under the null hypothesis of 0.35%.6 13 of those

events have returns above the 80 percentile, which would occur by chance alone

with probability less than 0.02%. Eight of the events have returns greater than

the 90 percentile, which have an associated probability value of 0.11% under the

null. Finally, the average rank of all 22 events is 0.74, which would be obtained

by chance with a probability less than 0.06%. When we consider the set of four

successful coups, the conclusion is strengthened. The probability values associated
    6
   In the text, we report the higher of the analytical and simulated probability values.
Both are reported in the table. All reported probability values are one-sided.


                                          23
with the Uniform rank test, as well as the Binomial sign tests (for 50 , 80 and

90 percentiles) are all under 0.1%.

   Due to small sample size, the individual country tests have low power and thus

p-values are larger. Congo and Guatemala consistently produce probability values

under 10% for all the tests, and smaller for most. Iran produces probability values

ranging between 3% and 14% except for the 90 percentile, while Chile ranges

from 5% and 33%. Finally, consistent with our results above, Cuba shows no

systematic increase in returns following authorization events. For example, only

three out of the six events show positive returns, while the rest are negative.

   Our results also show heterogeneity across events. While there does not seem

to be a substantial reaction to a few events, most show positive reactions. And

many show reactions that were very strong, as exemplified by the fact that 8 out

of 22 events are above the 90 percentile in returns.

   Overall, our modified sign and rank tests provide strong evidence that the 4-day

returns after authorization events are, on average, highly statistically significant,

and our conclusions are not driven by the size of our sample and non-normal

distribution of returns. Also, they show us that there are reactions to some events

and not to others. However, when there is a reaction, the eﬀect is strong and

unmistakable.



        VI       Assessing the Gains from Coups
We also estimate abnormal returns for the coup attempts themselves using our

main specification. We do this for two reasons. First, we want to test if these

companies were aﬀected by the actual coup attempts, confirming that companies

                                         24
were benefitting from the anticipated regime change. Second, we want to compare

the direct eﬀect of the coup itself to the total net rise due to pre-coup authorizations.

       We look at two estimates of the eﬀect of the coup: abnormal returns during

the coup window and abnormal returns on the first day of the new regime. We

define the coup window as the period from and including the first day of the coup

to and including the first day of the new regime (the last day of the coup attempt

in the case of Cuba). These dates are listed in Table VII.

       Over the duration of the coup, the average cumulative return across countries

was 12.1%. The result is slightly higher at 13.4% when we restrict attention to the

successful coups. The first day of the new government measure is slightly lower for

both the full as well as successful coups samples at 10.0% and 11.8% respectively.

       The individual country estimates are also relatively similar across the two

measures for most of our sample. Chile and Congo’s coups are both one day events,

and so the eﬀect is identical across measures: 6.1% and significant at the 5% level

for Chile and 8.7% and insignificant at conventional levels for Congo. The eﬀects

for Cuba are near -5% for both measures. The first day of the new government

eﬀect is significant at the 1% level, reinforcing that there is belief in the possibility

of a successful coup in Cuba7 . The coup window eﬀect is larger for Iran than the

first day of the new government. The coup window eﬀect, 18.8%, is significant at

the 10% level; the first day of the new government eﬀect is substantially smaller

at 7.0%. For Guatemala, the sign actually flips. The coup window eﬀect for

Guatemala is actually negative and somewhat sizeable. The first day of the new
   7
    In a prior version of the paper, we also included an estimate of the return on the first
day of the coup. For Cuba, the estimate was positive and significant, reinforcing the view
that some traders thought that a successful coup was possible.



                                            25
government eﬀect, however, is quite a bit larger and positive in sign. The two

numbers are -10.3% and 22.7%, the latter number being statistically significant at

the 1% level. We attribute the stock price fall over the coup window to the fact

that the junta which initially took power when Arbenz resigned did not support

the return of assets to United Fruit. Further exacerbating the uncertainty around

United Fruit assets, the eleven days following Arbenz’s resignation saw four interim

governments come to power. Finally, the candidate backed by the CIA, Castillo

Armas, took power (Gleijeses 1991). Despite the uncertainty, Armas eventually

returned United Fruit assets.

       We now compare the magnitudes of the net authorization events to the coup

event eﬀects. We use the country-specific 13 day s in order to compute the

value per authorization for each country. The longer horizon return is used in

order to capture the full asset price change due to a leaked authorization. The

total rise in the stock price due to authorizations is then just one plus the return to

an authorization raised to the power of the net number of events8 plus the return

over the coup window:


(5)                          (1 +  ) (1 +  )


where  is the thirteen day cumulative abnormal return in country  

is the net number of authorization events, and  is the cumulative abnormal
   8
    In the case of Guatemala, the number of net events is two out of total four events
since one event was an aborted coup and thus counted as negative; in the case of Congo,
the number of net events is one, because out of five events, two are negative; in the case
of Cuba, the net events is two because two of the six events are negative. For the pooled
country samples, we use the mean number of events across countries as the net events.
Thus gives us 2.6 for the full country sample and 2.4 for the successful coups sample.



                                           26
return in country  on the first day of the new regime. We use the return on

the first day of the new government because, due to the length of the coup in

Guatemala and the ensuing political instability after the end of the Arbenz regime,

there is a net negative change in the stock price over the exact coup window.

   The results are listed in Table VII. While we can combine the eﬀects of the

authorization events and the coup itself in most of the countries, the failure of

the operation in Cuba makes interpretation of the resulting comparison diﬃcult.

Thus we interpret the Cuba numbers as the relative magnitude of stock price

movements from the coup event and the authorization events. The inclusion of

Cuba in our cross-country sample also makes the full sample decomposition diﬃcult

to interpret. Although we report both the Cuba decomposition and full sample

decomposition, we focus on the successful coup sample and the other 4 countries.

   If we assume the only source of coup-related asset price movements are our

events, together with the coup itself, we can estimate the total gains from the

coup. The average gain per authorization in the all country sample is 12.0%, and

the mean return on the first day of the post-coup regime is 10.0%. For the set of

successful coups, the gains from authorization events were roughly three times that

from the coup events; 75.5% of the relative gains come from authorization events.

By country, the total gains from the coup ranged greatly. For a fully exposed

company, the returns range from 14.1% in Chile to 77.1% in Guatemala. We also

compute that the relative percentage benefit of the coup attributable to ex-ante

authorization events, which amounted to 55.0% in Chile, 66.1% in Guatemala,

72.4% in Congo, and 86.9% in Iran. Overall, much of the gains from the coup

occurred before the coup itself due to speculation from top-secret information. This



                                        27
suggests that estimates of the value of the coup to a company that only considered

the stock price reaction to the coup itself would be dramatically understated.



                          VII        Conclusion
Covert operations organized and abetted by foreign governments have played a

substantial role in the political and economic development of poorer countries

around the world. We look at CIA-backed coups against governments which had

nationalized a considerable amount of foreign investment. Using an event-study

methodology, we find that private information regarding coup authorizations and

planning increased the stock prices of expropriated multinationals that stood to

benefit from the regime change. The presence of these abnormal returns suggests

that there were leaks of classified information to asset traders. Consistent with

theories of asset price determination under private information, this information

often took some time to be fully reflected in the stock price.

   We find that coup authorizations, on net, contributed substantially more to

stock price rises of highly exposed companies than the coup events themselves.

This suggests that most of the value of the coup to the aﬀected companies had

already been anticipated and incorporated into the asset price before the operation

was undertaken.

   Our results are robust to a variety of controls for alternate sources of information,

including public events and newspaper articles. They are also robust across countries

with the exception of Cuba. The anomalous results for Cuba are potentially due

to public information leaks and inadequate organization that surrounded that

particular coup attempt. Our results are consistent with evidence in political

                                         28
science that business interests exert disproportionate influence on foreign policy

(Jacobs and Page 2005), as well as historical accounts which suggest that protecting

foreign investments was a motivation for undertaking regime change (Kinzer 2006).

However, further empirical research is needed to uncover whether or not economic

factors were decisive determinants of U.S. government decisions to covertly overthrow

foreign governments.



UNIVERSITY OF MASSACHUSETTS-AMHERST

COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY AND IIES, STOCKHOLM UNIVERSITY

COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY



                          VIII        References
    Allen, Franklin, Stephen Morris, and Hyun Shin, “Beauty Contests and

    Bubbles”, Review of Financial Studies 19 (2006), 719—752.

    Andrews, Donald, “End-of-sample Instability Tests”, Econometrica 71 (2003),

    1661—1694.

    Acemoglu, Daron, and James Robinson, Economic Origins of Dictatorship

    and Democracy, (Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press, 2006).

    Campbell, John, Andrew Lo, and Craig Mackinlay, The Econometrics of

    Financial Markets, (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1997).

    Chomsky, Noam, Turning the Tide: U.S. Intervention in Central America

    and the Struggle for Peace, (Cambridge, MA: South End Press, 1986).


                                        29
Corrado, Charles, “A Nonparametric Test for Abnormal Security-Price

Performance in Event Studies”, Journal of Financial Economics 23 (1989),

385—95.

Corrado, Charles, and Terry Zivney, “The Specification and Power of the Sign

Test in Event Study Hypothesis Tests Using Daily Stock Returns”, Journal

of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 27 (1992), 465—478.

Cornell, Bradford, and Erik R. Sirri, “The Reaction of Investors and Stock

Prices to Insider Trading”, Journal of Finance 47 (1992), 1031—1059.

DellaVigna, Stefano, and Eliana La Ferrara, “Detecting Illegal Arms Trade”,

American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 2 (2010), 26—57.

De Witte, Ludo, The Assassination of Lumumba, (New York, NY: Verso,

2001).

Easterly, William, Nathan Nunn, Shankar Satyanath, and Dan Berger,

“Commercial Imperialim? Political Influence and Trade during the Cold War

”, NBER Working Paper No. 15981, May 2010.

Faccio, Mara, “Politically Connected Firms”, The American Economic

Review 96 (2006), 369—386.

Fisman, Raymond, “Estimating the Value of Political Connections”,

American Economic Review 91 (2001), 1095—1102.

Gleijeses, Piero, Shattered Hope: The Guatemalan Revolution and the United

States, (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1991).



                                  30
Jacobs, Lawrence, and Benjamin I. Page, “Who Influences U.S. Foreign

Policy?”, American Political Science Review 99 (2005), 107-124.

Knight, Brian, “Are Policy Platforms Capitalized into Equity Prices?

Evidence from the Bush/Gore 2000 Presidential Election”, Journal of Public

Economics 90 (2006), 751—773.

Guidolin, Massimo, and Eliana La Ferrara, “Diamonds Are Forever, Wars

Are Not. Is Conflict Bad for Private Firms?”, American Economic Review 97

(2007), 1978—1993.

Johnson, Loch, “Covert Action and Accountability: Decision-Making for

America’s Secret Foreign Policy”, International Studies Quarterly 33 (1989),

81—109.

Kinzer, Stephen, Overthrow: America’s Century of Regime Change from

Hawaii to Iraq, (New York, NY: Times Books Press, 2006).

Meulbroek, Lisa, “An Empirical Analysis of Insider Trading”, Journal of

Finance 48 (1992), 1661—1699.

Snowberg, Erik, Justin Wolfers, and Eric Zeitzwitz, “Partisan Impacts on the

Economy: Evidence from Prediction Markets and Close Elections”, Quarterly

Journal of Economics, 122(2007), 807—829

Wang, Jiang, “A model of competitive stock trading volume”, Journal of

Political Economy 102 (1994), 127—169

Weiner, Tim, Legacy of Ashes: A History of the CIA, (New York, NY:

Doubleday Press, 2007).

                                  31
Wyden, Peter, Bay of Pigs: The Untold Story, (New York, NY: Simon and

Schuster, 1979).




                               32
                                                                      Table I
                                                                   Coup Selection


                                                                    Planning Docs
           Project                  Country             Year         Declassified                    Description                    Coup       Exprop.

Ajax                            Iran                1953                   Yes           Coup against Mossadeq                       Yes          Yes
FU/Belt                         Chile               1970-73                Yes           Coup against Allende                        Yes          Yes
Bloodstone                      Germany             1946                   No            Recruitment of Nazis                        No           No
Brushfire                       US                  1955                   Yes           Propaganda at Universities                  No           No
Camelot                         Chile               1960s                  No            Funded Anthro. Research                     No           NA
ST/Circus                       Tibet               1955                   No            Trained Tibetan Rebels                      Yes          No
Democracy                       Nicaragua           1985                   No            Anti-Sandinista Operations                  No           Yes
IA/Feature                      Angola              1975                   No            Supported Savimbi                           No           Yes
Fiend                           Albania             1949                   No            Insurgency                                  Yes          No
Fortune/PB/Success              Guatemala           1952-54                Yes           Coup Against Arbenz                         Yes          Yes
PM/Forget                       All over            1950s                  No            Pro-U.S. Media Distortion                   No           NA
Haik                            Indonesia           1956/57                No            Military Support for Rebels                 Yes          Yes
HardNose                        Vietnam             1965                   No            Disrupt Viet Cong Supplies                  No           No
Momentum                        Laos                1959                   No            Trained Hmong in Laos                       No           No
Mongoose                        Cuba                1961                   Yes           Post-Bay of Pigs Operations                 No           Yes
Opera                           France              1951                   No            Electoral Manipulations                     No           No
Paper                           China               1951                   No            Invasion from Burma                         No           No
Stole                           N. Korea            1950/51                No            Sabotage                                    No           No
Tiger                           Syria               1956                   Yes           Assassination Attempts                      No           No
Washtub                         Guatemala           1954                   Yes           Anti-Arbenz Propaganda                      No           Yes
Wizard                          Congo               1960                   Yes           Lumumba Assassination                       Yes          Yes
Zapata                          Cuba                1960-61                Yes           Bay of Pigs                                 Yes          Yes



Notes: (1.) Project is the name of the operation, (2.) Country is the target country of the operation, (3.) Year is the year when the operation was carried
out, (4.) Planning documents records yes if the planning documents are publicly available, (5.) Description is a description of the operation, (6.) Coup
is recorded as yes if a coup was planned as part of the operation and no otherwise, and (7.) Exprop. refers to whether or not the regime nationalized
(or expropriated) property from multinational firms operating within the country.
                                                                       Table II
                                                            Authorization Event Selection


         Date                       Country            Description                                                                       Good      Cancelled
September 15, 1970                 Chile               Nixon Authorizes Anti-Allende Plan (Incl. Poss. Coup)                              Y           N
January 28, 1971                   Chile               40 Committee Appropriates $1.2 Million                                             Y           N
October 26, 1972                   Chile               40 Committee Appropriates $1.4 Million                                             Y           N
August 20, 1973                    Chile               40 Committee Appropriates $1 Million                                               Y           N

August 18, 1960                    Congo               Eisenhower Endorses Lumumba's Elimination                                           Y             Y
September 12, 1960                 Congo               Belgian Operation Barracuda Begins                                                  Y             Y
October 11, 1960                   Congo               Operation Barracuda Cancelled                                                       N             Y
December 5, 1960                   Congo               CIA Stops Operation                                                                 N             Y
January 18, 1961                   Congo               Lumumba Secretly Killed                                                             Y             N

March 17, 1960                     Cuba                Eisenhower Approves Plan to Overthrow Castro                                        Y             N
August 18, 1960                    Cuba                Eisenhower Approves $13 Million to Overthrow Castro                                 Y             N
January 30, 1961                   Cuba                Kennedy Authorizes Continuing Bay of Pigs Op                                        Y             N
November 4, 1961                   Cuba                Operation Mongoose Planning Authorized                                              Y             Y
February 26, 1962                  Cuba                Operation Mongoose Scaled Back                                                      N             Y
October 30, 1962                   Cuba                Operation Mongoose Cancelled                                                        N             Y

August 18, 1952                    Guatemala           DCIA Approves PBFortune (Coup to Overthrow Arbenz)                                  Y             Y
October 8, 1952                    Guatemala           PBFortune Halted                                                                    N             Y
December 9, 1953                   Guatemala           DCIA Approves PBSuccess (Coup to Overthrow Arbenz)                                  Y             N
April 19, 1954                     Guatemala           Full Approval Given to PBSuccess                                                    Y             N

June 19, 1953                      Iran                CIA/MI6 Both Approve Coup                                                           Y             N
July 1, 1953                       Iran                Churchill Approves Coup                                                             Y             N
July 11, 1953                      Iran                Eisenhower Appoves Coup                                                             Y             N



Notes: (1.) Date is the date of the event, (2.) Country is the target country of the coup attempt, (3.) Description gives a brief description of the event, (4.)
Good is coded as Y if the event should raise the share value of the company and N if the event should lower the share value of the company, (5.)
Cancelled is coded as Y if the operation was cancelled and N if it was executed, (6.) The 40 Committee was the subgroup of the executive branch
National Security Council responsible for authorizing covert actions after 1964.
                                                                   Table III
                                                                Summary Statistics


                                                                       Variable

                                                                                                           Mean                               Daily Avg.
                                                      4-Digit                    Exprop.                   (Raw       SD (Raw                   NYT
         Company                 Country       N        SIC     Market Cap        Value      Exposure     Return)      Return)     Volume      Stories
Anaconda Co                      Chile       2224       3333      4.80E+08      3.20E+08      0.6666       0.0000      0.0234     24298.61      0.5494
Bethlehem Steel Corp             Chile       2225       3312      9.79E+08      2.50E+07      0.0255       0.0002      0.0177      36475.6      0.5494
Cerro Corp                       Chile       2224       1031      1.53E+08      1.41E+07      0.0923      -0.0001      0.0231      11858.5      0.5494
General Tire & Rubr Co           Chile       2225       3011      3.29E+08      1.20E+07      0.0365      -0.0002      0.0188      14514.7      0.5494
International Tel & Teleg Corp Chile         2223       3662      2.57E+09      1.07E+08      0.0417       0.0000      0.0183      61939.7      0.5501
Kennecott Copper Corp            Chile       2225       3331      1.33E+09      2.17E+08      0.1633       0.0002      0.0194      31554.1      0.5494


Union Miniere                    Congo       1124       1021      1.85E+11      6.25E+10      0.3379      -0.0009      0.0268                   0.8823


American Sugar Refng Co          Cuba        2085       2061      5.84E+07      5.52E+07      0.9452       0.0007      0.0167       709.2       2.6749
Canada Dry Corp                  Cuba        2088       2090      4.90E+07      1.11E+06      0.0227       0.0003      0.0127      1949.1       2.6733
Coca Cola Co                     Cuba        2087       2090      6.05E+08      1.87E+07      0.0310       0.0005      0.0115      2301.3       2.6592
Colgate Palmolive Co             Cuba        2087       2841      2.79E+08      9.88E+06      0.0354       0.0006      0.0167      3880.8       2.6740
Continental Can Inc              Cuba        2089       3411      5.55E+08      6.07E+06      0.0109      -0.0001      0.0165      4590.7       2.6696
Freeport Sulphur Co              Cuba        2089       1477      2.26E+08      6.02E+07      0.2658       0.0002      0.0171      2730.5       2.6725
International Tel & Teleg Corp Cuba          2087       3662      5.40E+08      8.90E+07      0.1649       0.0005      0.0206      11711.5      2.6714
Lone Star Cement Corp            Cuba        2087       3272      2.52E+08      1.69E+07      0.0672       0.0001      0.0163      3543.9       2.6716
Swift & Co                       Cuba        2088       2011      2.44E+08      4.05E+06      0.0166       0.0000      0.0127      2607.2       2.6738
United Fruit Co                  Cuba        2088       2062      3.03E+08      5.88E+07      0.1941      -0.0002      0.0165      7255.9       2.6733
Woolworth F W Co                 Cuba        2088       5331      5.58E+08      6.26E+06      0.0112       0.0002      0.0106      3537.8       2.6655


United Fruit Co                  Guatemala 3469         120       5.31E+08      7.83E+07      0.1475       0.0001      0.0116      3412.3       0.2170


Anglo-Iranian                    Iran        2391       2910      7.46E+09      2.31E+09      0.3103       0.0006      0.0204                   0.7525




Notes: (1.) Summary statistics by country and company are shown over the event window, (2.) N gives the number of observations for the majority of
listed variables for a given company in a given country; in some cases, particular variables are missing for a few days for a given company/country, (3.)
Market Cap is the average price times the outstanding shares starting two years before the nationalizing regime comes to power and ending one year
before the nationalizing regime comes to power, (4.) Expropriated Value is the dollar amount of the assets that were expropriated from the company by
the coup country government, (5.) Exposure is the ratio of nationalized to total assets for the company/country, (6.) Raw returns and volume are at the
daily level, (7.) Daily Average NYT Stories are daily counts of articles in the New York Times which mention both a country and the country's leader by
name.
                                                    Table IV
                             Effect of Secret Coup Authorizations on Stock Returns

                                    Main Effects - Cumulative Abnormal Returns


                            (0,0)            (0,3)         (0,6)         (0,9)         (0,12)         (0,15)

All Coups                   0.0435           0.0938        0.0990        0.1055         0.1204        0.1342
                         (0.0162)***      (0.0270)***   (0.0345)***   (0.0390)***    (0.0424)***    (0.0522)**
                            22157            22157         22157         22157          22157         22157

Successful Coups            0.0551           0.1208        0.1274        0.1309         0.1459        0.1640
                         (0.0201)***      (0.0336)***   (0.0425)***   (0.0481)***    (0.0523)***    (0.0647)**
                             8555             8555          8555          8555           8555          8555

Cancelled Coups            0.0729           0.1341        0.1414        0.1359         0.1564         0.1971
                         (0.0337)**       (0.0546)**    (0.0681)**     (0.0730)*     (0.0777)**      (0.1018)*
                           15257            15257         15257          15257         15257           15257

Chile                      -0.0095          0.0172        0.0003        0.0214         0.0183         0.0104
                          (0.0066)         (0.0274)      (0.0373)      (0.0491)       (0.0510)       (0.0620)
                            6091             6091          6091          6091           6091           6091

Congo                      0.1667           0.2270        0.2014        0.2429         0.2283         0.2581
                         (0.0771)**        (0.1196)*     (0.1335)      (0.1426)*      (0.1546)       (0.1719)
                             421              421           421           421            421            421

Congo-Belgium events        0.2730          0.2632        0.3179        0.4260         0.3914         0.4622
                         (0.0794)***       (0.1895)      (0.1972)     (0.2029)**      (0.2182)*     (0.2260)**
                              421             421           421           421            421            421

Cuba                       -0.0030          -0.0141       -0.0147       0.0039         0.0183         0.0147
                          (0.0079)         (0.0125)      (0.0178)      (0.0202)       (0.0222)       (0.0263)
                            13602            13602         13602        13602          13602          13602

Guatemala                  0.0491            0.1650       0.2049        0.1365         0.2011         0.1859
                         (0.0203)**       (0.0530)***   (0.0896)**     (0.1136)       (0.1274)       (0.1662)
                            1234              1234         1234          1234           1234           1234

Iran                       0.0144            0.0739       0.1030         0.1229         0.1359        0.2017
                          (0.0110)        (0.0184)***   (0.0428)**    (0.0385)***    (0.0349)***    (0.0792)**
                             809               809          809            809            809           809

Notes: (1.) For single country regressions, the reported coefficient is on an indicator for authorization events
interacted with company exposure, muliplied by the length of the window, (2.) Multi-country regressions report
the mean of the country coefficients, (3.) All regressions control for an interaction of a company dummy (or
country-specific company dummy for multi-country regressions) with the four Fama-French factors, (4.) All dates
where a company changed its name or changed its outstanding shares by more than 5% were dropped, (5.) One
day price changes greater than 50% in magnitude were dropped, (6.) "Successful coups" excludes Cuba, (7.)
"Cancelled coups" only uses authorizations and deauthorizations of coups that were eventually cancelled, (8.)
Column numbers at the top in parentheses denote the number of days before and after the authorizations which are
included as part of the dummy variable for the authorization event, e.g., (0,3) refers to the return between the
event date and three days after the event date, (9.) Standard errors reported in parentheses are the maximum of
clustered by company, clustered by date, and robust, (10.) Statistical significance at 10%, 5% and 1% levels is
denoted by *,**, and *** respectively.
                                                           Table V
                                                          Robustness


                 Raw         Public Events/NYT      No NYT News            Trend          Market      Matched          Log
               Returns                                Subsample           Controls       Placebo      Placebo        Volume
All Coups       0.0947              0.0723              0.1249             0.0989         0.0002       0.0068        19.0429
             (0.0282)***         (0.0222)***         (0.0137)***        (0.0034)***      (0.0011)     (0.0216)     (2.2102)***
                22157               22157                7123              22157          22157        17239          20895

Successful    0.1210                0.0939               0.1153            0.1259        -0.0013       0.0111        26.4944
Coups      (0.0350)***           (0.0275)***          (0.0332)***       (0.0372)***      (0.0082)     (0.0268)     (3.3202)***
               8555                  8555                 5224              8555           8555         6670           7324

Chile           0.0365              0.0191               0.1006            0.0243         0.0154      -0.0149        20.4970
               (0.0371)            (0.0279)             (0.0765)          (0.0319)       (0.0136)     (0.0317)     (0.7534)***
                 6091                6091                 3530              6091           6091         4764           6091

Congo          0.2274               0.1202                  .             0.2532         -0.0067      -0.0245            .
              (0.1180)*            (0.0909)                 .           (0.1282)**       (0.0133)     (0.0216)           .
                 421                  421                   .               421             421          322             .

Cuba           -0.0103             -0.0154               0.0276           -0.0098         0.0066      -0.0085         4.1386
               (0.0138)            (0.0124)             (0.0365)          (0.0144)       (0.0088)     (0.0145)      (2.5058)*
                13602               13602                 1899             13602          13602        10569          13571

Guatemala       0.1394              0.1648               0.1373            0.1909        -0.0311       0.0255        32.4391
              (0.0628)**         (0.0530)***           (0.0603)**       (0.0621)***      (0.0224)     (0.0916)     (12.5956)**
                 1234                1234                 1068              1234           1234          965          1233

Iran            0.0806              0.0738               0.1061            0.0359         0.0171       0.0528            .
             (0 0189)***
             (0.0189)***         (0 0189)***
                                 (0.0189)***          (0 0137)***
                                                      (0.0137)***         (0 0305)
                                                                          (0.0305)       (0 0146)
                                                                                         (0.0146)     (0 0400)
                                                                                                      (0.0400)           .
                  809                 809                  398               809            809          619             .




Notes: (1.) Estimates are on (0,3) returns, (2.) For single country regressions, the reported coefficient is on an indicator for
authorization events interacted with company exposure, muliplied by the length of the window (i.e., 4), (3.) Multi-country
regressions report the mean of the country coefficients, (4.) Except for the "Raw returns" and "Market Placebo"
specifications, regressions control for an interaction of a company dummy (or country-specific company dummy for multi-
country regressions) with the four Fama-French factors, (5.) All dates where a company changed its name or changed its
outstanding shares by more than 5% were dropped, (6.) One day price changes greater than 50% in magnitude were
dropped, (7.) "Successful coups" excludes Cuba, (8.) Public information controls include (a.) an exposure-interacted
country specific effect of the number of New York Times articles mentioning a country and its leader by name and (b.)
country-specific interaction between public event dummies and exposure, (9.) No NYT column drops all observations with
any New York Times articles mentioning a country and its leader by name on that date, (10.) "Trend controls" control for
local trends by including an additional dummy in an 20 day symmetric window around each authorization date,
 (11.) "Market Placebo" regresses the NYSE return on the exposure-interacted event dates, (12.) "Matched Placebo"
replaces each company's stock return with that of the company with the closest market capitalization, factor loadings, and
mean and standard deviation of returns within the same 3-digit SIC code, (13.) Log Volume runs the baseline specification
with the log of volume as the dependent variable, (14.) Standard errors reported in parentheses are the maximum of
clustered by company, clustered by date, and robust, (15.) Statistical significance at 10%, 5% and 1% levels is denoted by
*,**, and *** respectively.
                                                                                      Table VI
                                                                                 Small Sample Tests


                                                                     Successful
                                                5 Country              Coups                   Chile              Congo                  Cuba           Guatemala                  Iran
                      4 Day CAR                   0.0262                0.0393                0.0189              0.0768                -0.0086           0.0239               0.0243
                      Asymptotic
                     Standard Error            (0.0030)***           (0.0039)***             (0.0149)          (0.0195)***             (0.0076)         (0.0093)**            (0.0165)
                        Number of                    22                    16                    4                   5                      6                 4                     3
                         Events

Binomial Sign Number Above                           18                    15                    3                   5                      3                 4                     3
    Test        Median
                        P-Value:                0.0022***             0.0003***               0.3125            0.0313**                0.6563            0.0625*              0.1250
                        Analytical
                         P-Value:               0.0035***             0.0006***               0.3294            0.0355**                0.6602            0.0688*              0.1357
                        Simulated

                     Number Above                    13                    12                    2                   5                      1                 3                     2
                     80th Percentile

                        P-Value:                0.0001 ***            0.0000***               0.1808            0.0003***               0.7395           0.0272**              0.1040
                        Analytical

                         P-Value:                0.0002**             0.0000***               0.1921            0.0005***               0.7403           0.0314**              0.1033
                        Simulated

                     Number Above                     8                     8                    2                   3                      0                 3                     0
                     90th Percentile

                        P-Value:                0.0009***             0.0001***              0.0523*           0.00856***               1.0000          0.0037***              1.0000
                        Analytical

                         P-Value:                0.0011**             0.0003***              0.0502*            0.0126**                1.0000          0.0059***              1.0000
                        Simulated

Uniform Rank
    Test               Mean Rank                  0.7440                0.8195                0.6417              0.9350                0.4418            0.8803               0.8211


                        P-Value:                0.0000***             0.0000***               0.1700            0.0000***               0.6852          0.0022***             0.0257**
                        Analytical

                         P-Value:               0.0006***             0.0000***               0.1766            0.0001***               0.6952          0.0033***             0.0261**
                        Simulated

Notes I: (1.) This table reports 4 Day Cumulative Abnormal Returns using (exposure weighted) company portfolios for individual countries, (2) Multi-country estimates report
averages of country portofolio returns, (3) Asymptotic standard error is computed using standard deviations of returns in the estimation sample; (4) , and *, **, and *** denote
statistical significance using asymptotic inference at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively, (3) “Successful Coups” excludes Cuba.
Notes II (For the Binomial Sign Test): (1.) "Number above the median" (and 80th and 90th percentiles) reports the number of 4-day events above the median (and 80th and 90th
percentile) of the abnormal return distribution in the estimation window, (2.) "P-Value: Analytical" reports the associated P-Value using the Binomial Distribution to give the
probability of having at least X number of events above the cutoff (median or80th or 90th percentile), (3.) "P-Value: Simulated" reports the p-value for a simulated distribution of
having at least X number of events above the cutoff (median or 80th percentile or 90th percentile) out of Y total events, accounting for the cutoff value being estimated using the actual
    b III f(For
Notes       d thei Uniform
                    th   ti Rank
                              ti Test):l (1.) "Mean rank" is the average percentile rank of abnormal returns for events relative to the estimation window. (2.) "P-Value: Analytical" uses
the uniform distribution to calculate the probability of having an average rank of K events greater than or equal to M, (3.) "P-Value: Simulated" reports the p-value for a simulated
distribution of having an average of K events having rank greater than or equal to M, accounting for the ranks being estimated using the actual number of days in the estimation
sample.
                                                                                    Table VII
                                                              Gains From Coup and Authorization Events


                                                                         First Day of             12 Day           Total Gain           Total Gain from            Relative Gain
                                                      Coup                   New                   Auth.           from Auth.            Auth and First             From Auth.
                Coup Begin Coup End                  Window              Government               Effect             Events              Day New Gov                  Events

All                                                   0.1211                0.1004                0.1204              0.3136                 0.4455                    0.7575
                                                   (0.0463)***           (0.0259)***
                                                      22173                 22165

Top 4                                                0.1335                 0.1179                0.1459              0.4248                 0.5928                    0.7828
                                                   (0.0603)**            (0.0419)***
                                                      8571                   8563

Chile            9/11/1973        9/11/1973          0.0613                 0.0613                0.0183              0.0750                 0.1410                    0.5503
                                                   (0.0250)**             (0.0250)**
                                                      6097                   6097

Congo             2/5/1961         2/5/1961           0.0869                0.0869                0.2283              0.2283                 0.3350                    0.7242
                                                     (0.0947)              (0.0947)
                                                        421                   421

Cuba             4/15/1961        4/20/1961           -0.0445              -0.0546                0.0183              0.0370                 (0.0196)                 (2.1047)
                                                     (0.0283)            (0.0141)***
                                                       13602                13602

Guatemala        6/19/1954        6/28/1954           -0.1030               0.2274                0.2011              0.4426                 0.7706                    0.6606
                                                     (0.1737)            (0.0704)***
                                                                             1235

Iran             8/15/1953        8/20/1953          0.1875                 0.0703                0.1359              0.4657                 0.5686                    0.8689
                                                    (0.1054)*              (0.0526)
                                                       813                    810


Notes: (1.) For single country regressions, the reported coefficient is on an indicator for the relevant coup period interacted with company exposure, muliplied by the length of the
relevant coup period, (2.) Multi-country regressions report the mean of the country coefficients, (3.) The coup window is defined as the full length of time between beginning and
end of the coup , the first day of the coup, or the first day of the new government after the coup (in the case of Cuba this is the first day after the end of the invasion), (4.) All
regressions control for an interaction of a company dummy (or country-specific company dummy for multi-country regressions) with the four Fama-French factors, (5.) All dates
where a company changed its name or changed its outstanding shares by more than 5% were dropped, (6.) Since Cuba's coup was unssuccesful, the stock price changes are
negative, (7.) Standard errors reported in parentheses are the maximum of clustered by company, clustered by date, and robust. (8.) Statistical significance at 10%, 5% and 1%
levels is denoted by *,**, and *** respectively. (9.) Per event authorization event gain is the cumulative abnormal return over a thirteen day period for a company in a country
estimated individually, (10.) Total gains from authorization events is one plus the abnormal return to the power of the number of net events; in the case of Guatemala, the number
of net events is 2 out of total 4 events since one event was an aborted coup and thus counted as negative; in the case of Congo, the number of net events is 1, because out of 5
events, two are negative; in the case of Cuba, the net events is 2 because 2 of the 6 events are negative, (11.) The multi-country decomposition raises one plus the estimated mean
multi-country effect to the power of the average number of events across the relevant countries and uses the relevant multi-country first day of new government estimate for the
gain from the coup event, (12.) The total gain from authorization plus coup events is the cumulative gain from the authorization events times one plus the gain from the first day of
the new government, (13.) The relative gain from authorization events is the share of the total gain from the coup (including pre-coup stock market rises) due to authorization
events.
                                                                              Figure I
                                                              Cumulative Abnormal Returns - All Countries
 0.3


0.25


 0.2


0.15


 0.1


0.05
CAR




      0


-0.05


 -0.1


-0.15


 -0.2


-0.25
          -20   -18     -16    -14     -12    -10      -8     -6      -4      -2      0      2       4       6      8      10      12      14     16      18   20
                                                                                   Days

            Notes: (1.) The thicker line (and the diamond symbols) represent the average of country-specific coefficients on an indicator for authorization
            events interacted with company exposure, muliplied by the length of the window, (2.) The horizontal axis labels denote the number of days
            before or after the authorizations which are included as part of the dummy variable for the authorization event, e.g., 4 refers to the return
            between the event date and four days after the event date while -4 refers to the return between four days prior to the event date and the event
            date, (3.) All regressions control for an interaction of a country-specific company dummy with the four Fama-French factors, (4.) All dates
            where a company changed its name or changed its outstanding shares by more than 5% were dropped, (5.) One day price changes greater than
            50% in magnitude were dropped, (5.) The thinner lines (and square symbols) represent the 95% confidence interval using standard errors that
            are the maximum of clustered by company, clustered by date, and robust.
                                                      Figure IIa                                                                                                                                         Figure IIb
                                          Chile Cumulative Abnormal Returns                                                                                                                   Congo Cumulative Abnormal Returns
             0.2                                                                                                                                                       0.8

            0.15
                                                                                                                                                                       0.6
             0.1
                                                                                                                                                                       0.4
            0.05

                 0                                                                                                                                                     0.2
CAR




            -0.05                                                                                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                                      CAR
             -0.1
                                                                                                                                                                      -0.2
            -0.15
                                                                                                                                                                      -0.4
             -0.2

            -0.25                                                                                                                                                     -0.6

             -0.3                                                                                                                                                     -0.8
                     -20 -18 -16 -14 -12 -10 -8        -6        -4        -2     0 2               4       6       8    10 12 14 16 18 20                                      -20 -18 -16 -14 -12 -10 -8     -6        -4        -2        0 2        4       6       8    10 12 14 16 18 20
                                                                                Days
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Days

                                                  Figure IIc                                                                                                                                                  Figure IId
                           Congo (Belgium events only) Cumulative Abnormal Returns                                                                                                                 Cuba Cumulative Abnormal Returns
        1.2
                                                                                                                                                                        0.1
             1

        0.8
                                                                                                                                                                      0.05
        0.6

        0.4
                                                                                                                                                                             0
        0.2
                                                                                                                                                                       CAR
             0
      CAR




                                                                                                                                                                  -0.05
       -0.2

       -0.4
                                                                                                                                                                       -0.1
       -0.6

       -0.8

            -1                                                                                                                                                    -0.15
                 -20 -18 -16 -14 -12 -10 -8            -6        -4        -2       0       2       4       6       8        10    12    14    16    18    20                    -20 -18 -16 -14 -12 -10 -8        -6        -4        -2     0 2       4       6       8    10 12 14 16 18 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Days
                                                                                    Days
                                                   Figure IIe                                                                                                                                                Figure IIf
                                      Guatemala Cumulative Abnormal Returns                                                                                                                      Iran Cumulative Abnormal Returns
      0.8                                                                                                                                                         0.4



      0.6
                                                                                                                                                                  0.3


      0.4
                                                                                                                                                                  0.2

      0.2
CAR




                                                                                                                                                                  0.1

        0

                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                                                CAR




  -0.2


                                                                                                                                                                 -0.1
  -0.4



  -0.6                                                                                                                                                           -0.2
             -20 -18 -16 -14 -12 -10 -8           -6        -4        -2        0       2       4       6       8       10    12    14    16    18    20                    -20 -18 -16 -14 -12 -10 -8        -6        -4        -2        0   2   4       6       8       10 12 14 16 18 20
                                                                            Days                                                                                                                                                            Days

                     Notes: (1.) The thicker line (and the diamond symbols) represent the coefficients on an indicator for authorization events interacted with company exposure, muliplied by the length of the window, (2.) The
                     horizontal axis labels denote the number of days before or after the authorizations which are included as part of the dummy variable for the authorization event, e.g., 4 refers to the return between the event d
                     and four days after the event date while -4 refers to the return between four days prior to the event date and the event date, (3.) All regressions control for an interaction of a company dummy with the four
                     Fama-French factors, (4.) All dates where a company changed its name or changed its outstanding shares by more than 5% were dropped, (5.) One day price changes greater than 50% in magnitude were
                     dropped, (6.) The thinner lines (and square symbols) represent the 95% confidence interval using standard errors that are the maximum of clustered by company, clustered by date, and robust.
                                                      Figure III
                                                Time-Shifted Placebos




                                                            0.2
       4-Day Abnormal Returns




                                                           0.15

                                                            0.1

                                                           0.05

                                                               0
                                -60   -40        -20               0               20                40                60
                                                          -0.05

                                                           -0.1

                                                        -0.15
                                      Number of Days Shifted From Actual Event Date


Notes: ((1.)) We pplot ((the thick line)) the average
                                                   g of country-specific
                                                              y p        coefficients for a regression
                                                                                              g        of daily
                                                                                                              y stock returns on
an indicator for authorization events interacted with company exposure and multiplied by the four day window including
and after an authorization event, (2.) The horizontal axis labels denote the number of days by which we shift the
authorization date, e.g., 20 represents the four day return if we shift the authorization day forward by 20 days, while -20
represents a four day return if we shift the authorization date backwards by 20 days, (3.) All regressions control for an
interaction of a country-specific company dummy with the four Fama-French factors, (4.) All dates where a company
changed its name or changed its outstanding shares by more than 5% were dropped, (5.) One day price changes greater
than 50% in magnitude were dropped, (6.) The dashed line represent the 95% confidence interval using standard errors
that are the maximum of standard errors clustered by company, clustered by date, and robust.
