                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 WHY SURPLUS CONSUMPTION IN THE HABIT MODEL MAY BE LESS PERSISTENT
                         THAN YOU THINK

                                          Anthony W. Lynch
                                           Oliver Randall

                                        Working Paper 16950
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16950


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2011




The authors would like to thank Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, Greg Du®ee, and participants at two NYU
seminars, the Wharton Brown Bag Macro Seminar, and a session of the 2011 AFA Meetings for helpful
comments and suggestions. All remaining errors are of course the authors' responsibility. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Anthony W. Lynch and Oliver Randall. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Why Surplus Consumption in the Habit Model May be Less Persistent than You Think
Anthony W. Lynch and Oliver Randall
NBER Working Paper No. 16950
April 2011, Revised August 2011
JEL No. D91,E21,G12

                                               ABSTRACT

In U.S. data, value stocks have higher expected excess returns and higher CAPM alphas than growth
stocks. We find the external-habit model of Campbell and Cochrane (1999) can generate a value premium
in both CAPM alpha and expected excess return so long as the persistence of the log surplus-consumption
ratio is not too high. In contrast, Lettau and Wachter (2007) find that when the log surplus-consumption
ratio is assumed to be highly persistent as in Campbell and Cochrane, the external-habit model generates
a growth premium in expected excess return. However, the micro evidence favors a less persistent
log surplus-consumption ratio. We choose a value for this persistence which is sufficiently low that
the most recent 2 years of log consumption contribute over 98% of all past consumption to log habit,
which is a much more reasonable number than the 25% contribution generated by the Lettau-Wachter
value. In our model, expected consumption is slowly mean-reverting, as in the long-run risk model
of Bansal and Yaron (2004), which is why our model is able to generate a price-dividend ratio for
aggregate equity that exhibits the high autocorrelation found in the data, despite the very low persistence
of the price-of-risk state variable. Our results suggest that an external habit model in the spirit of Campbell
and Cochrane can deliver an empirically sensible value premium once the persistence of the surplus
consumption ratio is calibrated to the micro evidence rather than set to a value close to one. When
we allow the conditional volatility of consumption growth to also be slowly mean reverting as in the
long-run risk model of Bansal and Yaron, our model is also able to generate empirically sensible predictability
of long-horizon returns using the price-dividend ratio, without eroding the value premium. Our results
also suggest that models with fast-moving habit can deliver several empirical properties of aggregate
dividend strips that have been recently documented.


Anthony W. Lynch
New York University
44 W. 4th Street, #9-190
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
alynch@stern.nyu.edu

Oliver Randall
New York University
44 W. 4th Street, #9-190
New York, NY 10012
orandall@stern.nyu.edu
1    Introduction


A number of papers have considered how habit preferences impact the moments of the aggregate
equity price-dividend ratio, the aggregate equity return, and the riskfree rate. Early papers by
Constantinides (1990), and Sundaresan (1989) show how preferences with internal habit can gen-
erate a higher equity premium for a given curvature parameter, γ, while Abel (1990) obtains a
similar result using external habit. One issue with habit preferences is its impact on the volatility
of the riskfree rate: many specifications generate too much relative to what we see in U.S. data.
Campbell and Cochrane (1999), hereafter CC, consider an economy with i.i.d. consumption and a
representative agent with external habit preferences, and model the habit process in such a way as
to produce a constant riskfree rate. They specify a process for the log consumption surplus, which
is defined to be the log of consumption in excess of habit scaled by consumption. The conditional
volatility of the log surplus is specified to vary inversely with the log surplus in such a way that
the effect of variation in the log surplus on the riskfree rate due to the intertemporal substitution
motive is exactly offset by its effect on the riskfree rate due to the precautionary saving motive.
The implication is that the shock to the price of risk is close to perfectly negatively correlated with
the shock to consumption growth in their specification. CC allow the log surplus to be a highly
persistent process so that in their economy the price-dividend ratio is also highly persistent and
long-horizon stock returns are forecastable using the price-dividend ratio. Both are features of U.S.
data.


Recently Lettau and Wachter (2007), hereafter LW, consider how the correlation between the shock
to the price of risk and the shock to log consumption growth affects the expected return differential
between value and growth stocks when the state variable driving the price of risk is highly persistent
and the mean of consumption growth is a slowly mean-reverting process as in Bansal and Yaron
(2004). They find that large negative correlation between the shock to the price-of-risk state
variable and the shock to consumption growth generates a growth premium for expected excess
returns, in contrast to the value premium found in U.S. data. To produce a value premium, they
set this correlation to zero. This finding raises the question whether habit preferences can generate
a value premium as in U.S. data.


When the log surplus is as persistent as in CC and LW, the two most recent years of consumption
contribute a much smaller fraction to the agent’s habit level (less than 26%) than all past consump-
tion from more than two years ago, which seems counterintuitive and appears to be inconsistent



                                                  2
with the micro evidence. The last two years of consumption would be expected to make a much
larger contribution to the agent’s habit level than the sum of the contributions to the habit level
by consumption from more than two years ago. Moreover, the 4 most recent years of consumption
still contribute less to the agent’s habit level than all past consumption from more than 4 years
ago.


Motivated by this intuition, our paper examines how a less persistent state variable for the price
of risk, which would be implied by a less persistent log surplus ratio, affects the moments of the
aggregate equity price-dividend ratio and return, and the expected return differential and CAPM-
alpha differential between value and growth stocks. Roughly matching the data Sharpe ratio and
expected price-dividend ratio for aggregate equity, we find that when the persistence of the price-
of-risk state variable is low, a large negative correlation between the shock to the price-of-risk state
variable and the shock to log consumption growth can generate a value premium for expected
excess returns and for CAPM alpha, consistent with U.S. data, and in contrast to LW’s findings
when the persistence of the price-of-risk state variable is high. We also find that, so long as the
conditional mean of consumption growth is allowed to be slowly mean-reverting as parameterized
by LW and Bansal and Yaron based on U.S. data, the price-dividend ratio exhibits first order
autocorrelation comparable to that in U.S. data even when the persistence of the price-of-risk
state variable is low. This is because the expression for the price-dividend ratio for zero-coupon
aggregate equity (which pays the aggregate market dividend at a given point in the future) suggests
that the autocorrelation of the aggregate market’s price-dividend ratio is approximately a weighted
average of the autocorrelations of the conditional mean of log consumption growth and price-of-risk
processes, and the mean of log consumption growth is still slowly mean-reverting.


Our baseline specification follows LW and assumes that the aggregate consumption process and the
aggregate dividend process are the same by calibrating both to the aggregate dividend process for
U.S. stocks. It is unable to generate the aggregate equity return volatility found in the data. In
addition to this specification, we also consider two specifications that allow the consumption process
to differ from the dividend process, by calibrating the consumption process to data and leaving the
dividend process the same. The first of these specifications continues to allow the aggregate equity
return volatility to be much lower than that in the data, and generates an even larger value premium
in both expected excess returns and CAPM alpha relative to the baseline specification that sets
aggregate consumption and dividend equal. The second of these specifications moves aggregate
equity return volatility much closer to the data, but still is able to generate a value premium in
expected excess return that is considerably larger than that in the baseline specification, and a

                                                   3
value premium in CAPM alpha that is similar in magnitude to that in the baseline specification.


Unfortunately, these three specifications, with their implicit assumption that log consumption
growth is homoscedastic, are unable to replicate the strong predictability of long-horizon equity
returns found in the data when the price-dividend ratio is used as the predictor. However, when the
consumption and dividend processes are specified to be different, we are able to obtain long-horizon
return predictability of a magnitude much closer to that in the data, and without drastically reduc-
ing the value premia, by allowing the conditional volatility of consumption growth to also be slowly
mean reverting. This specification with slowly mean reverting consumption volatility delivers value
premia in both expected excess return and CAPM alpha that are larger than for any of the other
three specifications: in fact, we are able to generate a value premium in expected excess return that
is very close to the one found in the data using a book-to-market sort. This specification also comes
very close to matching the volatility of aggregate equity return found in the data. Allowing the
conditional volatility of consumption growth to be an autoregressive process is in the spirit of the
second model in Bansal and Yaron (2004), which allows the conditional variance of consumption
growth to be an autoregressive process. Long run risk in consumption volatility also helps match
the data along several other dimensions: for example, while all our specifications counterfactually
deliver negative market return autocorrelation, the specification with long run risk in consumption
volatility, by producing the least negative autocorrelation, comes closest to matching the positive
autocorrelation in the data.


Thus, our results suggest that an external habit model in the spirit of CC can deliver an empirically
sensible value premium once the persistence of the surplus consumption ratio is calibrated to the
micro evidence rather than set to a value close to one. Simultaneously allowing the conditional
mean consumption growth to be slowly mean reverting delivers a log price-dividend ratio that
exhibits empirically sensible persistence, without eroding the value premium. Also allowing the
conditional volatility of consumption growth to be slowly mean reverting gives rise to empirically
sensible predictability of long-horizon returns using the price-dividend ratio, again without eroding
the value premium.


Our model also delivers many of the empirical results for aggregate dividend strips that have
recently been documented by van Binsbergen, Brandt, Koijen (2011). They find that the means,
volatilities and Sharpe ratios for monthly returns on assets that pay the S&P 500 dividend for on
average no more than the next 1.5 years are all larger than for the S&P 500 index itself. All our
models with fast-moving habit deliver these three implications for annual returns, while LW and


                                                 4
van Binsbergen, Brandt, Koijen (2011) show that the Lettau-Wachter model also delivers these
three implications for annual returns. In contrast, van Binsbergen, Brandt, Koijen (2011) and
LW find that the external habit model with slow-moving habit produces means, volatilities and
Sharpe ratios for annual returns on aggregate dividend strips that are increasing in maturity. Van
Binsbergen, Brandt, Koijen (2011) also find a higher R2 for the regression that uses asset price-
dividend ratio to forecast the monthly return on an asset paying the S&P 500 dividend for the next
1.5 years on average than for the regression that uses the S&P 500’s price-dividend ratio to forecast
the monthly return on the S&P 500 index. All our models and the Lettau-Wachter model deliver
this same result for quarterly returns. Thus, our model delivers the higher short-horizon return
predictability for short-maturity aggregate dividend strips than for the aggregate market itself that
van Binsbergen, Brandt, Koijen (2011) find empirically. In sum, these results suggest that models
with fast-moving habit can also deliver several empirical properties of aggregate dividend strips
that have been recently documented.


The micro evidence in support of slow-moving habit is quite weak. Brunnermeier and Nagel (2006)
test an implication of slow-moving habit that risky asset holdings as a fraction of financial wealth
increase in response to wealth increases, but find very little evidence in support of this hypothesis.
In contrast, when habit moves rapidly in response to recent consumption, the hypothesized increase
in risky asset holdings is much reduced, so this evidence does not contradict the presence of a habit
that moves rapidly in response to recent consumption. The idea behind the hypothesis is the
following. When habit is slow-moving, it is like a subsistence level. When utility is CRRA with a
subsistence level, the agent puts the present value of future subsistence levels into the riskless asset
and the rest into the CRRA-optimal portfolio. When wealth increases, the entire increase is placed
in the CRRA-optimal portfolio, causing the agent’s risky asset holding as a fraction of financial
wealth to increase. If habit is fast-moving, it will increase as consumption adjusts to the wealth
increase. Consequently, the agent will only put a fraction of the wealth increase in the CRRA-
optimal portfolio because the agent will be compelled to put a fraction of the wealth increase in the
riskless asset to cover the habit increase. Hence, the increase in the agent’s risky asset holding as
a fraction of wealth in response to a wealth increase is much smaller when the habit is fast-moving
rather than slow-moving in response to recent consumption.


With access to a unique credit-card panel data set, Ravina (2007) uses quarterly credit card pur-
chases as a measure of quarterly consumption and then estimates a habit model in which a house-
hold’s internal habit depends on its own consumption last quarter, and external habit depends on
current and last quarter’s consumption in the city where the household lived. Testing a version of

                                                   5
the habit model in which internal and external habit are subtracted directly from consumption in
the utility function, Ravina finds that the coefficient of lagged own consumption in internal habit is
0.5 and the coefficient on current household city consumption in external habit is 0.29. In contrast,
slow-moving habit implies that last period’s consumption has very little effect on this period’s habit,
which implies that these coefficients are too high to be consistent with slow-moving habit. At the
same time, if lagged own consumption growth exhibits substantial positive autocorrelation with
longer lags of own consumption growth, after controlling for the various household-specific controls
used by Ravina (2007), then slow-moving habit would also deliver a large positive coefficient on
lagged own consumption, due to measurement error associated with omitting lags longer than one
from the regression. However, Ravina (2007) reports that individual consumption growth exhibits
autocorrelations below 3.5% in absolute value for lags of 2 and 3 quarters, which suggests that
the large positive coefficient on own consumption growth is unlikely due to slow-moving habit and
measurement error associated with using only the first lag of own consumption growth. Dynan
(2000) uses a similar methodology to Ravina but a different data set, namely annual PSID data,
and finds coefficients on lagged own consumption that are insignificantly different from zero. How-
ever, Ravina’s data set allows her to use household-specific financial information as controls in the
estimation. Once Ravina omits these controls from the estimation, the coefficient on lagged own
consumption drops to 0.10, a value similar to that obtained by Dynan.


Our paper is closely related to a recent paper by Santos and Veronesi (2008) which, like LW, finds
that when firm cash flows are fractions of aggregate consumption flows, with value firms receiving
larger fractions of these flows in the near future and growth firms receiving larger fractions in the
distant future, habit preferences deliver a growth premium rather than a value premium. Santos
and Veronesi introduce cash flow heterogeneity across firms to obtain a value premium, but find
that the heterogenity needed is too high relative to that found in the data. Also related is a
paper by Bekaert and Engstrom (2009) that considers an economy whose representative agent has
persistent external habit preferences. Their innovation is that log consumption growth is comprised
of positively-skewed ”good environment” shocks and negatively-skewed ”bad environment” shocks,
which allows them to match higher moments of the time series of asset returns. The paper focuses
on the time-series, rather than the cross-section, of expected returns. Kroce, Lettau and Ludvigson
(2010) examine how incorporating limited information in a long-run risk model can result in short-
duration assets having higher expected returns than long-maturity assets, as in the data. Using
the long-run risk model of Bansal and Yaron for aggregate consumption growth together with
Epstein-Zin preferences, Kiku (2006) documents how value stocks have relatively higher exposures



                                                  6
to long-run consumption shocks while growth firm are more exposed to short-lived consumption
fluctuations, and then shows how these different exposures lead to a value premium in expected
return, CAPM alpha, and consumption-CAPM alpha. Finally, Hansen, Heaton, and Li (2008)
report that the cash flows of value stocks but not growth stocks exhibit positive comovement with
macroeconomic risks in the long run, and then examine how equilibrium pricing depend on investor
preferences and the cash flow horizon.


Section 2 describes the model while section 3 presents the calibration details. Results are in section
4, and section 5 concludes.



2     The Model


We consider two versions of a model that is in the spirit of LW.


2.1   Model with One Price of Risk Variable


The model has 4 shocks: a shock to dividend growth, a shock to expected dividend growth, a shock
to the price of risk variable, and a shock to consumption growth. These shocks are assumed to be
multivariate normal, and independent over time. Let Dtm denote aggregate dividends at time t,
and define dm         m
            t ≡ log (Dt ). It evolves as follows:


                                           ∆dm      m   m    m
                                             t+1 = g + zt + εt+1                                    (1)

with a time-varying conditional mean, g m + ztm , where ztm follows an AR(1) process:

                                              m
                                             zt+1 = φz ztm + εzt+1                                  (2)

with 0 ≤ φz < 1. Let Dt denote aggregate consumption at time t, and define dt ≡ log (Dt ). Log
aggregate consumption growth evolves as follows:

                                            ∆dt+1 = g + zt + εdt+1                                  (3)

            gm              ztm
where g ≡   δm   and zt ≡   δm .   The shock to dividend growth is composed of a levered version of the
shock to consumption growth plus an additional shock: εm      m d      u
                                                       t+1 ≡ δ εt+1 + εt+1 . This specification

allows separation between the aggregate dividend and aggregate consumption, with log dividend
growth a levered version of log consumption growth as in Abel (1999). In the base case, we set log

                                                      7
consumption growth equal to log market dividend growth by setting δ m = 1 and εu = 0. Define
σi2 ≡ σ 2 [εi ] for i = d, z, x, u, and σi,j ≡ σ[εi , εj ] and ρi,j ≡ ρ[εi , εj ] for i, j = d, z, x, u.


The stochastic discount factor is driven by a single state variable xt which also follows an AR(1)
process:
                                         xt+1 = (1 − φx )x̄ + φx xt + εxt+1                                (4)

with 0 ≤ φx < 1. We specify that only the shock to consumption growth is priced, and that the
stochastic discount factor takes the form:
                                          ½                   ¾
                                                  1     xt
                              Mt+1 = exp a + bzt − x2t − εdt+1 .                                           (5)
                                                  2     σd

Since the conditional log-normality of Mt+1 implies that Et [Mt+1 ] = exp {a + bzt }, the log of the
riskfree rate from time t to t + 1 is given by:

                                                    rtf ≡ −a − bzt                                         (6)

If b 6= 0, the riskless rate is time varying. Since the most relevant papers to ours, LW and CC, both
assume that the riskfree rate is constant, we assume this too, i.e. that b = 0, so we can directly
compare our results to theirs.


We consider four cases using this version of model. We examine a case, the LW case, that essentially
replicates LW by having the shocks to x and d be uncorrelated (ρx,d = 0), the x process highly
persistent (φx close to 1), and a consumption process that matches the dividend process which has
been calibrated to data. Our base case also sets the consumption process equal to the calibrated
dividend process, but allows the x process to be less persistent, as suggested by recent evidence
about the persistence of habit, and ρx,d = −0.99, as implied by the habit specification used in
CC. We also examine two wedge cases that resemble our base case except that the consumption
process is calibrated to data rather than matched to the dividend process. Further details of the
calibrations follow in section 3.


2.1.1      Price-Dividend Ratio and Expected Returns for Zero-coupon Equity


     m be the time-t price of a claim to zero-coupon market equity, paying off in n periods.
Let Pn,t
                                    m takes the following recursive form:
Following LW, it can be shown that Pn,t
                           m
                          Pn,t
                               = F (xt , ztm , n) = exp{A(n) + Bx (n)xt + Bz (n)ztm }                      (7)
                          Dtm

                                                           8
                              m = D m we see A(0) = B (0) = B (0) = 0, and proceeding by
Using the boundary condition P0,t  t                 z       x

induction on n, we can show the following recursive relationships hold:

                                                                 1 m 0
              A(n) = A(n − 1) + a + g m + Bx (n − 1)x̄(1 − φx ) + (Cn−1         m
                                                                        ) Σε,ε Cn−1
                                                                 2
                                       1     m
             Bx (n) = φx Bx (n − 1) − Σd,ε Cn−1                                                     (8)
                                      σd
                      (1 + b/δ m )(1 − φnz )
             Bz (n) =                                                                               (9)
                             1 − φz

where Cnm ≡ [δ m 1 Bx (n) Bz (n)]0 , ε ≡ [εd εu εx εz ]0 , Σd,ε ≡ E[εd ε0 ], and Σε,ε ≡ E[εε0 ].

     m
Let Rn,t+1 be the return from time t to t + 1 of a claim to zero-coupon market equity paying off at
                        m
time t + n, and define rn,t+1        m
                              ≡ log(Rn,t+1 ). It can be shown that (see LW):

                                      m            m           m
                                     rn,t+1 = Et [rn,t+1 ] + (Cn−1 )0 εt+1                         (10)

                                      σt2 [rn,t+1
                                            m           m
                                                  ] = (Cn−1 )0 Σε,ε Cn−1
                                                                     m
                                                                         .                         (11)

We can show that the risk premium on a zero-coupon claim depends on Bz , Bx , x, the variance of
the consumption shock and its covariances with the other shocks:
            Ã "          #!
                    m
                  Rn,t+1                            1
         log Et       f
                                      m
                              = Et [rn,t+1 − rtf ] + σt2 [rn,t+1
                                                           m
                                                                 ]
                    Rt                              2
                                  ¡                                              ¢ 1
                              = δ m σd2 + σd,u + Bx (n − 1)σx,d + Bz (n − 1)σz,d      xt           (12)
                                                                                   σd


2.1.2    Implications for the value/growth premium


Since Bz (n) is positive for all n, it follows that the the conditional risk premium for n-period zero-
coupon market equity increases monotonically with the covariance between shocks to z and d for
all n. Moreover, Bz (n) is increasing in n. So taking the covariance between shocks to z and d to be
negative, the conditional risk premium evaluated at the unconditional mean of xt is declining in n
whenever the covariance between shocks to x and d is assumed to be zero. As reported in LW, this
generates a value premium in expected excess returns because value stocks have shorter cash flow
durations than growth stocks. Since Bz (n) is positive for any n, a positive shock to zt+1 causes a
                   m
positive shock to Pn,t+1   m which causes a positive shock to Rm
                         /Dt+1                                 n,t+1 . When ρd,z is taken to be
                                  m
negative, this positive shock to Rn,t+1 is typically associated with a negative shock to dt+1 which
makes the zero-coupon market equity a hedge against shocks to aggregate consumption and causes
its conditional premium to be lower than when ρd,z is taken to be zero.


                                                       9
Turning to the covariance between shocks to x and d, its effect on the conditional risk premia for
n-period zero-coupon market equity depends on the sign of Bx (n). If Bx (n) is negative, which is
usually the case, then it follows that the conditional risk premium for n-period zero-coupon market
equity decreases monotonically with the covariance between shocks to x and d for all n. If the
correlation between shocks to x and d is close to -1, as the CC external habit model implies, the
conditional risk premium for n-period zero-coupon market equity increases in the absolute value
of Bx (n) for all n. Moreover, the relation between the conditional risk premia for the n-period
zero-coupon market equity and its maturity n depends on how Bx (n)σx,d , which is positive, and
Bz (n)σz,d , which is negative, vary with n. We have already seen that Bz (n)σz,d is decreasing in
maturity. Whether there is still a value premium when the correlation between shocks to x and d
is close to -1 depends on how Bx (n)σx,d varies with n. When the persistence of x is high, a shock
to x today impacts the value of x for many periods in the future. Consequently, the absolute value
of Bx (n) increases monotonically for many periods into the future, which causes a growth premium
rather than a value premium. However, when the persistence of x is low, a shock to x today only
affects the value of x for a few periods into the future. Consequently, the absolute value value of
Bx (n) increases monotonically for a few periods into the future before starting to decline. If the
persistence of x is sufficiently low, this turning point can be sufficiently early that there is still a
value premium in expected excess return. This intuition explains why the almost perfect negative
correlation between shocks to x and d in our base and wedge cases is still able to generate a value
premium when the persistence of x is assumed to be low.


2.2     Model with heteroscedasctic log consumption growth


The base and wedge cases fail to match the price-dividend ratio’s ability to predict the returns of
long-horizon equity we see in the data. To match this feature, we consider a second model for which
the conditional volatility of log consumption growth, σt , is a highly persistent AR(1) process, i.e.
log consumption growth evolves as:

                                       ∆dt+1 = g + zt + σt εdt+1                                   (13)

where
                                    σt+1 = σ̄ + φσ (σt − σ̄) + εw
                                                                t+1                                (14)

and εw            2
     t+1 ∼ N (0, σw ), uncorrelated with the other shocks. This specification is closely related to

Bansal and Yaron (2004), who specify that the variance, not the volatility, is an AR(1). The


                                                  10
stochastic discount factor of our base and wedge cases becomes:
                                       (                              )
                                                                 εd
                                                  1
                           Mt+1 = exp a + bzt − (xt σt )2 − xt σt t+1                                                   (15)
                                                  2               σd

Using a first order Taylor approximation, we can approximate the price of risk as follows:

                                     xt σt ≈ x̄σ̄ + x̄(σt − σ̄) + σ̄(xt − x̄)                                           (16)

                                             = x̄(σt − σ̄) + σ̄xt ,                                                     (17)

which gives us the following stochastic discount factor
                         (                                                             )
                                                                                  εd
                                        1
            Mt+1 = exp a + bm ztm − (x̄(σt − σ̄) + σ̄xt )2 − (x̄(σt − σ̄) + σ̄xt ) t+1                                  (18)
                                        2                                          σd


We consider one case using this version of model, a long run risk in volatility case (the LRR-vol
case), that resembles the two wedge cases described above, except that log consumption growth’s
conditional volatility, as well as its conditional mean, is allowed to be mean reverting. As mentioned
above, the aggregate consumption process considered in the LRR-vol case is in the spirit of Bansal
and Yaron (2004), except that in the LRR-vol case, aggregate consumption growth’s conditional
volatility is an AR(1) process, while in Bansal and Yaron, its conditional variance is an AR(1)
process.1 Further details of the calibration of this case are provided in section 3.


2.2.1    Price-Dividend Ratio and Expected Returns for Zero-coupon Equity


                      m takes the following recursive form for this model:
It can be shown that Pn,t
               m
              Pn,t
                   = F (xt , σt , ztm , n) = exp{A(n) + Bx (n)xt + Bσ (n)(σt − σ̄) + Bz (n)ztm }                        (19)
              Dtm
                              m = D m we see A(0) = B (0) = B (0) = B (0) = 0, and
Using the boundary condition P0,t  t                 z       x       σ

proceeding by induction on n, we can show the following recursive relationships hold:
                                                                   1 m 0          m
                A(n) = A(n − 1) + a + g m + Bx (n − 1)x̄(1 − φx ) + (Cn−1 ) Σε,ε Cn−1
                                                                   2
                                         σ̄    m
               Bx (n) = φx Bx (n − 1) − Σd,ε Cn−1                                                                       (20)
                                        σd
                                         x̄    m
               Bσ (n) = φσ Bσ (n − 1) − Σd,ε Cn−1                                                                       (21)
                                         σd
                        (1 + b/δ m )(1 − φnz )
               Bz (n) =                                                                                                 (22)
                               1 − φz
   1
                                                                                            p
    We also ran a case where σt2 is an AR(1), using a first order Taylor expansion for xt       σt2 in the stochastic discount
factor, and the results were qualitatively the same.


                                                          11
where Cnm ≡ [δ m 1 Bx (n) Bσ (n) Bz (n)]0 , ε ≡ [εd εu εx εw εz ]0 , Σd,ε ≡ E[εd ε0 ], and Σε,ε ≡ E[εε0 ].

                      m
It can be shown that rn,t+1 can be written as follows in this model:

                                     m            m           m
                                    rn,t+1 = Et [rn,t+1 ] + (Cn−1 )0 εt+1                                (23)

                                      σt2 [rn,t+1
                                            m           m
                                                  ] = (Cn−1 )0 Σε,ε Cn−1
                                                                     m
                                                                         .                               (24)

We can show that the risk premium on a zero-coupon claim now depends on Bx , Bσ , Bz , xt , σt ,
the variance of the consumption shock and its covariances with the other shocks:
            Ã "             #!
                     m
                   Rn,t+1
         log Et
                     Rtf
                             1
             m
     = Et [rn,t+1  − rtf ] + σt2 [rn,t+1
                                   m
                                         ]                                                    (25)
                             2                                            µ                  ¶
         ¡                                                               ¢ σ̄      x̄
     = δ m σd2 + σd,u + Bx (n − 1)σx,d + Bσ (n − 1)σw,d + Bz (n − 1)σz,d       xt + (σt − σ̄)
                                                                            σd     σd


In the LRR-vol case, εw is uncorrelated with all other shocks. So we can see that for this case,
the first expression in parentheses on the right hand side of equation (25) has the same terms
as the first expression in parentheses on the right hand side of equation (12). Now x̄ is always
positive, and σ̄ is positive in the LRR-vol case. So holding σd2 , σx,d and σz,d fixed, the shape of
       m
E[Et [rn,t+1 −rtf ]+ 21 σt2 [rn,t+1
                              m     ]] as a function of n in the first model and in the LRR-vol case depends
on the shapes of Bx (n − 1) and Bz (n − 1) as functions of n. So if the shapes of Bx (n − 1) and
Bz (n − 1) as functions of n remain similar once σt is allowed to be slowly mean-reverting rather
than constant, then allowing σt to be slowly mean reverting rather than constant won’t affect the
ability of the CC model with low persistence of the surplus consumption ratio to deliver a value
premium in expected excess return.


2.3    Aggregate Equity Price Dividend Ratios and Returns


Aggregate equity is the claim to all future aggregate dividends. By the law of one price, a claim
to aggregate equity is equal in price to the sum of the prices of zero-coupon market equity over all
future horizons. We specify that dividends are paid at a quarterly frequency, so we can calculate
the annual price-dividend ratio as follows:

                                                  X∞       m
                                        Ptm              Pn,t
                                     P3     m
                                                =     P3      m
                                                                 .                                       (26)
                                      τ =0 Dt−τ   n=1  τ =0 Dt−τ



                                                      12
Market returns can be calculated as a function of the market price-dividend ratio and dividend
growth:
                                              m + Dm
                                             Pt+1
                                   m                   t+1
                                  Rt+1 =                                                                       (27)
                                                 Ptm
                                             µ m       m + 1 ¶ µ Dm ¶
                                              Pt+1 /Dt+1          t+1
                                           =                          .                                        (28)
                                                  Ptm /Dtm       Dtm
We simulate at a quarterly frequency, and we calculate annual returns by compounding quarterly
returns. This approach is equivalent to reinvesting dividends at the end of each quarter and can
be contrasted with the calculation of annual returns using annual price-dividend ratios, which is
equivalent to assuming that dividends earn a zero net return within a year.2


2.4     Relation to other models


These two specifications are related to a number of other models.


2.4.1     LW


LW don’t distinguish between consumption and dividends and specify a stochastic discount factor
of the form:                                    ½               ¾
                                                   f 1 2 xt d
                                    Mt+1   = exp −r − xt − εt+1
                                                     2    σd
where rf is the log of the riskfree rate, and is constant over time. Notice that our first model nests
LW by setting a = −rf , b = 0, δ m = 1, and σu = 0.




2.4.2     CC with i.i.d. Consumption Growth


CC assume that a representative agent maximizes the utility function:
                                               ∞
                                               X          (Dt − Ht )1−γ − 1
                                           E         δt                                                        (29)
                                                               1−γ
                                               t=0

where Ht is the level of external habit at time t and δ is the subjective discount factor. Defining
        ³        ´
st ≡ log DtD−H
             t
               t
                  , the log of the surplus-consumption ratio at time t, they specify the following
   2
    We reproduced all our tables using the return calculation that sums dividends within a year and the results that
we obtained were very similar to the ones we report in the paper.


                                                             13
dynamics:

                                    ∆dt+1 = g + εdt+1

                                      st+1 = (1 − φs )s̄ + φs st + λ(st )εdt+1

where εd ∼ N (0, σd2 ) and λ(.) is a sensitivity function. They specify the sensitivity function to be:
                                       ( p
                                         1
                                             1 − 2(st − s̄) − 1 st ≤ smax
                              λ(st ) = S̄
                                         0                      st ≥ smax
                q
                     γ
where S̄ ≡ σd       1−φs ,   s̄ ≡ log(S̄), and smax = s̄ + 21 (1 − (S̄)2 ). These dynamics imply a stochastic
discount factor equal to:

                    Mt+1 = exp{−γg + log(δ) + γ(1 − φs )(st − s̄) − γ(1 + λ(st ))εdt+1 }


                                                                             γ(1−φs )
Our first model approximates CC by setting a = log(δ) − γg +                    2     ,   δ m = 1, σu = 0, σz = 0,
and xt = γσd (1 + λ(st )). The model approximates the heteroskedastic process for γσd (1 + λ(st ))
in CC by specifying xt as a homoskedastic AR(1) process. As long as the sensitivity function is
rarely zero, it follows that our first model can approximate CC when ρd,x ≈ −1 and φx ≈ φs .


2.4.3   CC with Persistent Conditional Mean Consumption Growth


CC with persistent conditional mean consumption growth can be approximated by the first model
when σz 6= 0 . Suppose the representative agent again maximizes the habit specification in equation
(29), but the conditional mean of aggregate consumption growth is slowly mean-reverting, following
equations (2) and (3). We extend the dynamics for the log consumption surplus in CC to the case in
which there is long run risk in mean consumption growth by assuming that CC’s sensitivity function
loads on the innovation to log consumption growth above its conditional mean, ∆dt+1 − g − zt ,
which is equal to εdt+1 . We also assume that the log consumption surplus depends linearly on zt
with coefficient λ(s̄). Putting these two together, the consumption surplus evolves as follows:

                                  st+1 = (1 − φs )s̄ + φs st + λ(s̄)zt + λ(st )εdt+1                          (30)

where λ(.) is the same sensitivity function as used by CC and described in the previous subsection.


Using the same sensitivity function as in CC, and setting zt ’s loading to be the sensitivity function
evaluated at the steady state surplus consumption value, allows the riskfree rate to depend only on


                                                         14
zt . The specification in (30) also implies the following desirable properties for the habit process:
at the consumption surplus’s steady state, log habit is predetermined only by an exponentially-
weighted sum of past lagged log consumption (see section 2.5 below); and, habit next period moves
positively with consumption next period irrespective of the consumption surplus this period. Note
that CC’s specification for surplus consumption implies that their habit process satisfied these same
two properties, given their assumptions about the consumption growth process.


This specification implies the following stochastic discount factor:

        Mt+1 = exp{−γg + log(δ) − γ(1 + λ(s̄))zt + γ(1 − φs )(st − s̄) − γ(1 + λ(st ))εdt+1 }

Matching coefficients in the stochastic discount factor we see that the riskfree rate is affine in zt .
So we can approximate CC with persistent mean consumption growth using our first model by
setting a = log(δ) − γg + γ(1−φ
                             2
                               s)
                                  , b = −γ(1 + λ(s̄)), δ m = 1, σu = 0 and xt = γσd (1 + λ(st )). As in
the previous subsection, our first model uses xt , a homoskedastic AR(1) process, to approximate
γσd (1 + λ(st )), a heteroskedastic AR(1) process, and so, as long as the sensitivity function is rarely
zero, ρd,x ≈ −1 and φx ≈ φs .


2.4.4   CC with Persistent Conditional Mean and Volatility of Consumption Growth


CC with persistent conditional mean and volatility of consumption growth can be approximated by
our second model when σz and σw are both strictly positive. Suppose the representative agent again
maximizes the habit specification in equation (29) but both the conditional mean and volatility of
aggregate consumption growth are slowly mean-reverting, following equations (2), (13) and (14).
We extend the dynamics for the log consumption surplus in CC to the case in which there is long run
risk in the mean and volatility of consumption growth, by assuming that CC’s sensitivity function
loads on the innovation to log consumption growth above its conditional mean, ∆dt+1 − g − zt ,
which becomes equal to σt εdt+1 . As in the previous subsection, we assume that the log consumption
surplus depends linearly on zt with coefficient λ(s̄). Specifically we assume the consumption surplus
evolves as follows:
                           st+1 = (1 − φs )s̄ + φs st + λ(s̄)zt + λ(st )σt εdt+1                   (31)

where λ(.) is the same sensitivity function as used by CC which is described in subsection 2.4.2.


Using the same sensitivity function as in CC, and setting zt ’s loading to be the sensitivity function
evaluated at the steady state surplus consumption value, allows the riskfree rate to depend only on


                                                    15
zt and σt2 . The specification in (31) also delivers the same two desirable properties for the habit
process that we obtained in the previous subsection.


This specification implies the following stochastic discount factor:

        Mt+1 = exp{−γg + log(δ) − γ(1 + λ(s̄))zt + γ(1 − φs )(st − s̄) − γ(1 + λ(st ))σt εdt+1 }

Matching coefficients in the stochastic discount factor we see that the riskfree rate is affine in zt
and σt2 . So our second model can be used to approximate CC with persistent conditional mean
and volatility of consumption growth by first using the same approximation in (16) applied to
                                                                   γ(1−φs )
γ(1 + λ(st )) and σt , and then setting a = log(δ) − γg +             2     ,   b = −γ(1 + λ(s̄)), δ m = 1, σu = 0
and xt = γσd (1 + λ(st )) and σt equal to itself. As in the previous subsections, our second model
approximates γσd (1 + λ(st )), a heteroskedastic AR(1) process, with xt , an homoskedastic AR(1)
process. So again, as long as the sensitivity function is rarely zero, ρd,x ≈ −1 and φx ≈ φs .


2.4.5    Power Utility with Persistent Mean Consumption Growth


When σx = 0, we see xt ≡ x̄, and the model reduces to a representative agent with power utility:
                                                 ∞
                                                 X          (Dt )1−γ
                                             E         δt
                                                             1−γ
                                                 t=0

Again, the conditional mean of aggregate consumption growth is slowly mean-reverting, following
equations (2) and (3). This specification implies the following stochastic discount factor.

                              Mt+1 = exp{−γg + log(δ) − γzt − γεdt+1 }


2.5     Relation between External Habit and Past Consumption


Following an earlier version of CC, we can show that log habit is approximately a moving average
of lagged log consumption, for the specification of log consumption growth and the log surplus con-
sumption ratio in subsection 2.4.4, which allows the conditional mean and volatility of consumption
growth to be slowly mean reverting as in Bansal and Yaron (2004). Define ht ≡ log(Ht ), and apply
a log-linear approximation to the definition of st :
                               ³           ´
                    st = log 1 − eht −dt
                                                                                 Ã              !
                                ³            ´    £            ¡     ¢¤               −eh−d
                                       h−d
                         ≈ log 1 − e             + (ht − dt ) − h − d
                                                                                     1 − eh−d

                                                        16
Substituting this in to the law of motion for s described in (31), and utilizing the imposed restriction
that ht+1 is predetermined at the steady state, we can show that:
                                                      ∞
                                                      X                       g
                           ht+1 ≈ h − d + (1 − φs )         (φs )j dt−j +                          (32)
                                                                            1 − φs
                                                      j=0



This is precisely the same expression derived in an earlier version of CC, in which consumption
growth is assumed i.i.d.. Almost by definition, habit should only depend on lagged consumption so
this is an attractive property of the specification for st given in equation (31) when consumption
growth has a persistent conditional mean and volatility as in Bansal and Yaron. We can also derive
an expression for the innovation to habit, which is a function of how far consumption is above
habit:
                                                      £                   ¤
                             ht+1 − ht ≈ g + (1 − φs ) (dt − ht ) − d − h                          (33)

The lower the persistence of the surplus-consumption ratio, the more impact the most recent
consumption has on habit. Notice that these expressions also hold for the specification of log
consumption growth and the log surplus consumption ratio in subsection 2.4.3, which only allow
the conditional mean of consumption growth to be slowly mean reverting. This follows because the
specification in subsection 2.4.4 nests the one in 2.4.3.


These expressions highlight a point made in the introduction, namely that when habit is slow-
moving with φs close to 1, recent consumption contributes very little to current habit. The co-
efficient on log lagged consumption, dt , in the expression for log habit, ht+1 , in equation (32) is
(1 − φs ). So when φs is close to 1, as in CC, this coefficient is close to 0. This expression for habit
shows clearly how the large coefficient on lagged own consumption obtained by Ravina is consistent
with habit being fast-moving in response to recent consumption.


2.6      Specifying the Share Process


We follow LW and specify that the market is made up of 200 firms that generate dividends which
aggregate to the market dividend. The share of the aggregate dividend produced by each firm is set
deterministically. Let s be the minimum share of any firm. Without loss of generality suppose firm
1 produces this share initially. LW choose a growth rate of 5% per quarter for the share process
so that the cross-sectional distribution of dividend growth rates in the model matches that in the
sample. Following LW subject to rounding, we choose a growth rate of 5.5% per quarter for the
share process. With this growth rate choice, firm 1’s share increases by 5.5% a quarter for 100

                                                  17
quarters to a maximum share of 1.055100 s, then declines at the same rate for 100 quarters such
that its share after 200 quarters exactly equals its initial share. Firm 2 starts at the second point
in the cycle, and so on, so that each firm is at a different point in the cycle at any time. Here s
is set so that the shares of the 200 firms add up to 1 at all times. So firm i, with share si of the
aggregate dividend, pays a dividend sit Dt at time t.


The law of one price determines that firm i’s ex-dividend price equals:
                                                      ∞
                                                      X
                                              Pti =         sit+n Pn,t
                                                                   m
                                                                                                             (34)
                                                      n=1

Quarterly returns for individual firms can be calculated similarly to the market, as a function of the
firm’s quarterly price-dividend ratio and quarterly dividend growth. Annual returns are calculated
as described above, by compounding the quarterly returns.


2.7     Forming the Value/Growth Deciles


Recall that we specify a period in the model to be a quarter as in LW. At the start of each year,
we sort firms into deciles from value to growth based on their annual price-dividend ratios, which
                  P
are given by Pti / 3τ =0 Dt−τ
                          i   for firm i. We calculate moments for the decile excess annual returns
and annual CAPM alpha by simulating the model at a quarterly frequency and then compounding
the quarterly firm returns to obtain annual firm returns, as described above.



3       Calibration


As a comparison point, we first implement the calibration in LW using their parameter values.3
Both the LW case and our base case assume the aggregate consumption process is the same as the
aggregate dividend process. We also consider two wedge cases and a LRR-vol case in which the ag-
gregate consumption process is allowed to differ from the aggregate dividend process. Consumption
growth is homoscedastic in the two wedge cases, and heteroscedastic in the LRR-vol case. Table 1
reports the parameters used by these cases, which all use exactly the same calibration for the z m
process, ∆dm process and rf as used by LW.


Our base, two wedge and LRR-vol cases depart from LW in the calibration of the parameters of the
    3
     The values reported in LW are likely subject to rounding which explains why our parameter values are slightly
different from those reported in LW.


                                                       18
price-of-risk state variable, the x process. The external habit model of CC implies a value close to
-1 for ρ[εd , εx ] but LW show that at their chosen parameter values, a large negative value for this
correlation generates a growth rather than value premium in expected return. For this reason, they
set this correlation equal to 0 and are able to generate a value premium for both expected return
and CAPM alpha. However, one of the main goals of our paper is to show that a value premium
is possible for both expected return and CAPM alpha when this correlation is close to -1 so long
as the price-of-risk state variable is not too persistent. For this reason, we set this correlation to
-0.99 in the base, two wedge and LRR-vol cases.4


While the model is quarterly, the log riskfree rate rf is converted into an annual number in Table
1 by multiplying by a factor of 4. We express the persistence parameters φx and φz at annual
frequencies by raising each of them to the power of 4.


3.1    Calibration of the base case: the x process


To ensure the covariance matrix of (εd , εz , εx ) is positive definite, we specify σ[εx , εz ] so that εx
and εz are correlated only through their correlations with εd . That is, σ[εx , εz ] is calculated as
follows: 1) Regress εd on εz , yielding εd = βd,z εz + ud where ρ[εz , ud ] = 0; and, 2) Regress εx on
εd , yielding εx = βx,d εd + ux where ρ[εd , ux ] = 0. The following expression can be derived:
                                    h                                i
                    σ[εx , εz ] = σ βx,d βd,z εz + βx,d ud + ux , εz
                                  µ                      h             i1          ¶
                                      d x       d z               d x 2 2    x z
                                =  ρ[ε , ε ]ρ[ε , ε ] + 1 − ρ[ε , ε ]     ρ[u , ε ] σz σx                          (35)

When ρ[εd , εx ] = −0.99, the chosen value for ρ[ux , εz ] does not much affect ρ[εx , εz ] or σ[εx , εz ],
so we use (35) with ρ[ux , εz ] = 0 to calculate σ[εx , εz ]. Notice this specification has the attractive
property that when σ[εd , εz ] is set equal to 0, σ[εx , εz ] is set equal to 0 as well. Since ρ[εd , εz ] is
set equal to -0.82, the assumed value for ρ[εx , εz ] is 0.81. Note that this correlation measures the
correlation of the shock to future expected returns with the shock to future expected consumption
growth (which is also the shock to future expected dividend growth in the base case).


The next parameter of the x process to be calibrated is the persistence parameter. LW calibrate
the autocorrelation of x to equal the data autocorrelation of the log price-dividend ratio for the
aggregate market (0.87 annually), arguing that since the variance of expected dividend growth
   4
    Choosing -0.99 instead of 1 seems unimportant since the base case results are unaffected by setting this correlation
to -0.995 or -0.999.



                                                          19
(g m + ztm ) is small, the autocorrelation of the log price-dividend ratio is primarily driven by the
autocorrelation of x. However, the expression for the price-dividend ratio for zero-coupon aggregate
equity, equation (7) in section 2, suggests that the autocorrelation of the aggregate market’s price-
dividend ratio is approximately a weighted average of the autocorrelations of the z and x processes.
So the fact that the z process is highly persistent, with an annualized autocorrelation of 0.91,
means that it may be possible to have an x process that is not very persistent and still have a log
price-dividend ratio for the aggregate market with an annualized autocorrelation of 0.87.


Moreover, there are good theoretical reasons for why the x process might not be very persistent.
In particular, it is easy to show that the CC model implies that the persistence of our price-of-risk
state variable x is approximately equal to the persistence of the log surplus s in their model. While
CC themselves use a very large value for the autocorrelation of the log surplus in their model, the
use of such a large value implies that habit depends much less on the consumption in the recent past
than consumption in the distant past. For example, Table 2 uses the expression in (32) that relates
log habit to past log consumption in CC to calculate the contribution of lagged log consumption to
log habit when x’s persistence parameter is set equal to the LW annualized value of 0.87 and to the
value in our base and wedge cases. At the LW value, the contribution of the most recent 5 years is
just a little over 50% and so the contribution of log consumption more than 5 years ago is almost
50% which seems very high. We choose an annualized value for φx of 0.14 which is sufficiently low
that the most recent 2 years of log consumption contribute over 98% of all past consumption to
log habit, which is a much more reasonable number than the 25% contribution generated by the
LW value. Subsection 2.1.2 discussed the intuition for why a value premium can be generated by
an x-variable whose shock is highly negatively correlated with the d-variable shock so long as it is
not too persistent.


The remaining parameters of the x process left to calibrate are its mean x̄ and its conditional
                                                                                        p
volatility σx . LW calibrate x̄ such that the maximum conditional quarterly Sharpe ratio ex̄2 − 1
equals 0.70, which corresponds to x̄ = 0.625. They calibrate σx to match the volatility of the
price-dividend ratio for aggregate equity. When choosing x̄ and σx , we concentrate on matching
the mean rather than the volatility of the price-dividend ratio for aggregate equity, in addition to
the unconditional Sharpe ratio for aggregate equity in the data. Both the unconditional Sharpe
ratio and the expected price-dividend ratio for aggregate equity move positively with both x̄ and
σx . We choose our x̄ and σx to produce a Sharpe ratio that roughly corresponds to the 0.41 value
obtained by LW (0.42 in our simulation of LW) and an expected price-dividend ratio for aggregate
equity whose mean absolute error relative to the data value is similar to that obtained by LW. The

                                                 20
data value of the Sharpe ratio, at 0.33, is a little lower than the values obtained by LW and our
base case. While the LW value for the expected price-dividend ratio is about 5.5 lower than the
data value of 25.55, the value obtained by our base case is about 5.5 higher than the data value.


3.2   Calibration of the wedge cases: distinguishing between consumption and
      dividends


In the base case we do not make a distinction between dividend growth and consumption growth;
i.e. we set δ m = 1 and σu2 = 0. In the two wedge cases we do make this distinction, and consider log
dividend growth to be a levered version of log consumption growth. The two wedge cases both have
the same processes for log dividend growth and log consumption growth but each has a different
specification for the x process.


We keep the volatility of εm and the covariance of εm with εz the same as in the base case, matching
the following to LW’s data moments:

                                      σ 2 [εm ] = (δ m )2 σd2 + σu2 + 2δ m σd,u                       (36)

                                 σ[εm      z        m
                                    t+1 , εt+1 ] = δ σd,z + σu,z                                      (37)

We can get a closed-form expression for the annual covariance of log consumption and dividend
growth:
  hP             P4          i
     4                   m
σ    i=1 ∆dt+i ,  i=1 ∆d t+i

                          µ                                                         ¶
                 1                4         2         2φz (1 − φ3z ) φ2z (1 − φ6z )
         =                  (1 − φz )(1 + φz ) + 3 −                +                 σz2
           (1 − φz )2 δ m                               1 − φz          1 − φ2z
                 2                                  1
           +           2
                         (3 − 4φ + φ4 )σz,d + m             (3 − 4φz + φ4z )σz,u + 4δ m σd2 + 4σd,u
             (1 − φz )                         δ (1 − φ2z )

The annual correlation of log consumption growth with log dividend growth is 0.55 in Bansal-
Yaron’s sample period. This value for the annual correlation requires x̄ < 0 for the price-dividend
ratio to converge, which is a problem since the x process is positive in CC. The correlation of log
consumption growth with log dividend growth at a quarterly frequency is a simple expression:

                                                       δ m σd   σd,u
                                   ρ[εm      d
                                      t+1 , εt+1 ] =          +       .                               (38)
                                                       σ[ε ] σ[εm ]σd
                                                           m


Simulations suggest that the annual and quarterly correlations are very similar, at least for the
range of parameter values we consider, so we focus on the quarterly number because its expression
is much simpler. Since the x process is positive in CC, we instead chose a larger correlation than


                                                        21
in the data, 0.82 at a quarterly frequency, for which the price-dividend ratio converges for a range
of x̄ > 0 in the base case.


Using the methods of Stambaugh (1997) and Lynch and Wachter (2008), and given the volatility
of annual log consumption and dividend growth and their correlation in the Bansal-Yaron sample
period (1929-1998), and the volatility of annual log dividend growth for the LW sample period
(1890-2002), we can estimate the volatility of annual log consumption growth in the LW sample
period. The Bansal-Yaron moments allow us to regress annual log consumption growth on annual
log dividend growth, estimating the regression coefficient and the variance of the residuals. Using
these and the volatility of annual log dividend growth for the LW sample period, we can back out
an estimate for the volatility of annual log consumption growth for this period. This comes out to
be 3.18%, and we square this and match it to our analytical expression for the variance of annual
log consumption growth:
           " 4       #   µ                                                          ¶
            X              (1 + φz + φ2z + φ3z )2                                       σz2
         2                                                       2              2 2
       σ       ∆dt+i   =                          + 1 + (1 + φz )  + (1 + φz + φz )
                                 1 − φ2z                                              (δ m )2
             i=1
                                           2σd,z (3 + 2φz + φ2z )
                                 +4σd2 +                                                               (39)
                                                    δm

                                                        σm
Typically in the literature δ m is set equal to         σd .   Our set-up allows δ m to be different from
this, but we chose this value as the natural point of departure. Since LW calibrate their divi-
dend/consumption process to U.S dividend data, we keep the joint {z m ,∆dm } process the same,
i.e. φz , σz , σm , g m , ρm,z are unchanged from the base case. We set ρ[εd , εz ] = ρ[εm , εz ] which has
a couple of attractive features in our setting. First, there is an asset in the wedge cases with the
same cash-flows and price as produced by the market dividend in the base case. Second, given σz
                          σm
and σm fixed and δ m =    σd ,   then as ρ[εd , εm ] tends to 1, the pricing implications for the two wedge
cases, in which aggregate consumption and dividends are allowed to differ, converge to those for
our base case in which the two are the same.


Given a δ m value and ρ[εd , εz ] = ρ[εm , εz ], the system of equations defined in (36)-(39) yields
                                                                          σm
σd , σu , σd,u and σz,u . The resulting σd can be used to calculate       σd , which becomes the    new δ m
                                                                          σm                    m
value. We iterate until convergence, namely, until the obtained           σd value equals the δ     used to
obtain it.


Turning to the x process, we set ρ[εd , εx ] = −0.99 as in the base case, in the spirit of CC, and
φx = 0.14 as in the base case, in the spirit of the micro evidence concerning the persistence of
the log consumption surplus. The covariances σ[εx , εz ] and σ[εx , εu ] are set to ensure that the

                                                       22
covariance matrix of (εd , εz , εx , εu ) is positive definite. As in the base case, σ[εx , εz ] is obtained
using equation (35) with ρ[ux , εz ] = 0, while σ[εx , εu ] is calculated similarly using
                                   h                                i
                   σ[εx , εu ] = σ βx,d βd,z εu + βx,d ud + ux , εu
                                 µ                      h             i1          ¶
                                     d x       d u               d x 2 2    x u
                               =  ρ[ε , ε ]ρ[ε , ε ] + 1 − ρ[ε , ε ]     ρ[u , ε ] σz σx ,             (40)

with ρ[ux , εu ] set equal to 0 to calculate σ[εx , εu ].


Both wedges cases choose the x̄ and σx values to match the mean of the price-dividend ratio and
the unconditional Sharpe ratio. Table 3 shows that both wedge cases are able to match both these
aggregate moments about as well as the LW and base cases. However, the first wedge case, like
the base case, does not try to match the unconditional volatility of the excess return on aggregate
equity, understating it by a magnitude comparable to the base case, while the second wedge case
tries to match this unconditional volatility and does a much better job than the first of doing so.


3.3    Calibration of the LRR-Vol case: making the conditional volatility of log
       consumption growth stochastic


When we calibrate the LRR-vol case, φx is set at 0.14 annually and ρd,x is set equal to -0.99, as
in the base and wedge cases. The expressions for σ 2 [εm ] and σ[εm      z
                                                                  t+1 , εt+1 ] are the same as in the

wedge cases. The expression for the annual variance of consumption growth becomes
           " 4       #     µ                                                          ¶
            X                (1 + φz + φ2z + φ3z )2                                       σz2
         2                                                         2              2 2
       σ       ∆dt+i   =                            + 1 + (1 + φz )  + (1 + φz + φz )
                                    1 − φ2z                                             (δ m )2
             i=1
                                                  2σd,z (3 + 2φz + φ2z )
                                +4σd2 E[σt2 ] +                          σ̄,                           (41)
                                                           δm
and the expression for the quarterly correlation between the shocks to dividend growth and con-
sumption growth becomes
                                                            (δ m σd2 + σd,u )σ̄
                                     ρ[εm         d
                                        t+1 , σt εt+1 ] =            p          .                      (42)
                                                             σm σd E[σt2 ]
We choose the values of δ m , ρd,u , g m , φz and σz as in the wedge cases, so that the joint distribution
of z m and dm is the same as in the base and wedge cases.


When we calibrate the process for σt in the LRR-vol case, we want the shock to monthly log
consumption growth to match that used by Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron (2009). To do this, we
start by simulating the conditional variance of monthly log consumption growth using the AR(1)
specification and parameters from Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron. We discard any negative draws, as

                                                         23
they do. We approximate the quarterly variance by the sum of the variance for the 3 consecutive
months in the quarter. We then compute the quarterly volatility as the square root of this quarterly
time series, and fit the volatility to an AR(1) process. This nails down the value for φσ . Since
εd in Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron is scaled to have unit variance, while ours is not, we scale our
volatility process to preserve the unconditional second moment of the shock to log consumption
growth from the wedge cases, i.e. E[(σt εdt+1 )2 ] in the LRR-vol case equals E[(εdt+1 )2 ] in the wedge
cases. Combining this with the 4 moment conditions in (36)-(37) and (41)-(42), we solve for the
volatility scaling factor, σd , σu , σd,z and σz,u . These values nail down the values for σ̄ and σw . It
follows that the unconditional correlation between the shock to log consumption growth and the
shock to the mean of log consumption growth is the same as in the wedge cases; i.e. ρ[σt εdt+1 , εzt+1 ]
in the LRR-vol case equals ρ[εdt+1 , εzt+1 ] in the wedge cases. The estimated parameters for σ̄, φσ
and σw are given in Table 1. The calibrated volatility process goes negative less than 0.3% of the
time. Finally, we follow Bansal and Yaron (2004) and impose that εw is uncorrelated with all other
shocks.


Turning to the x process, σ[εx , εz ] is obtained using equation (35) with ρ[ux , εz ] set equal to zero,
and σ[εx , εu ] is obtained using equation (40) with ρ[ux , εu ] set equal to zero. The reasons for doing
this are the same as in the base and wedge cases. Finally, just as with the second wedge cases, x̄
and σx are chosen to best match the data values for the unconditional volatility of the excess return
on aggregate equity, as well as its unconditional Sharpe ratio and its expected price-dividend ratio.
As Table 3 shows, the LRR-vol case matches these three aggregate moments better than either
wedge case.



4    Results


This section reports the results for the five cases: LW, base, two wedge, and LRR-vol. We also
report results for U.S. data. The data are the same as that in LW: the aggregate data are annual
from 1890-2002, while the data for the value and growth portfolios are monthly from Ken French’s
website and span 1952 to 2002. Means are annualized by multiplying by 12 and volatilities by 120.5 .


Each model is simulated at a quarterly frequency for at least 4 million quarters, and until the
mean price-dividend ratio and Sharpe ratio of the aggregate market and the two value premia
have converged: i.e., until an additional 10% of simulated quarters causes the values of all these
variables to change by less than small prespecified tolerances. The unconditional mean and volatility


                                                   24
of annual excess market equity return on zero-coupon equity with n years to maturity are simulated
to convergence in the same way.


4.1     Base Case


This subsection discusses the results for the base case and compares them to the results from the
data and for the LW case. As in LW, the aggregate consumption process is assumed to be equal to
the market dividend process, which is calibrated to data. The market dividend process used in the
base case is the same as that used by LW. The correlation between the change in log consumption
and the price-of-risk variable x is 0 in LW but is set to -0.99 in the base case, consistent with habit
preferences. As discussed in section 3, the persistence of the x process is set to 0.14 annualized,
which is a much lower value than the 0.87 annualized used by LW based on CC. Recall from section
3 that in the base case, the remaining x parameters are chosen to match the mean of the equity
price-dividend ratio and its unconditional Sharpe ratio.


4.1.1    Aggregate Moments


Table 3 reports moments for aggregate equity return, aggregate equity price-dividend ratio and
aggregate dividend growth. The first column reports moments for the data, the second reports
simulated moments for the LW case, and the third reports simulated moments for the base case.
Returns, dividends, and price-dividend ratios are aggregated to annual frequencies: so Ptm /Dtm =
     P
Ptm / 3τ =0 Dt−τ
             m and pm − dm ≡ log(P m /D m ). Sharpem is the unconditional Sharpe ratio of the
                      t     t         t    t

aggregate equity, and AC denotes autocorrelation.


Since the parameters of ∆dm are chosen to match the data, it is to be expected that the base
case is able to closely match the autocorrelation and unconditional volatility of ∆dm . And as
discussed above, the expected price-dividend ratio obtained from the base case is as close to the
data value as the LW value, and the base-case unconditional Sharpe ratio is virtually the same
as the LW value. But these close matches are to be expected and are not evidence of the base
case’s ability to match data moments, since the parameters of the x process not nailed down by
the habit specification were chosen to match these parameters. However, because parameter values
were not chosen specifically to match the autocorrelation of the price-dividend ratio in the data,
it is impressive that the base-case value of this autocorrelation, 0.895, is higher than, but close to,
both the data value of 0.87 and the LW value of 0.883.

                                                  25
While the base case is calibrated to match the unconditional Sharpe ratio, it delivers an expected
excess market return and a market excess return volatility that is too low relative to the data and
LW values. The delivered volatility of 10.69% is particularly low relative to the data volatility of
19.41% which LW does a good job matching. The base case also delivers a price-dividend ratio
volatility of 0.261 that is much lower than the data value of 0.38. Again, the LW case matches the
data moment quite closely, delivering a value of 0.382. Excess market returns also exhibit negative
autocorrelation of -0.13, which is counterfactual: the data value is 0.03. The LW case also delivers
excess market returns that are negatively autocorrelated, though much less so than in our base
case, at a value of -0.04.


4.1.2   Predictive Regressions


Table 4 reports results for three predictive regressions. The regression reported in the top panel
regresses the future log excess aggregate equity return on today’s log aggregate equity price-dividend
ratio. The regression reported in the middle panel regresses future changes in log aggregate equity
dividend on today’s log aggregate equity price-dividend ratio. The regression reported in the bottom
panel regresses future changes in log aggregate equity dividend on today’s consumption-aggregate
equity dividend ratio for the data and today’s z m for the cases. The first column reports results
for the data, the second reports results for the LW case, and the third reports results for the base
case. Log returns, log dividend growth, log price-dividend ratios and log consumption-aggregate
dividend ratios are all aggregated to annual frequencies, as described above. Results are reported
for horizons of 1 and 10 years for future return and dividend growth. R2 is the regression R2 .


Perhaps the most glaring inability of the base case to match data moments concerns the excess
market return predictability regressions. The data and the LW case deliver R2 s and negative
predictability coefficients that are both larger in absolute value at a 1 year return horizon than at a
10 year return horizon. While the base case is able to produce negative predictability coefficients,
their magnitudes are much smaller than those observed in the data, and the base-case R2 s at
horizons of 1 and 10 years are both negligible. As in LW, the base case does a poor job of
reproducing the predictability of 1 or 10 year log dividend growth found in the data using the log
price-dividend ratio, especially at the 10 year horizon, where the sign of the predictive coefficient
is negative for the data and positive for the base case. All the cases considered calibrate the
joint process for log market dividend and z m in exactly the same way as LW. Consequently, when
forecasting 1 or 10 year log dividend growth using z m for the cases and a proxy for z m in the data,


                                                  26
all the cases considered here replicate LW’s ability to match the R2 s of the regressions and also
their ability to match the sign but not the magnitude of the predictive coefficients.


4.1.3   Value vs Growth Portfolios


Table 5 reports results for the extreme growth decile (portfolio 1), the extreme value decile (portfolio
10), and the portfolio which is long portfolio 10 and short portfolio 1 (the HML portfolio). The
top panel reports expected excess annual return, the volatility of excess annual return and the
unconditional Sharpe ratio for annual return. The bottom panel reports CAPM alpha, CAPM
beta and regression R2 using annual returns. The first three columns report results for the data,
the fourth reports results for the LW case, and the fifth reports results for the base case. For the
data, the first column obtains the extreme portfolios by sorting on earnings yield (E/P), the second
column by sorting on equity cash flow to market value (C/P), and the third column by sorting
on equity book-to-market value (B/M). For the models, we sort the 200 firms into deciles at the
start of each year from value to growth based on their annual price-dividend ratios, which are given
                    P
by: Pti /Dti = Pti / 3τ =0 Dt−τ
                            i   for firm i. Sharpei is the unconditional Sharpe ratio for portfolio i’s
annual return while Ri2 is the regression R2 .


Table 5 shows that the base case can generate a positive value premium in both expected excess
return and CAPM alpha, though the magnitudes of the two are less than those found in the data
or delivered by the LW case. In the data, using B/M to sort stocks into deciles, the expected
excess return spread between the value and the growth portfolio is 4.88% versus the 1.91% per
annum delivered by the base case. Similarly, the CAPM-alpha spread for these two extreme book-
to-market deciles is 5.63% per annum in the data, but only 1.20% per annum in the base case.
Moreover, both the data and LW deliver a CAPM-alpha spread between the extreme value and the
growth deciles that is larger than the expected excess return spread, while the converse is true for
the base case. The reason is that the CAPM beta for the extreme value decile is lower than for
the extreme growth decile for the data and LW, while the converse is true for the base case, as the
rows labeled βi in Table 5 show. The base case delivers excess return volatility that is higher for
the extreme value decile than for the extreme growth decile, which is consistent with the data when
B/M is used to construct the extreme deciles, but inconsistent when E/P or C/P is used. The
volatility numbers for the two extreme deciles and especially for HML are much lower for the base
case than for the data. The LW case also delivers lower volatility for HML than the data, though
not as low as delivered by the base case. The implication is the returns on the extreme deciles are


                                                  27
much more correlated for the two cases, especially the base case, than for the data, which is not
surprising given that the dividend shares received by the firms are deterministic. Consistent with
this observation, the R2 s of the CAPM market model regressions for the two extreme deciles are
typically largest for the base case and smallest for the data, with the LW case in the middle. The
R2 s of the CAPM market model regressions for HML are below 15% for all the data sorts and the
base and LW cases. The unconditional Sharpe ratio is lowest for the extreme growth decile for the
two cases and all the data sorts, and is highest for the extreme value decile for all but the LW case.


The main message of Table 5 is that the base case can deliver a value premium both in expected
excess return and CAPM alpha. To better understand why the base case delivers a value premium
in expected excess return, we now turn our attention to the zero-coupon market dividend claims
described in section 2. Figure 1 plots, as a function of maturity for zero-coupon equity with n years
to maturity, the unconditional expected annual excess return, the unconditional volatility of annual
return and the unconditional Sharpe ratio for annual return in the top, middle and bottom graphs
respectively. In each graph, the solid black line is for the LW case and the dot-dashed line is for
the base case. The quarterly return on zero-coupon equity with n years to maturity is calculated
as the return from holding zero-coupon equity with n years to maturity at the start of the quarter.
The annual return on zero-coupon equity with n years to maturity is then obtained by rolling over
these quarterly returns for 4 quarters.


It is worth noting that the excess return on the market equity portfolio is a weighted average of the
excess returns on the zero-coupon equity claims, where all the weights are positive. Further, the
firms in the extreme value decile receive fractions of the market dividend that are relatively larger
in the near future than in the far future. The converse is true for the firms in the extreme growth
decile. The top graph of Figure 1 shows that in the LW case, the expected excess return on the
zero-coupon equity claim is declining in the claim’s maturity which explains why this case delivers
a value premium in expected excess return. For the base case, it is hump-shaped as a function
of maturity, but the hump occurs at a sufficiently short maturity to still deliver a value premium
in expected excess return, as discussed in section 2.1. The middle graph shows that excess return
volatility is hump-shaped in both cases, though the hump occurs much earlier for the base case.
The bottom graph shows that the Sharpe ratio declines monotonically for both cases, though the
relation is strongly convex for the LW case and concave at most maturities for the base case.


Using the expressions for the excess return on zero-coupon equity and its first two moments in
equations (10)-(12), the shapes of A(n), Bz (n) and Bx (n) as functions of n can be used to better


                                                 28
understand the relations plotted in Figure 1, especially the relation between the expected excess
return on zero-coupon equity and its maturity plotted in the top graph. Figure 2 plots, as a function
of maturity for zero-coupon equity with n years to maturity, A(n), Bz (n)(1 − φz ) and Bx (n) in the
top left, top right, and bottom left graphs respectively. In each graph, the solid black line is for
the LW case and the dot-dashed line is for the base case. A(n), Bz (n) and Bx (n) are, respectively,
the constant coefficient, the coefficient on z m and the coefficient on x in equation (7) for the price-
dividend ratio of zero-coupon aggregate equity paying out in n periods. Bz (n) is multiplied by
(1 − φz ). Note that Bz (n) is the same in all cases considered, including these two.


As was pointed out in subsection 2.1, Bz (n) is always positive and increasing in n. Moreover, Bz (n)
is the same for the LW and base cases. The right hand side of equation (12) provides an expression
         m
for Et [Rn,t+1 /Rtf ], and since Et [Rn,t+1
                                      m     /Rtf ] is likely to be highly correlated with Et [Rn,t+1
                                                                                               m     − Rtf ],
this right hand side of (12) can be used to understand how the unconditional expected excess return
                                  m
on a zero-coupon equity claim (E[Rn,t+1 − Rtf ]) varies with maturity. This analysis is performed in
section 2.1 by exploiting the fact that the unconditional mean of x is positive. Since σx,d is zero in
                               m
the LW case, the shape of Et [Rn,t+1 /Rtf ] as a function of its maturity n depends on the shape of
                                                                                              m
Bz (n) and the sign of σz,d . Since σz,d is negative and Bz (n) positive and increasing, Et [Rn,t+1 /Rtf ]
is decreasing in n as reported in Figure 1. Hence the LW case delivers a value premium in expected
excess return as reported in Table 5.

                                                                                            m
Now σx,d is negative in the base case, so the shape of Bx (n) matters for the shape of Et [Rn,t+1 /Rf ].
Figure 2 shows that Bx (n) is negative and has an inverted hump shape, consistent with the observa-
tion of section 2. Consequently, Bx (n − 1)σx,d in equation (12) is hump-shaped and the implication
             m
is that Et [Rn,t+1 /Rf ] can be hump-shaped, as reported in Figure 1. Hence, the base case is able
to deliver a value premium in expected excess return as reported in Table 5.


4.2    Wedge Cases


This subsection discusses the results for the two wedge cases and compares them to the results
from the data and for the LW and base cases. In contrast to the LW and base cases, the aggregate
consumption process is allowed to differ from the market dividend process in the two wedge cases.
This process is the same for both wedge cases and is calibrated to the data, while the market
dividend process in both wedge cases is the same as that used in the base case. As in the base case,
the correlation between the change in log consumption and the price-of-risk variable x is set to -0.99


                                                     29
in the 2 wedge cases, consistent with habit preferences. The persistence of the x process in the two
wedge cases is the same low annualized value of 0.14 used in the base case. As discussed in section
3, the x parameters in wedge case 1 are chosen to match the mean of the equity price-dividend
ratio and its unconditional Sharpe ratio, as in the base case. For wedge case 2, the x parameters
are also chosen to get close to the unconditional volatility of the market equity excess return.


4.2.1   Aggregate Moments


The two columns of Table 3 labeled “Wedge” contain moments for aggregate equity return, ag-
gregate equity price-dividend ratio and aggregate dividend growth for the two wedge cases. Both
wedge cases are calibrated to match the unconditional equity Sharpe ratio and the unconditional
mean of its price-dividend ratio, and Table 3 shows that they both get close to both moments.
Wedge case 1 does not attempt to match the volatility of the market equity excess return and pro-
duces a much lower value than in the data, just as the base case does. On the other hand, wedge
case 2 does attempt to match this volatility and the last column of Table 3 shows that it does so
with some success. Because wedge case 2 is calibrated to match the equity Sharpe ratio and the
volatility of the equity excess return, it also matches the data expected excess market return. Since
wedge case 2 successfully matches the volatility of equity excess return, it is somewhat surprising
that it suffers the same fate as wedge case 1 and the base case of substantially understating the
volatility of the equity price-dividend ratio. Again, because parameter values for the 2 wedge cases
were not chosen specifically to match the autocorrelation of the price-dividend ratio in the data, it
is impressive that this autocorrelation is above 0.90 for wedge case 1 and still above 0.84 for wedge
case 2. Finally, as with the base case, excess market returns exhibit negative autocorrelation for
both wedge cases, especially the second, which is counterfactual.


4.2.2   Predictive Regressions


Table 4 reports results for the predictive regressions and the two columns labeled “Wedge” report
results for the 2 wedge cases. The most glaring weakness of the base case was its inability to generate
the excess market return predictability observed in the data. Unfortunately, the two wedge cases
do not perform much better than the base case along this dimension. While the 2 wedge cases are
also able to produce the data’s negative predictability coefficients, their magnitudes are again much
smaller than those observed in the data, and the predictive regression R2 s at horizons of 1 and 10



                                                  30
years are still negligible. As in the base case, the two wedge cases do a poor job of reproducing the
predictability of 1 or 10 year log dividend growth found in the data using the log price-dividend
ratio, especially at the 10 year horizon, where the sign of the predictive coefficient is negative for
the data and positive for the wedge cases.


4.2.3   Value vs Growth Portfolios


Table 5 reports results for the extreme growth and value deciles as well as HML and the two
columns labeled “Wedge” report results for the 2 wedge cases. These “Wedge” columns show that
the 2 wedge cases can also generate a value premium in both expected excess return and CAPM
alpha. Moreover, the premia in expected excess return generated by the two cases, while still less
than in the data, is much closer than the premium generated by the base case. The same is true for
the premium in CAPM alpha for wedge case 1, while the premium in CAPM alpha for wedge case
2 is similar in magnitude to that obtained from the base case. In wedge cases 1 and 2, the expected
excess return spreads between the value and the growth portfolio are 4.05% per annum and 3.82%
per annum respectively, which are much closer to the data value of 4.88% per annum when sorting
on B/M than the 1.91% per annum delivered by the base case. For wedge case 1, the CAPM-alpha
spread for these two extreme book-to-market deciles is 2.71% per annum which is also closer to the
5.63% per annum in the data than the 1.20% per annum in the base case. However, wedge case 2
delivers a CAPM-alpha spread of 1.30% per annum which is comparable to the value generated by
the base case. Figure 1 plots, as a function of maturity, important statistics for the annual return
on zero-coupon equity with n years to maturity, with the dotted lines representing wedge case 1 and
the dashed lines representing wedge case 2. The top graph in Figure 1 shows that the unconditional
expected annual return on the zero-coupon equity is hump-shaped in maturity with the both humps
occurring at maturities less than 10 years. Recall that the firms in the extreme value decile receive
fractions of the market dividend that are relatively larger in the near future than in the far future,
while the converse is true for the firms in the extreme growth decile. Consequently, these hump-
shapes in the top graph of Figure 1 are consistent with the two wedge cases delivering value premia
in expected excess returns, just as the base case delivering the same hump-shape is consistent with
it also delivering a value premium in expected excess return. Moreover, Bx (n) plotted in Figure 2
as a function of n is u-shaped for the two wedge cases just as it is for the base case.


The two wedge cases generate results that are similar to the results for the base case in a number
of other respects. First, both wedge cases deliver a CAPM-alpha spread between the extreme value


                                                 31
and the growth deciles that is smaller than the expected excess return spread. Second, both wedge
cases deliver excess return volatility that is higher for the extreme value decile than for the extreme
growth decile. Third, the volatility numbers in the two wedge cases for the two extreme deciles
and especially for HML, though not as low as in the base case, are much lower than in the data,
except for the extreme value decile in wedge case 2, whose excess return volatility is close to that
in the data.


For the two wedge cases, the R2 s of the CAPM market model regressions are similar to the data
R2 values for the growth decile, but, as in the base case, are larger than the data R2 values for the
value decile and HML. As for all the data sorts and the base case, the extreme growth decile has
the lowest Sharpe ratio of the two extreme portfolios and HML for both wedge cases. The extreme
value decile has the highest Sharpe ratio for all the data sorts and the base case, while HML has
the highest Sharpe ratio for both of the wedge cases.


4.3     LRR-Vol Case


This subsection discusses the results for the LRR-vol case and compares them to the results from
the data and for the LW, base and two wedge cases. As in the two wedge cases, the aggregate
consumption process is allowed to differ from the market dividend process in the LRR-vol case.
This process has mean and volatility that is slowly mean reverting and is calibrated to the data,
while the market dividend process in both wedge cases is the same as that used in the base case. As
in the base case and the two wedge cases, the correlation between the change in log consumption
and the price-of-risk variable x is set to -0.99 in the LRR-vol case, consistent with habit preferences.
The persistence of the x process in the LRR-vol case is the same low annualized value of 0.14 used
in the base and two wedge cases. As discussed in section 3, the x parameters are chosen to match
the unconditional volatility of the market equity excess return as well as the mean of the equity
price-dividend ratio and its unconditional Sharpe ratio, as in the second wedge case.


4.3.1    Aggregate Moments


The last column of Table 3 contains moments for aggregate equity return, aggregate equity price-
dividend ratio and aggregate dividend growth for the LRR-vol case. The LRR-vol case is calibrated
to match the unconditional Sharpe ratio of market equity, the volatility of its excess return and
the unconditional mean of its price-dividend ratio, and Table 3 shows that it matches all three

                                                  32
moments better than wedge case 2. As with wedge case 2, since the LRR-vol case does a good
job matching the unconditional market equity Sharpe ratio and the volatility of the market equity
excess return, it also does a good job matching the unconditional market equity excess return.


However, while wedge case 2 successfully matches the volatility of equity excess return, it severely
understates the volatility of the equity price-dividend ratio. This is not a problem that the LRR-vol
case suffers from. In fact, the volatility value obtained for the LRR-vol case of 0.480 is higher than
the data value of 0.38. As would be expected given the high persistence of the σt process, the
autocorrelation of the price-dividend ratio is higher than in either wedge case, taking a value that
is even higher than the data value. One problem for wedge case 2 is the autocorrelation of the
excess market equity return, since it’s 0.03 in the data but -0.27 for wedge case 2. Allowing σt to
be slowly mean reverting rather than constant attenuates this problem since the autocorrelation
increases to -0.10 in the LRR-vol case.


4.3.2   Predictive Regressions


Table 4 reports results for the predictive regressions and the last column reports results for the
LRR-vol case. We see that the LRR-vol case remedies the most glaring weakness of the base
and two wedge cases, namely their inability to generate the excess market return predictability
observed in the data using market equity price-dividend ratio. The LRR-vol case is much closer
to the data than the base or either wedge case because it is able to produce much more negative
predictability coefficients and much larger R2 s for the regressions than those cases. For the 10 year
return horizon regression, the R2 is 0.31 for the data, 0.27 for the LRR-vol case, and less than
0.02 for these other cases. While the R2 s are still a little low relative to the data, they represent
a significant improvement over the results for the base and two wedge cases. The implication is
that allowing consumption growth to have volatility that is slowly mean reverting can help models
with external habit preferences to generate the return predictability in the data. The question
(answered in the next subsection) is whether the value premium survives the introduction of long
run risk in consumption growth volatility. As in the other cases, the LRR-vol case does a poor job
of reproducing the predictability of 1 or 10 year log dividend growth found in the data using the
log price-dividend ratio, especially at the 10 year horizon.




                                                 33
4.3.3   Value vs Growth Portfolios


Table 5 reports results for the extreme growth and value deciles as well as HML and the last
column reports results for the LRR-vol cases. This last column shows that the LRR-vol case can
also generate a value premium in both expected excess return and CAPM alpha. Moreover, the
premia in both expected excess return and CAPM alpha generated by the LRR-vol case is higher
than those obtained for either wedge case. In the LRR-vol case, the expected excess return spreads
between the value and the growth portfolio is 4.39% which is higher than the maximum value of
4.05% obtained by the other non-LW cases and actually quite close to the data value of 4.88%
per annum when sorting on B/M. The CAPM-alpha spread for these two extreme book-to-market
deciles is 4.03% per annum which is also closer to the 5.63% per annum in the data than the 2.71%
per annum in wedge case 1.


Figure 1 plots, as a function of maturity, important statistics for the annual return on zero-coupon
equity with n years to maturity, with the pale solid line representing the LRR-vol case. The top
graph of Figure 1 shows that the unconditional expected annual excess return on the zero-coupon
equity is hump-shaped in maturity with the hump occurring at a maturity less than 10 years, same
as for all the other cases except LW. Recall once more that the firms in the extreme value decile
receive fractions of the market dividend that are relatively larger in the near future than in the
far future, while the converse is true for the firms in the extreme growth decile. Consequently,
this hump-shape in the top graph of Figure 1 is consistent with the LRR-vol case delivering value
premia in expected excess return, just as the base and wedge cases deliver a value premium in
expected excess return by delivering the same hump-shape. Further, across the cases, the top
graph of Figure 1 shows that the difference between the expected annual return on the zero-coupon
market equity maturing in 3 and 13 years is largest for the LRR-vol case, which is consistent with
the value premium in expected excess return being the largest for this case.


Moreover, Bx (n) plotted in Figure 2 as a function of n is u-shaped for the LRR-vol case just as it is
for the base and two wedge cases. The Bx (n) curve for the LRR-vol case lies just above the Bx (n)
curve for the two wedge cases, but from equation (25) we see this generates a larger value premium
in expected excess return, because x̄ for the LRR-vol case is larger than for the two wedge cases.
The shape of Bσ (n), which is plotted in the bottom right-hand graph of Figure 2 as a function
of n, does not matter for the value premium in expected excess return, because the LRR-vol case
imposes ρd,w = 0, and equation (25) also shows that ρd,w = 0 means Bσ (n) does not matter for



                                                 34
unconditional mean excess market equity returns.


The LRR-vol case generates results that are similar to the results for the base and two wedge cases
in a number of other respects. First, the LRR-vol case delivers a CAPM-alpha spread between the
extreme value and the growth deciles that is smaller than the expected excess return spread, which
is counterfactual. Second, the LRR-vol case delivers excess return volatility that is higher for the
extreme value decile than for the extreme growth decile. However, the volatility numbers produced
by the LRR-vol case for the two extreme deciles, though lower, are actually quite close to the data
values, which is in contrast to the much lower numbers produced by the base and wedge cases.


Similar to the other non-LW cases, the R2 s of the CAPM market model regressions in the LRR-vol
case are slightly higher than the data R2 values for the growth decile, but much larger than the
data R2 values for the value decile. All the other cases produce R2 s for HML that are much too
high, while the LRR-vol case produces a low R2 that is quite close to the data values. As in all the
data sorts and the other cases, the extreme growth decile has the lowest Sharpe ratio of the two
extreme portfolios and HML in the LRR-vol case. Across the three portfolios, the extreme value
decile has the highest Sharpe ratio for all the data sorts, while HML has the highest Sharpe ratio
for the LRR-vol case, just like both of the wedge cases.


4.4   Return Properties of Aggregate-dividend Strips


Recent empirical work by van Binsbergen, Brandt, Koijen (2011) examines the return properties
of short-horizon returns on aggregate dividend strips. An interesting question is whether any of
our non-LW cases or the LW case can replicate the empirical properties documented for these
strips. van Binsbergen, Brandt, Koijen (2011) find that the means, volatilities and Sharpe ratios
for monthly returns on assets that pay the S&P 500 dividend for on average no more than the
next 1.5 years (short-end aggregate dividend assets) are larger than for the S&P 500 index itself.
Figure 1 shows that, for the LW case and all the fast-moving habit cases we consider, the annual
risk premium and return volatility on aggregate dividend strips are decreasing in maturity beyond
maturities that range from 1 to 10 years. Moreover, for all cases considered, both the annual risk
premium and return volatility for a one-year strip that are plotted in Figure 1 are always much
higher than those reported for the aggregate market portfolio in Table 3. The same is true for
the annual Sharpe ratio, though the ratio’s behavior as a function of the strip’s maturity for the
various cases is more complicated. Consequently, all our fast-moving habit cases and the LW case


                                                35
are able to deliver the much higher risk premia, return volatilities, and Sharpe ratios reported by
van Binsbergen, Brandt, Koijen (2011) for short-end aggregate dividend assets relative to the S&P
500 index. In contrast, van Binsbergen, Brandt, Koijen (2011) and LW find that the external habit
model with slow-moving habit produces means, volatilities and Sharpe ratios for annual returns on
aggregate dividend strips that are increasing in maturity.


Van Binsbergen, Brandt, Koijen (2011) also find a higher R2 and larger slope coefficient in absolute
value for the regression that uses asset price-dividend ratio to forecast the monthly return on a
short-end aggregate dividend asset than for the regression that uses the S&P 500’s price-dividend
ratio to forecast the monthly return on the S&P 500 index. For all the cases considered in our
paper, Figure 3 plots, as a function of maturity for aggregate dividend strips with n years to
maturity, the slope coefficient and R2 for predictive regressions of quarterly return on the strips’
own price-dividend ratios, in the top and bottom graphs, respectively. The results in Figure 3 can
be compared to the first row of the top panel of Table 4 which reports the slope coefficient and R2
for a predictive regression of quarterly aggregate market return on the aggregate market’s price-
dividend ratio. For the LW case and all our fast-moving habit cases, both the R2 and the magnitude
of the slope coefficient is much larger for the one-year strip than for the aggregate market. Thus,
our model also delivers the higher short-horizon return predictability for short-maturity aggregate
dividend strips than for the aggregate market itself that van Binsbergen, Brandt, Koijen (2011)
find empirically. In sum, these results suggest that models with fast-moving habit can also deliver
several empirical properties of aggregate dividend strips that have been recently documented.



5    Conclusion


This paper finds that the external-habit model of Campbell and Cochrane (1999) can generate a
value premium in both CAPM alpha and expected excess return when the log surplus-consumption
ratio is allowed to be not very persistent. In contrast, Lettau and Wachter (2007) find that when
the log surplus-consumption ratio is assumed to be highly persistent as in Campbell-Cochrane
(by assuming that the price-of-risk state variable is highly persistent), the external-habit model
generates a growth premium in expected excess return. However, recent micro evidence indicates
that the persistence of the log surplus-consumption ratio is likely to be quite low. Brunnermeier
and Nagel (2006) examine how risky asset holdings change in response to wealth shocks and reject
a persistent habit specification, while Ravina (2007) shows that credit card purchases are more in
line with a fast-moving habit than a slow-moving habit. Moreover, the high persistence assumed

                                                36
by Lettau-Wachter’s specification implies that the contribution of the most recent 5 years of log
consumption to log habit is just a little over 50% and so the contribution of log consumption more
than 5 years ago is almost 50%, which seems very high. We choose a value for this persistence that
is more in line with the micro evidence and which is sufficiently low that the most recent 2 years of
log consumption contribute over 98% of all past consumption to log habit, which is a much more
reasonable number than the 25% contribution generated by the Lettau-Wachter value.


In our specification, expected consumption is slowly mean-reverting, as in the long-run risk model
of Bansal and Yaron (2004), which is why our model is able to generate a price-dividend ratio
for aggregate equity that exhibits the high autocorrelation found in the data, despite the very low
persistence of the price-of-risk state variable. When aggregate consumption and market dividend
are assumed to be the same and are both calibrated to market dividends, the model is able to
match the mean equity price-dividend ratio and equity Sharpe ratio, but is unable to generate a
sufficiently volatile equity return. Driving a wedge between aggregate consumption and market
dividend by calibrating the former to aggregate consumption data also allows the model to more
closely match the volatility of the equity return.


One important dimension of equity return behavior that low persistence has difficulty replicating
when consumption growth is homoscedastic is the predictability of long-horizon equity return using
the price-dividend ratio. However, in a setting in which the consumption and dividend processes
are specified to be different, we are able to obtain long-horizon return predictability of a magni-
tude much closer to that in the data, and without destroying the value premium, by allowing the
conditional volatility of consumption growth to also be slowly mean reverting. Our results suggest
that external-habit preferences and long-run risk in the mean and volatility of consumption growth
may both play important roles in explaining the time-series and cross-sectional properties of equity
returns and prices.


An interesting dimension not considered here is the extent to which long horizon returns on the
extreme value and growth portfolios are predictable using aggregate equity’s price-dividend ratio
and other measures of the aggregate state. It would be interesting to see if fast moving habit
and aggregate consumption specified to possess long-run risk in mean and volatility and calibrated
to data can generate the low return predictability documented for these extreme portfolios by
Roussanov (2011) and others. We leave an examination of this question to future research.




                                                 37
References

[1] Abel, Andrew B., 1990. Asset Prices under Habit Formation and Catching Up with the Joneses.
   American Economic Review 80, 38-42.

[2] Abel, Andrew B., 1999. Risk Premia and Term Premia in General Equilibrium. Journal of
   Monetary Economics 43, 3-33.

[3] Bansal, Ravi, and Amir Yaron, 2004. Risks for the Long-Run: A Potential Resolution of Asset
   Pricing Puzzles. Journal of Finance 59, 1481-1509.

[4] Bansal, Ravi, Amir Yaron, Dana Kiku, 2007. Risks For the Long Run: Estimation and Inference.
   Working Paper, Duke University and University of Pennsylvania.

[5] Bekaert, Geert, and Eric Engstrom, 2009. Asset Return Dynamics under Bad Environment-
   Good Environment Fundamentals. Working Paper, Columbia University and the Federal Re-
   serve.

[6] Brunnermeier, Markus, and Stefan Nagel, 2006. Do Wealth Fluctuations Generate Time-varying
   Risk Aversion? Micro-Evidence on Individuals; Asset Allocation. Working Paper, Princeton
   University and Stanford University.

[7] Campbell, John Y., and John H. Cochrane, 1999. By force of habit: A consumption-based
   explanation of aggregate stock market behavior. Journal of Political Economy 107, 205-251.

[8] Constantinides, George M., 1990. Habit Formation: A Resolution of the Equity Premium Puz-
   zle. Journal of Political Economy 98, 519-43.

[9] Croce, M., Lettau, M and S.C. Ludvigson, 2010 Investor Information, Long-Run Risk, and the
   Duration of Risky Cash-Flows. Working paper, New York University.

[10] Dynan, Karen E., 2000. Habit Formation in Consumer Preferences: Evidence from Panel Data.
   American Economic Review 90, 391-406.

[11] Hansen, Lars Peter, John C. Heaton, and Nan Li, 2008. Consumption strikes back? Measuring
   long-run risk. Journal of Political Economy 116, 260-302.

[12] Kiku, Dana, 2006. Is the value premium a puzzle? Working Paper, University of Pennsylvania.

[13] Lettau, Martin, and Jessica Wachter, 2007. Why Is Long-Horizon Equity Less Risky? A
   Duration-Based Explanation of the Value Premium. Journal of Finance 62, 55-92.


                                               38
[14] Lynch, Anthony W., and Jessica Wachter, 2008. Using Samples of Unequal Length in Gener-
   alized Method of Moments Estimation. Working Paper, New York University and University of
   Pennsylvania.

[15] Ravina, Enrichetta, 2007. Habit Persistence and Keeping Up with the Jones: Evidence from
   Micro Data. Working Paper, New York University.

[16] Roussanov, Nikolai, 2011. Composition of Wealth, Conditioning Information, and the Cross-
   Section of Stock Returns. Working Paper, University of Pennsylvania.

[17] Santos, Tano and Pietro Veronesi, 2010. Habit Formation, the Cross Section of Stock Returns
   and the Cash-Flow Risk Puzzle. Journal of Financial Economics 98, 385-413

[18] Stambaugh, Robert, 1997. Analyzing Investments Whose Histories Differ in Length. Journal
   of Financial Economics 45, 285331.

[19] Sundaresan, Suresh, 1989. Intertemporally Dependent Preferences and the Volatility of Con-
   sumption and Wealth. Review of Financial Studies 2, 73-89.

[20] van Binsbergen, Jules H., Michael W. Brandt, Ralph S. J. Koijen, 2011. On the Timing and
   Pricing of Dividends. forthcoming American Economic Review.




                                              39
Table 1: Model Parameters. This table lists the parameter values used by LW (first column)
and for our base, wedge and LRR-vol cases (final four columns). All parameters are as defined in
section 2. The model is quarterly, but the mean of the log dividend growth g m and the log riskfree
rate rf are converted into an annual number by multiplying by a factor of 4 and we express the
persistence parameters φx and φz at annual frequencies by raising each of them to the power of 4.

            Variable     Frequency      LW       Base            Wedge        LRR-Vol
                                                               1         2
               gm         annual       2.28%     2.28%     2.28%     2.28%      2.28%
            rf = −a       annual       1.93%     1.93%     1.93%     1.93%      1.93%
            b or bm                       0         0         0          0          0
                x̄       quarterly     0.625      0.25     0.3493      0.28      0.365
               φz         annual        0.91      0.91       0.91      0.91       0.91
               φx         annual       0.865      0.14       0.14      0.14       0.14
               σm        quarterly    0.0724     0.0724    0.0724    0.0724     0.0724
               σd        quarterly    0.0724     0.0724    0.0160    0.0160     0.0164
               σz        quarterly    0.00165   0.00165   0.00165 0.00165      0.00165
               σx        quarterly    0.1225      0.16     0.3049    0.3305       0.29
               σu        quarterly        0         0      0.0435    0.0435     0.037
           ρm,z = ρd,z   quarterly     -0.82      -0.82     -0.82     -0.82      -0.82
              ρd,x       quarterly        0       -0.99     -0.99     -0.99      -0.99
              ρz,x       quarterly        0       0.81       0.81      0.81      0.81
              ρd,u       quarterly        -         -       -0.30     -0.30      -0.30
              ρz,u       quarterly        -         -      0.0037    0.0037       0.15
              ρx,u       quarterly        -         -       0.30       0.30       0.30
               δm        quarterly        1         1        4.54      4.54       4.54
                σ̄       quarterly        1         1          1        1       0.918
               φσ        quarterly        -         -          -         -       0.994
               σw        quarterly        0         0          0        0       0.037
Table 2: Contribution of Lagged Consumption to Habit. This table shows the percentage
contribution of lagged log consumption to log habit in the external habit model of CC for
parameters implied by the LW case (the first column) and our cases (the second column). Section 2
shows how to back out the implied CC parameters from the models and presents the approximate
relation between log habit and lagged log consumption used to calculate the contributions:
                           P∞           j              g
ht+1 ≈ h − d + (1 − φs )    j=0 (φs )       dt−j +   1−φs .

This table decomposes habit into the proportion from consumption within the last 5 years,
and the proportion from more than 5 years before, for LW and our calibrations.

                            Consumption Lag               Habit Contribution (%)
                                 (yrs)                     LW               Ours
                                   1                      13.50            86.00
                                   2                      11.68            12.04
                                   3                      10.10              1.69
                                   4                       8.74              0.24
                                   5                       7.56              0.03
                                   1 to 5                 51.57            99.99
                                    >5                    48.43             0.01
Table 3: Aggregate Moments. This table reports moments for aggregate equity return, aggregate
equity price-dividend ratio and aggregate dividend growth. The first column reports moments
for the data, the second reports simulated moments for the LW case, and the final four report
simulated moments for the base, wedge and LRR-vol cases. The data are the same as that in
LW and are annual from 1890-2002. The models are simulated at a quarterly frequency for a
minimum of 4 million quarters, until the moments have converged: i.e. are sufficiently close to
those when an additional 10% of simulated quarters are also included. Returns,Pdividends, and
price-dividend ratios are aggregated to annual frequencies: so P /D = Pt / 3τ =0 Dt−τ
                                                                m   m     m            m   and
 m     m          m   m          m
p − d ≡ log(P /D ). Sharpe is the unconditional Sharpe ratio of the aggregate equity, and
AC is the autocorrelation.

                   Moment       Data    LW      Base       Wedge      LRR-Vol
                                                          1     2
                 E[P m /Dm ]    25.55   20.04   30.94   31.09 23.06    25.08
                 σ[pm − dm ]     0.38   0.382   0.261   0.279 0.260    0.480
                AC[pm − dm ]    0.87    0.883   0.895   0.900 0.843    0.946
                E[Rm − Rf ]      6.33   8.116   4.497   4.512 6.180    6.835
                 σ[Rm − Rf ]    19.41   19.44   10.69   10.71 14.68    16.55
                AC[Rm − Rf ]     0.03   -0.04   -0.13   -0.14 -0.27    -0.10
                  Sharpem        0.33   0.418   0.421   0.421 0.421    0.413
                  AC[∆dm ]      -0.09   -0.03   -0.03   -0.03 -0.03    -0.02
                   σ[∆dm ]      14.48   14.42   14.38   14.38 14.39    14.43
Table 4: Predictive Regressions. The top panel is the regression of the future log excess return
on the aggregate equity on the log aggregate equity price-dividend ratio today. The middle panel
is the regression of future changes in log aggregate equity dividend on the log aggregate equity
price-dividend ratio today. The bottom panel is the regression of future changes in log aggregate
equity dividend on the consumption-aggregate equity dividend ratio for the data and z m today for
the models. The first column reports results for the data, the second reports results for the LW
case, and the final four report results for the base, wedge and LRR-vol cases. The data are the same
as that in LW and are annual from 1890-2002. The models are simulated at a quarterly frequency
for a minimum of 4 million quarters, until the moments have converged: i.e. are sufficiently close
to those when an additional 10% of simulated quarters are also included. Log returns, log dividend
growth, log price-dividend ratios and log consumption-aggregate
                                                  P3               dividend ratios are all aggregated
to annual frequencies: so pm t  − dm ≡ log(P m /
                                   t           t         D m ). Results are reported for horizons, H,
                                                     τ =0 t−τ
of 1 and 10 years. For the top panel, results are also reported for a horizon of 3 months. R2 is the
regression R2 .

                   Horizon (yrs)       Data      LW      Base      Wedge         LRR-Vol
                                                                  1     2
                        PH       m        f
                           i=1 (rt+i   − rt+i−1 ) = β0 + β1 (pm    m
                                                              t − dt ) + t+H

                        1/4                      -0.03   0.00     0.00   -0.02    -0.02
              β1         1             -0.12     -0.12   -0.01   -0.01   -0.04    -0.06
                        10             -1.09     -0.68   -0.05   -0.11   -0.14    -0.49
                        1/4                      0.02    0.00    0.00    0.00     0.01
              R2         1             0.05      0.07    0.00    0.00    0.01     0.03
                        10             0.31      0.30    0.00    0.01    0.02     0.27
                              PH     m
                               i=1 ∆dt+i       = β0 + β1 (pm    m
                                                           t − dt ) + t+H

              β1         1              0.02     0.05    0.11    0.10    0.10     0.03
                         10            -0.31     0.32    0.73    0.68    0.68     0.21
              R2         1             -0.01     0.02    0.04    0.04    0.03     0.01
                         10             0.05     0.09    0.22    0.22    0.19     0.06
                                PH       m
                                   i=1 ∆dt+i      = β0 + β1 ztm + t+H
              β1         1             0.10      3.89    3.83    3.87    3.86     3.88
                         10            0.68      26.38   26.02   26.15   26.26    26.42
              R2         1             0.03      0.04    0.04    0.04    0.04     0.04
                         10            0.25      0.25    0.25    0.25    0.25     0.24
Table 5: Value vs Growth Portfolios. The table reports results for the extreme growth decile
(portfolio 1), the extreme value decile (portfolio 10), and the portfolio which is long portfolio 10
and short portfolio 1 (the HML portfolio). The top panel reports expected excess annual return,
the volatility of annual excess return and the unconditional Sharpe ratio for annual return. The
bottom panel reports CAPM alpha, CAPM beta and regression R2 using annual returns. The first
three columns report results for the data, the fourth reports results for the LW case, and the final
four report results for the base, wedge and LRR-vol cases. Data are monthly from Ken French’s
website and span 1952 to 2002: means are annualized by multiplying by 12 and volatilities by
120.5 . For the models, we sort the 200 firms into deciles at the start of each
                                                                              P year jfrom value to
growth based on their annual price-dividend ratios, which are given by Ptj / 3τ =0 Dt−τ    for firm j.
The models are simulated at a quarterly frequency for a minimum of 4 million quarters, until the
moments have converged: i.e. are sufficiently close to those when an additional 10% of simulated
quarters are also included. Sharpei is the unconditional Sharpe ratio for portfolio i’s annual return
while Ri2 is the regression R2 for portfolio i.

                   Portfolio   E/P     C/P     B/M      LW     Base       Wedge        LRR-Vol
                                                                         1     2

                               Expected Excess Return: E[Ri ] − Rf
     E[Ri ] − Rf      1        4.71    5.05    5.67    5.28    3.38    2.02     3.24     3.87
                      10       12.95   11.81   10.55   10.81   5.30    6.07     7.06     8.27
                     HML       8.25    6.77    4.88    5.53    1.91    4.05     3.82     4.39
     σ[Ri − Rf ]      1        19.35   18.99   17.77   19.55   9.90     9.23   10.51     16.18
                      10       18.11   17.24   18.46   17.67   11.46   11.99   15.72     16.54
                     HML       15.40   14.57   15.15    8.84   4.47     6.40   8.24       8.62
       Sharpei        1        0.24    0.27    0.32    0.27    0.34    0.22     0.31     0.24
                      10       0.72    0.69    0.57    0.61    0.46    0.51     0.45     0.50
                     HML       0.54    0.46    0.32    0.63    0.43    0.63     0.46     0.51

                           CAPM α: Rti − Rtf = αi + βi (Rtm − Rtf ) + it
          αi          1        -3.09   -2.70   -1.66   -2.72   -0.66   -1.66   -0.82     -2.45
                      10        6.22    5.34   3.97     3.72    0.54   1.10    0.48       1.59
                     HML        9.31   8.04    5.63     6.45   1.20     2.71   1.30       4.03
          βi          1        1.18     1.17   1.11     0.99   0.90    0.80     0.66     0.92
                      10       1.02     0.98   1.00     0.87   1.06    1.10     1.07     0.98
                     HML       -0.16   -0.19   -0.11   -0.11   0.16    0.30     0.41     0.05
         Ri2          1        0.83    0.85    0.87    0.96    0.95    0.87     0.84     0.90
                      10       0.71    0.72    0.65    0.92    0.97    0.97     0.99     0.96
                     HML       0.02    0.04    0.01    0.06    0.14    0.25     0.53     0.01
                  25




                                                                                           LW
                                                                                           Base
                  20




                                                                                           Wedge 1
   risk premium




                                                                                           Wedge 2
                  15




                                                                                           LRR−Vol
                  10
                  5
                  0




                        0     10                      20                 30                      40
                                                Maturity (years)
                  50




                                                                                           LW
                                                                                           Base
                  40




                                                                                           Wedge 1
                                                                                           Wedge 2
   volatility
                  30




                                                                                           LRR−Vol
                  20
                  10
                  0




                        0     10                      20                 30                      40
                                                Maturity (years)
                  0.8




                                                                                           LW
                                                                                           Base
                                                                                           Wedge 1
   Sharpe ratio
                  0.6




                                                                                           Wedge 2
                                                                                           LRR−Vol
                  0.4
                  0.2
                  0.0




                        0     10                      20                 30                      40
                                                Maturity (years)



Figure 1: Returns on Zero-coupon Equity. The figure plots the unconditional expected annual
return, the unconditional volatility of annual return and the unconditional Sharpe ratio for annual
return in the top, middle and bottom graphs respectively. In each graph, the solid black line is for
the LW case, the dot-dashed line is for the base case, the dotted line is for wedge case 1, the dashed
line is for wedge case 2, and the solid pale blue line is for the LRR-vol case. The quarterly return on
zero-coupon equity with n years to maturity is calculated as the return from holding zero-coupon
aggregate equity with n years to maturity at the start of the quarter. The annual return on zero-
coupon equity with n years to maturity is then obtained by rolling over these quarterly returns for
4 quarters. The models are simulated at a quarterly frequency for a minimum of 4 million quarters,
until the moments have converged: i.e. are sufficiently close to those when an additional 10% of
simulated quarters are also included.
                                                                                   1.0
         0




                                                                                   0.8
         −1




                                                                                   0.6
                                                                      Bz(1 − φz)
         −2
    A




                                                                                   0.4
                    LW                                                                                           LW
         −3




                    Base                                                                                         Base




                                                                                   0.2
                    Wedge 1                                                                                      Wedge 1
                    Wedge 2                                                                                      Wedge 2
                    LRR−Vol                                                                                      LRR−Vol




                                                                                   0.0
         −4




                0             10         20           30         40                       0   10         20                30         40
                                   Maturity (years)                                                Maturity (years)
                                                                                   0.0
         0.0




                                                                                   −0.5
         −0.4




                                                                                                                            LRR−Vol
                                                                                   −1.0
                                                                         Bσ
    Bx
         −0.8




                                                                                   −1.5




                                                       LW
                                                       Base
                                                       Wedge 1
                                                       Wedge 2
                                                                                   −2.0




                                                       LRR−Vol
         −1.2




                0             10         20           30         40                       0   10         20                30         40
                                   Maturity (years)                                                Maturity (years)


Figure 2: Zero-coupon Aggregate Equity Log Price-dividend Ratio Coefficients A(n),
Bz (n), Bx (n) and Bσ (n). The figure plots A(n), Bz (n)(1 − φz ), Bx (n) and Bσ (n) in the top left,
top right, bottom left and bottom right graphs respectively. In each graph, the solid black line is for
the LW case, the dot-dashed line is for the base case, the dotted line is for wedge case 1, the dashed
line is for wedge case 2, and the solid pale blue line is for the LRR-vol case. For the LW, base
and wedge cases, A(n), Bz (n) and Bx (n) are, respectively, the constant coefficient, the coefficient
on z m and the coefficient on x in equation (7) of section 2 for the zero-coupon aggregate equity
price-dividend ratio paying out in n periods. For the LRR case, they are the equivalent coefficients
from equation (19) in section 2, with Bσ (n) the coefficient on (σt − σ̄). Bz (n) is multiplied by
(1 − φz ).
        0.00
        −0.10




                                                                              LW
   β1




                                                                              Base
        −0.20




                                                                              Wedge 1
                                                                              Wedge 2
                                                                              LRR−Vol
        −0.30




                0             10                    20                   30                   40
                                              Maturity (years)
        0.12
        0.08




                                                                              LW
                                                                              Base
   R2




                                                                              Wedge 1
                                                                              Wedge 2
        0.04




                                                                              LRR−Vol
        0.00




                0             10                    20                   30                   40
                                              Maturity (years)


Figure 3: Predictability of Zero-coupon Aggregate Equity. The figure plots, as a function
of maturity, the regression coefficient and R2 from the regression of future excess log return of
zero-coupon aggregate equity on the log price-dividend ratio of zero-coupon aggregate equity.
The return is calculated as the quarterly return from holding zero-coupon aggregate equity with
n years to maturity at the start of the quarter. The price-dividend ratio is the trailing annual
price-dividend ratio of zero-coupon aggregate equity with n years to maturity, and is calculated
one quarter prior to the return. The regression coefficient (β1 ) and R2 from the following regression
are reported in the top and bottom panel, respectively:
                               P3         
 m
rn,t+1 − rf = β0 + β1 ln Pn,tm/       D m
                                  τ =0 t−τ

In each graph, the solid black line is for the LW case, the dot-dashed line is for the base
case, the dotted line is for wedge case 1, the dashed line is for wedge case 2, and the solid pale blue
line is for the LRR-vol case. The models are simulated at a quarterly frequency for a minimum of
4 million quarters, until the moments have converged: i.e. are sufficiently close to those when an
additional 10% of simulated quarters are also included.
