NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TECHNOLOGY GROWTH AND EXPENDITURE GROWTH IN HEALTH CARE
Amitabh Chandra
Jonathan S. Skinner
Working Paper 16953
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16953

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2011

This research was funded by the National Institute of Aging NIA P01 AG19783 and the Robert Wood
Johnson Foundation. We thank David Balan, Michael Chernew, Janet Currie, David Cutler, Alan Garber,
Dana Goldman, Elliott Fisher, Victor Fuchs, Roger Gordon, Daniel Lawver, Ellen Meara, Joseph Newhouse,
Gabriel Scheffler, Mark Schlesinger, Zirui Song, Douglas Staiger, Jack Wennberg, seminar participants
at the University of Washington, Dartmouth, RAND, Wharton, University of California Berkeley,
Harvard, MIT, NBER, Yale, and two anonymous referees for insightful comments, and Kathy Stroffolino
for research assistance. The opinions in this paper are those of the authors and should not be attributed
to the NIA or the NBER.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Amitabh Chandra and Jonathan S. Skinner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Technology Growth and Expenditure Growth in Health Care
Amitabh Chandra and Jonathan S. Skinner
NBER Working Paper No. 16953
April 2011
JEL No. D24,I1,I12
ABSTRACT
In the United States, health care technology has contributed to rising survival rates, yet health care
spending relative to GDP has also grown more rapidly than in any other country. We develop a model
of patient demand and supplier behavior to explain these parallel trends in technology growth and
cost growth. We show that health care productivity depends on the heterogeneity of treatment effects
across patients, the shape of the health production function, and the cost structure of procedures such
as MRIs with high fixed costs and low marginal costs. The model implies a typology of medical technology
productivity: (I) highly cost-effective “home run” innovations with little chance of overuse, such as
anti-retroviral therapy for HIV, (II) treatments highly effective for some but not for all (e.g. stents),
and (III) “gray area” treatments with uncertain clinical value such as ICU days among chronically
ill patients. Not surprisingly, countries adopting Category I and effective Category II treatments gain
the greatest health improvements, while countries adopting ineffective Category II and Category III
treatments experience the most rapid cost growth. Ultimately, economic and political resistance in
the U.S. to ever-rising tax rates will likely slow cost growth, with uncertain effects on technology growth.

Amitabh Chandra
John F. Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
amitabh_chandra@ksg.harvard.edu
Jonathan S. Skinner
Department of Economics
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
jonathan.skinner@dartmouth.edu

1. Introduction
The science section of a U.S. newspaper routinely features articles on new surgical and
pharmaceutical treatments for cancer, obesity, aging, and cardiovascular diseases, with rosy
predictions of expanded longevity and improved health functioning (Wade, 2009). The business
section, on the other hand, features gloomy reports of galloping health insurance premiums
(Claxton et al., 2010), declining insurance coverage, and unsustainable Medicare and Medicaid
growth leading to higher taxes (Leonhardt, 2009) and downgraded U.S. debt (Stein, 2006). Not
surprisingly, there is some ambiguity as to whether these two trends, in outcomes and in
expenditures, are a cause for celebration or concern.
Economists and other observers often point to technology growth as the source of both
trends. Newhouse (1992) considered a wide variety of factors that could reasonably have caused
the rapid growth in health care expenditures, such as an aging population or the expansion of
health insurance, and concluded that only technology growth could explain the vast majority of
expenditure growth. Similarly, Cutler (2004) has argued that technological advances have
generated both the far-reaching advances in longevity and the rapid growth in costs.1
Unfortunately, simply attaching the label of “technological growth” as the major cause of
increases in health care expenditures doesn’t get us much closer to understanding either the
pathology of the disease – if it is a disease – or a meaningful way to address the problem – if it
is a problem. Thus the principal focus of the paper is to better understand technological growth
in health care and its impact on cost-growth and productivity improvements.
As a first step, we develop a demand-side model of health care, and like Hall and Jones
(2007), show that rising income levels can optimally generate rapid growth in health care costs in
a model with well functioning private insurance markets. But we also show that a rising role of
government financing in health care can attenuate optimal growth as marginal tax rates rise. We
then complete the supply-side with a parsimonious model of physician behavior, anchored by the
assumption that physicians want to do everything in their power to cure their patient, given
financial, ethical, and resource constraints.
The model is then used to distinguish among three general categories of treatments, ranked in
1

Cutler (2004) writes, “Money matters in health care as it does in few other industries. Where we have spent a lot,
we have received a lot in return.”
p. 2

order of their contribution to health care productivity, defined as the improvement in health
outcomes per dollar increase in costs. (These three categories closely parallel the Wennberg,
Fisher, and Skinner (2002) categorizations of effective, preference-sensitive, and supplysensitive care.) We find that the greatest health contribution occurs for low cost but highly
effective treatments: antibiotics for bacterial infection, or aspirin and beta-blockers for heart
attack patients. Highly productive innovations may be expensive – for example, anti-retroviral
drugs for the treatment of people with HIV/AIDS. But the key to the high average productivity
of these expensive drugs is a strongly negative second derivative of the survival (or production)
function, so that benefits quickly turn negative for non-HIV-infected patients. Thus, few patients
are treated in a cost-ineffective way, whether because of serious adverse effects (as in the case of
anti-retrovirals) or because the treatments are so inexpensive (in the case of aspirin for heart
attacks).
A second broad category of medical technologies includes treatments and procedures whose
benefits are substantial for at least some patients, but where the second derivative of the survival
function is small in magnitude, meaning there is a large population of potential patients for
whom health benefits converge towards zero as costs accumulate. Angioplasties with stents are a
good example. In this procedure, a catheter is used to free blockages in the heart, and the stent, a
wire mesh, is inserted to maintain blood flow. For heart attack patients treated within the first 12
hours following the heart attack, the benefits of stents are substantial. But there are many more
patients where the value of angioplasty is less clear, for example among those with stable angina,
or among those with little taste for the inherent risk of surgery. Because there are more people in
the latter category than in the former and the U.S. health care system compensates generously for
all procedures, the marginal health benefits of this innovation are driven to zero and average
productivity is diminished substantially.
The third treatment category of technological innovations encompasses those treatments for
which benefits are small or there is little scientific evidence of their value. This wide category
includes treatments for which randomized trials indicate no benefit (vertebroplasty, in which
cement is injected to stabilize vertebrae), as well as procedures whose effectiveness has not been
evaluated (intensity-modulated radiation therapy for prostate cancer). There are also many
decisions in this category that are made for the management of chronic illness. Few randomized
trials have been conducted to evaluate when pneumonia patients should be admitted to the
p.3

hospital, how frequently patients with chronic disease need to see a physician, or whether
specialists or primary care physicians can best coordinate and provide high-quality care. Not
surprisingly, much of the improved health is generated by our first category of treatments, while
much of the cost growth is generated by the third.
To return to our original question, we suggest that it’s not technology per se that causes
growth in health care expenditures – it’s the patients with full insurance coverage who demand
the latest prosthetic hip. It’s the urologist who installs the latest 64-slice CT scanner in his
office. Thus U.S. health care spending as a percentage of GDP has risen rapidly compared to
other countries because the reimbursement system encourages the widespread diffusion of both
old and new technology. This is particularly true of the U.S. Medicare program that offers
generous incentives for more intensive care. In some cases, this means that the U.S. can be the
first to enjoy the benefits of as-yet unproven technology. The downside is the widespread use of
treatments with unproven value, and the scarcity of cost-saving innovations (Nelson et al., 2009).
What are the implications for the future? In a classic 1991 article, Weisbrod suggested that
the then-new Medicare prospective payment system would provide incentives to develop costsaving technologies. His prediction may have been premature, but there is increasing evidence of
the potential for cost-saving technologies (with equivalent or better outcomes) in the
management and organization of health care to yield substantial productivity gains. But these
types of innovations are unlikely to diffuse widely through the U.S. health care system until there
are much stronger incentives to do so. Whether U.S. health care reform can change these
incentives remains to be seen. But ultimately, the growth in health care spending may be limited
by the shrinking ability of private insurance markets and tax revenues to finance ever-rising
health care bills.

2. Empirical Patterns of Health Care Costs and Outcomes
It is well understood that the United States is an outlier with respect to health care spending,
whether on a per-capita dollar basis, or with respect to the share of GDP devoted to health care,
which in 2009 was 17.6 percent. But is the U.S. also an outlier with respect to growth in health
care spending?
p. 4

This question is considered in more detail using a comprehensive sample of 21 developed
countries (Table 1) and a smaller sample of 6 countries (Figure 1).2 Countries are ranked
according to their initial 1980 share of GDP devoted to health care, and further categorized into
low, medium, and high shares of health care spending relative to GDP. In 1980, the U.S. was the
highest among this sample (9.0 percent of GDP), but not much higher than in Sweden (8.9
percent), Denmark (8.9 percent), West Germany (8.4 percent), or Ireland (8.2 percent).
Nor is the U.S. an outlier with respect to real per-capital growth rates in health care spending:
its annual growth rate from 1980 to 2008 (4.0 percent) is lower than in Spain, Portugal, Norway,
and Ireland, and barely higher than in the U.K. (3.8 percent).3 Similarly, its 1.8 percent annual
rate growth in real per-capita GDP is roughly average among the sample of 21 countries.
But the U.S. is an outlier with respect to growth in the share of GDP devoted to health care: a
growth of 7 percentage points (from 9 to 16 percent of GDP) between 1980 and 2008, well above
the average of the other OECD countries (2.7 percentage points) and the next-highest country,
Portugal (4.6 percentage points). As Figure 1 shows, the U.S. particularly stands out among the
countries with initially high 1980 health spending: Average growth in the share of GDP devoted
to health care in Sweden, Denmark, and Germany is less than one percentage point. Price
differences may explain a portion of inter-country spending differences at a point in time
(Anderson, et al., 2003), but we do not think that U.S. price growth explains the more rapid
increase in the U.S. share of health spending.
It is useful to at least check that U.S. survival rates didn’t grow faster than the countries with
the slower-growing health care sectors. Garber and Skinner (2008) found that, over time, U.S.
life expectancy growth has lagged behind a sample of 5 benchmark European countries. And
while Preston and Ho (2009) have suggested that different trends in health behavior can explain
these lagging U.S. mortality rates, Muennig and Glied (2010) find slower U.S. survival growth
even after adjusting for smoking behavior and obesity trends.
2

All data from OECD (2010). These countries were chosen if data existed for 1980-2008. A few countries were
missing 2008 data so we used 2007 or 2006 data instead. Korea and Turkey were excluded because their initial
share of GDP devoted to health care (3.9 and 2.4 percent respectively) was so low. We are comparing unified
Germany in 2008 with West Germany in 1980, but constructing two series (1980-90 for West Germany and 19922008 for unified Germany) and adding their growth, implies a smaller percentage point increase in health care
spending; 0.8 percent rather than 2.5 percentage points.

3

White (2007) however has argued that even U.S. growth rates were excessive relative to other OECD countries.

p.5

Variation in Medicare growth rates can also be seen within the United States. Figure 2
reports the growth of per-capita Medicare spending for specific Hospital Referral Regions.
During 1992-2006, inflation-adjusted per-capita Medicare spending rose at an average annual
rate of 3.5 percent. But this rapid growth still masked variations in levels of spending and in
growth rates across regions; San Francisco grew slower than the US at 2.4 percent, while Miami,
already starting from a high level of spending, experienced above-average 5.0 percent annual
growth. McAllen, Texas, the subject of an influential New Yorker article (Gawande, 2009)
experienced the most rapid recent growth – 8.3 percent annually – of all regions. Confronted
with these differences in growth rates and growth rates across regions (Chernew, et al., 2009), it
is natural to ask: Why did health care spending in some regions or countries grow faster than
others? And how did these differing growth rates affect health outcomes? Our paper offers a
framework to analyze both questions.

3. A Simple Model of Health Care and Growth
The traditional introduction to the economics of health care begins with the question of why
is health care so different from other goods. A reasonable place to begin is what appears to be a
fundamental human concern with the pain and suffering of others, which in turn has been
reflected in a collectivist view of health care. As health care became more expensive, insurance
markets appeared to insure patients against growing financial risk, ensure that providers got
paid, and in the case of publicly-provided insurance, to garner political dividends arising from
the creation of a broad-based entitlement program (Fuchs, 1998). Widespread insurance
markets lead naturally to the twin problems of moral hazard and adverse selection (Cutler and
Zeckhauser, 2004). Moral hazard occurs because a third-party, the insurance company, is paying
most of the cost of the transaction between the first party (the physician or health provider) and
the second party (the patient). This can lead to individuals not taking sufficient precaution
against illness, or more commonly, it can cause patients and providers to consume and provide
“too much” health care (Newhouse, 1993).
Adverse selection can occur on both sides of the market. Insurance companies structure
contracts in a way to attract low-risk enrollees away from other firms, for example by offering
managed care options that are most appealing to healthy enrollees. Adverse selection can also
p. 6

occur on the consumer side of the market, for example when people with higher expectations of
poor health buy long-term care insurance (Finkelstein and McGarry, 2006).
A third issue that arises in health care is the principal-agent problem; that because of
asymmetric information, the physician is making decisions on behalf of the patient, leading to
decisions that accommodate physician interests. This is the basis for a long-standing debate over
the existence of “supplier-induced demand,” a literature extending back several decades that
seeks to find evidence of physicians acting in their interest – to shift out demand for their
services – even when it may harm, at least financially, the patient (McGuire, 2000).
While each of these three issues is clearly important for health care policy, they are not
equally important in explaining the twin growth rates in technological progress and health care
costs. We are less concerned with the adverse-selection problem, since rapid growth in
spending occurs even in settings where adverse selection issues are less important, such as
Medicare which covers nearly every elderly American. Rather, we argue that the combination of
moral hazard and the principal agent problem has provided fertile ground for the particularly
rapid growth in health care costs.
In our analysis we are not thinking as much of the traditional (static) moral hazard problem,
since typical estimates of price elasticity cannot explain more than a tiny fraction of the overall
growth in health care costs (Newhouse, 1992; Manning et al., 1987). The more important role of
insurance is in financing the dramatic growth in health care expenditures through innovation and
the rapid diffusion of technology (Finkelstein, 2007). This view has its antecedents in
Weisbrod’s (1991) classic article arguing that the structure of insurance coverage was an integral
part of rapid cost growth. The intuition is straightforward: if you pay for it, they will build it.
This paper seeks to retain the spirit of Weisbrod’s insights as we next develop a simple model of
demand (consumer) and supply (provider) decisions to characterize the process of growth in
technology and expenditures.
3.1 The Demand for Health Care
We develop intuition from the demand-side models in Hall and Jones (2007) and Murphy
and Topel (2006) by collapsing the structure to a 2-period model of consumption and leisure,
where a consumer’s utility is based on consumption and leisure in the first period, and postretirement consumption in the second period.
p.7

The probability of surviving to the second period, s(x), is in turn is influenced by medical
spending x:
(1)

V  U (C 1,  1 ) 

~
s ( x )U ( C 2 )
1 

where Ci is consumption in period i, ℓ1 is leisure in period 1 (and retiree leisure is subsumed in
~
the second-period utility function U ), δ is the discount rate, x measures health care inputs, and
the survival function is concave, so that s’(x) ≥ 0, s” < 0.4 More generally, s may be viewed as
a “quality of life” indicator that reflects both survival and functioning since it augments secondperiod consumption and leisure. Measuring quality of life, and not simply survival, is important
in assessing the productivity of new innovations. Hip replacements, knee replacements, and
back surgery for spinal stenosis are all procedures that improve the quality and not the quantity
of life.
Utility is maximized subject to the budget constraint:
(2)

w1 (1   1 )  P  C1  px  C 2 /(1  r )

where w1 is the wage rate, p the consumer price of health care, P the premium paid for insurance
when p differs from q, the social cost of health care, and r is the interest rate.5 The maximization
problem yields the optimality condition for the individual (holding P constant)
(3)

p

~
U s ' ( x)U (C2 )

C1
(1   )

This captures the idea that optimal spending on health should be at the point where p dollars
given up for period one consumption should yield equal incremental benefits from an improved
chance of surviving to period two. Rearranging (3) yields
(4)

 

~
U (C 2 )
p

U
s' ( x)
(1   )
C1

4

When the s(x) function is non-concave, the presence of health insurance can also have a first-order impact on
utility (Nyman, 1999). This occurs in the case where insurance allows low income individuals to receive, say, a
$100,000 bone marrow transplant for which there is no reasonable alternative that is slightly less effective but lower
cost.
5

For more complex models involving investments in health capital, see Grossman (1972).
p. 8

We define Ψ to be individual demand for an extra quality-adjusted year of survival, which in
turn depends on the ratio of total second-period utility divided by the marginal utility of periodone consumption. In other words, because health is viewed as extending the period of time that
one enjoys in this world, the benefit relates to total utility of retirement leisure and consumption
(Murphy and Topel, 2006). Thus the value of remaining life years could therefore remain
substantial even after the individual has retired and is supported by Social Security and pension
income. 6
Assume that the price of health care p is equal to its social cost q, and we can normalize
health care inputs x such that the social cost q = 1. Then the right-hand side of Equation (4) is
simply the cost-effectiveness ratio, or how much it costs at the margin to gain one qualityadjusted life year, which is optimally set equal to marginal demand, Ψ.
A key implication of this model is that a rise in income and consumption will imply a morethan-proportional decline in the marginal utility of non-medical consumption. For example, if we
assume a constant relative risk aversion γ of 2 for utility, then doubling income would reduce the
marginal utility of consumption to 2-2 = .25 times its previous level. Combined with the small
increase in second-period utility, willingness to pay for health care will rise more than four
times, thus stimulating demand for additional health care – or moving society along the s(x)
curve to a point where the optimal cost-effectiveness ratio is considerably larger than it is now.
Intuitively, the marginal utility of a third car or flat screen TV in a future affluent world should
be lower than an increased opportunity to enjoy higher utility in the future; thus Hall and Jones
(2007) suggest that we might (optimally) devote as one-third of future GDP to health care.
A limitation of this utility-based approach arises because we cannot measure directly yearspecific utility. The typical approach to writing utility in these models is to include a constant
1

C
~
term, so that U  b  2 where γ is, as above, the Arrow-Pratt constant relative risk aversion.
1 

The reason why we need an intercept term b is because otherwise, when γ > 1, utility is less than
zero (C1-γ/(1-γ) < 0), implying that early death would improve lifetime utility. Thus b is a free
variable, and in practice it is calibrated to match existing evidence on how much to value a
6

For the social planner, there is an additional term, which captures whether an individual is making a net
contribution to society in the sense of their income being greater than consumption (Murphy and Topel, 2006; Hall
and Jones, 2007).

p.9

human life. Murphy and Topel (2006) suggest that a life-year may be worth as much as
$350,000 depending on age based on an EPA midpoint of $6.2 million for a human life. But
there is considerable debate about the “value” of a life, with confidence intervals from earlier
studies ranging from one to ten million dollars (Dockins, et al., 2004; also see Aldy and Viscusi,
2008). Ashenfelter and Greenstone’s (2004) estimate of 1.9 million dollars (in 2006 dollars) is at
the lower end of the estimates, but yields a value per life-year of about $100,000 for middle-aged
people, consistent with the Garber and Phelps (1997) rule-of-thumb that a life-year should be
valued at roughly double average annual income.
One might also object to the model’s assumption that the expected value of second-period
~
utility is s ( x )U (C 2 ) rather than a more general functional form U ( s ( x ), C 2 ) allowing for
diminishing returns to greater longevity. While the former specification matches the time-series
evidence in the U.S., it does less well in matching cross-sectional data. When γ = 2, for example,
an individual with $200,000 in income should be willing to pay 100 times as much at the margin
for health care as an otherwise identical person with $20,000 in income. Even allowing for the
presence of health insurance (which would blunt such income differences), we do not observe
such a pronounced difference in health care expenditures (McClellan and Skinner, 2006).
One could reconcile this paradox in a model where fundamental choices about health care
technology are made collectively. Society chooses a basic level of technology for every
provider, either because of ethical and equity concerns, because the care is provided under a
uniform insurance program (e.g., Medicare), or because it makes little sense to maintain
hospitals and emergency rooms catering solely to high-income patients. In this case, the optimal
level of care is determined by treating health care as if it were a public good, where optimal
health care is determined by equating the sum of marginal rates of substitution between health
care and other goods across the entire population equal to aggregate costs. This approach, which
implies a single aggregate “value of life,” would exhibit rising health care costs over time but
much less variation across income groups at a point in time.
Another concern with the above framework is the assumption that health care (or health care
insurance) is purchased in a representative agent model. In practice, health care financing
involves both the government sector and considerable amounts of redistribution, from young to
old and from healthy to sick. Consider the extreme case of a health care system financed entirely
p. 10

by a payroll tax with no copayments:
(1   1 ) w (1   )  C 1 

(2’)

C2
1 r

where τ is the marginal tax rate. Ignoring other government expenditures, the budget constraint
for the government (in per capita terms) is qx  (1   1 ) w  . The first-order condition in
Equation (4) is rewritten:
(5)

 

~
U (C 2 )
p

U
s' ( x)
(1   )
C1

where   [(1   1 )] /[(1   1 )   d 1 / d ] . Note that Ω is greater than one whenever taxation
induces efficiency costs. Furthermore, as the marginal tax rate rises, Ω will rise more than
proportionally, leading to a much-diminished demand for additional health care.7 Thus over
time, financing constraints could act as an additional brake on health care demand (Baicker and
Skinner, 2011).
Despite these caveats, the implications of the model are twofold: that relative demand for
health care may be expected to increase over time, and that “optimal” growth depends on how
health care is financed. We next turn to the supply side of the health care market.

3.2 A Static Model of Provider Behavior
We develop a model of physician and provider behavior based in a standard economic
framework, but one which tries to capture what physicians say and do. The model is grounded in
a single assumption about behavior:
Health care providers seek to maximize the perceived health of their patient, but
may deviate from this goal because of financial incentives, resource capacity,
ethical judgment, and patient demand.
That is, the vast majority of physicians and health care providers do their best to improve
7

As Kaplow (2008) has argued, the diminished demand for health care arises not so much from the distortion of
the tax per se, which in theory can be undone by appropriate transfers, but because of the increased requirement to
redistribute resources across individuals.

p.11

as many lives as they can.8 While there are always occasional rogue physicians who game the
system at the expense of patients, 9 most physicians believe that what they are doing is best for
their patient, and when unconstrained, say they’ve done everything possible.10 While there is
remarkable heterogeneity in physician beliefs, as we document below, let us for the moment
assume that there is a single known survival or “production” function st(xit) for patient i at time t,
and that physicians seek to maximize the value of health Ψtst(xit) by driving the marginal value
of spending to zero.
In practice, there are both explicit and implicit (or hidden) constraints on health care. In
the U.S. explicit restrictions are rare, and they are generally restricted to gatekeeper models of
health maintenance organizations (HMOs), which may require a second opinion or a sign-off for
common medical procedures. Implicit restrictions are more common; the limitations of
physicians who only have 24 hours in the day, a lack of diagnostic or surgical facilities (or
catheterization labs not staffed at night), and queues for the MRI or intensive care unit (ICU)
beds. Physicians often do not chafe against these implicit restrictions or are even aware of them,
simply adjusting their “best practice” to the resources they are accustomed to using.
Physicians also care about the income they make. Let income for physician j be defined as

8

This model is simpler in many respects than the model in Pauly (1980), where physicians provide two kinds of
services (diagnostic and therapeutic), and they may adjust both prices and quality of care (e.g., accuracy of
diagnosis) depending on market demand and the extent of competition in the market.
9

For example, two cardiac surgeons in Redding, CA, motivated by artificially high payment rates, pulled healthy
patients off the golf course for emergency cardiac surgery (Enkoji, 2002).
10

This is illustrated in the following quotation from an ICU physician (Goertz, 2004):
Here is an example I have used when teaching medical students and residents: You are taking care of
a patient in the ICU. You have done every test and procedure you know to do and have done
everything that all the consultants have recommended. I now tell you that you must spend another
$5,000 (originally I used $1,000) to improve the patient's quality of care. What would you do with the
money?
By this point the student or resident is in a bit of a quandary because they are not quite sure how to
use the additional money. If there were a continuing positive linear relationship, it should be
reasonably easy to suggest more things that result in improved patient care. Generally the suggestions
are more, or repeated, tests and procedures. I respond to the common answers with a statement that if
you do more tests or procedures, you could in fact make the patient worse. How? If you do more tests,
all tests have false positives and negatives. How will you use results that contradict earlier tests? With
again more tests, and the subsequent potential for much more confusion. If you repeat or do another
procedure, how do you interpret the results? Also, procedures generally have potential side effects or
complications, so again you have a very high risk of NOT improving quality or outcome with more
money.
p. 12

Y jt  m jt Wt   jt x jt  R jt

(6)

where income comprises two parts: the salary component, equal to Wt (payment per patient)
times the number of patients mjt; and the business component; the number of total procedures per
physician summed over their I(j) patients, xjt = Σi=I(j) xijt times marginal profitability πjt minus
fixed costs Rjt Note that the price paid by the patient, p, could be quite different from the
profitability of the procedure, π.11
We posit that income Y enters positively in the utility function, but allow as well for a target
or reference income Zjt (see Rizzo and Zeckhauser, 2003), so the income-based component of
utility is    (Y jt  Z jt ) .12 Thus the health care provider is assumed to maximize the sum
Ψtst(xit) + Ω.
One factor that could affect growth differentially is the fraction of physician income derived
from salary versus business sources. For example, many health care providers in the U.S. own or
lease expensive machinery such as MRIs, 64-slice computerized tomography, and robotic
surgical machinery. These tend to exhibit high fixed costs R and (at least in the U.S.) high
marginal profit (π) per unit of use, up to their capacity limit; thus both income and substitution
effects would encourage expanded use. Differences across countries in how new technologies are
reimbursed should affect country-specific rates of diffusion.
Capacity constraints are more likely in countries such as the U.K. or other countries with
centralized financing. In this case, the central health agency has a global budget used to provide
inputs to individual hospitals and clinics, for example a certain number of artificial knee or hip
joints devices (Aaron and Schwartz, 2005). Similarly, some regions may not be allocated as
many magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) machines, or cardiac catheterization units. Typically,
physicians adjust implicitly to these constraints, although waiting lists for surgery are often the
subject of public demonstrations and political controversy. Alternatively, the constraint could
reflect ethical norms against spending too much of the nation’s resources. Whether implicit or

11

While we maintain a single composite x for inputs, in practice different types of inputs exhibit much different
levels of profitability, for example cardiac procedures are typically very well compensated (Hayes et al., 2007),
while others are loss leaders.

12

Target income behavior would be generated by specifying that Ω’ is large and positive for Yjt – Zjt < 0, and zero
otherwise.

p.13

explicit, physicians and hospitals in these cases are operating subject to constraints, which can be
expressed as x jt  X jt .
An implication of the supplier-induced demand model is that physicians will knowingly harm
their patients if they are paid enough to do so. This model, however, assumes that every
physician believes their actions will benefit the patient. We therefore include an additional
constraint that the patients treated by physician j must be better off than the utility level in the
absence of the treatment, Vjt .13 This is admittedly a simplistic way to consider the demand side,
but it is consistent with empirical evidence (e.g., Jacobson, et al., 2010).
At a point in time, the Lagrangian for a given physician is written:
(7)

  t s t ( x jt )   ( m jt Wt   jt x jt  R jt )   jt ( x jt  X jt )   jt (V jt  V jt )

The first-order condition for (7) is:
(8)

t st ' ( x jt )   jt  jt   jt   jt v jt

where ωjt is the derivative of Ω, and vjt the total derivative of V with respect to x (including any
decline in non-medical consumption as a consequence of purchasing x), evaluated for the jth
physician at time t. That is, physicians spend up to the point where the combination of the social
marginal value of health or functioning, and the financial reward or penalty, weighted by the
importance of such rewards (ω), is limited by a capacity (or knowledge) constraint μ and a
demand-side constraint that insures the individual is better off with the treatment than without. It
is convenient to define a variable λ that summarizes the overall impact of financial incentives,
capacity constraints, and demand:

   jt  jt   jt   jt v jt
How then is supply and demand equated? Note that demand in Equation (4) can be rewritten
as Ψtst’(x) = pt (or the price facing the consumer) while the physician sets Ψtst’(x) = λt. Different
scenarios are illustrated in Figure 3, where the model assumes that physicians are able to allocate
treatments to those who would benefit most. In the framework of labor economics, this is the

13

Note that the constraint that patients are better off does not preclude putting the patient at some risk – for
example, plastic surgery carries risks, but the patient prefers the treatment. For the sake of simplicity, we assume a
representative patient rather than multiple patients each with a binding constraint.
p. 14

assumption that physicians use a Roy Model to rank patients on the basis of their benefit from a
benefit and then work down that distribution, so the marginal patient is the one with the lowest
incremental benefit. This assumption is supported by empirical work for heart attacks (Chandra
and Staiger, 2007) and for Cesarean sections (Baicker, Buckles and Chandra, 2006).
First consider a hypothetical country arbitrarily labeled “UK” where supply constraints are
sufficiently high to exceed both out-of-pocket costs for most treatments, so that (p < λ), but are
also high enough so that λ exceeds the social cost q. In this case, there is too little spending on
health care. (One might expect private markets to spring up in this case, where wealthy patients
demand additional services even at q.) Next, consider the case where individuals face the full
price of their health care q, perhaps because they lack insurance or are paying from a health
savings account.14 Even when the physician makes money by doing more than the optimal, she
will still provide at most the optimal quantity of health care x* because of the binding constraint
that doing more than x* will make the patient worse off. The key assumption here is that the
physician acts as an agent of the patient. This assumption will not hold if patients ascribe greater
benefits to procedures than is justified by clinical evidence or physician beliefs (Rothberg, et al.,
2010), or if the physician does not always account for patient preferences (Pritchard et al., 1998).
Finally, we consider the more common case in the U.S. where low out-of-pocket expenses
faced by consumers coupled with profitable compensation for procedures results in λ < q and
hence the conventional over-use of health care, as shown in Figure 3. (The constraint that
physicians act as the agent of their patients ensures that p ≤ λ < q as well.) At the extreme, when
there are no restrictions interfering with physicians’ motives to do as much as possible,
utilization is x' where s'(x) = 0, as shown in Figure 3.15
More complicated is where net profitability π is positive, there are no capacity constraints,
and physicians are able to convince patients that the treatments will benefit them, implying that
s'(x) may turn negative. Examples where physicians expose patients to serious mortality risk in
return for financial gain are rare, but there is a larger potential margin for procedures where there
is little evidence for improved survival but side effects are significant. Examples include the
14

The health savings account involves spending after-tax dollars, but these accounts also help to offset pre-existing
tax distortions (such as the tax on labor supply), thus potentially moving the consumer’s choice closer to x*.

15

To keep the figure simple, we have assumed constant social costs, but that is not necessary to make our point:
marginal social costs can increase in the level of x (that is, q' (x)>0).

p.15

decrement in sexual functioning following treatments for prostate cancer among older men, or
chemotherapy administered to people with incurable cancers. The complex interaction between
provider and patient is revisited in Section 4.2 below.
Finally, how might malpractice laws affect this equilibrium? While much of the concern
about malpractice laws have been directed towards “defensive medicine” that would tend to
increase utilization, this model suggests more modest effects such as those found in Mello et al.
(2010). Malpractice premiums increase fixed costs R, increasing work effort through the income
effect, while the risk of malpractice should encourage more diagnostic tests. But malpractice
liability rules also reduce utilization through the substitution effect: the incremental procedure
exposes the physicians to more malpractice risk and thus raises her implicit marginal cost per
procedure (Currie and MacLeod, 2008; Baicker, Fisher, and Chandra, 2007).
3.3 A Dynamic Model of Provider Behavior
To this point, the analysis has been in a static framework. We next turn to one that attempts to
model the dynamics of change (see also McGuire, 2009). Our approach is to take the derivative
of the first-order equation (8), 16 rearrange and simplify. Letting Δxjt = xjt+1 – xjt and similarly
for other variables, we write:
(9)

x jt 

t st ' ( x jt )  t st ' ( x jt )   jt  jt   jt  jt   jt   v jt  v jt '
 t s" ( x jt )

Thus, the growth in health care real inputs is expressed as the sum of several components.
Looking first at the numerator of (9), as income trends upward, one might expect a
corresponding increase in the value of a human life ΔΨt, as noted in the demand-side model
above, and hence a more than proportional increase in the demand for health care innovations.
On the other hand, premiums for health insurance Pt (from the budget constraint in Equation 2)
would likely rise to maintain actuarial balance in the private insurance market; this in turn could
dig into disposable income, cutting back on demand. The second term on the RHS of (9)
16

Taking the total differential of the first-order condition yields the following expression:

t st ' ( x jt )  t st ' ( x jt )  t s" ( x jt )x jt
  jt  jt   jt  jt   jt X jt   jt  

d 2V jt
dx jt

2

 

dV jt
dx jt
p. 16

captures a shift in the survival curve – technological innovations that increase survival holding
constant inputs; these imply movement along the survival production function to reestablish
equilibrium conditions. For example, through either learning-by-doing or knowledge spillovers,
the ability of providers to use a technology may improve over time. If so, more of that
technology should be delivered to patients.
The primary control over U.S. health care expenditure growth is through the setting of prices,
for example, through reimbursement rates for physician or inpatient services by Medicare and
Medicaid (Newhouse, 2002), or through the negotiation of discounts by large managed care
organizations and insurance firms. Thus the third term reflects the substitution effects arising
from changes in the profitability of health care services – lower profitability reduces use of
inputs. But as the literature on physician behavior has emphasized, cutting reimbursement rates
can have offsetting effects when physician or provider practices experienced reduced income,
leading to the fourth term, at least for procedures or services that continue to be profitable.
The fifth term reflects changes in the shadow price of capacity or knowledge constraints.
Capacity constraints are typically more explicit in countries such as the UK and Canada, where
quantity restrictions based on central decisions of the government are the primary determinants
of changes in both outcomes and costs. But they may also be present in the U.S. in the short
term through shortages in resources such as ICU hospital beds, specialists, or MRIs. Changes in
these resources are subject to a whole host of incentives, but changes take time, so gradual
capacity adjustment could translate into short-term quantity constraints.
The final terms in Equation (9) reflect the potential that individual patients are no longer
better-off as a consequence of the additional health care services, and thus we assume that
procedure growth would be curtailed or halted. This would occur, for example, when the price
facing consumers p, is rising, income is falling, or if the marginal value of the procedure is
fading.
A critical parameter that affects the magnitude and speed of the growth in x is in the
denominator of Equation (9), the second derivative of the production function s″. When there
are well-defined groups of people who benefit from the treatment, and where outside of that
group the treatment causes harm – such as anti-retroviral therapy for people with HIV/AIDS –
the magnitude of s″ is large, meaning that any changes in prices, income, or other factors has a
p.17

very small impact on its expansion. By contrast, when there are a large number of people who
could potentially benefit if only a small amount, then –s” is very small, which magnifies
dramatically the potential changes over time in utilization.
4. A Typology of the Productivity of Medical Technologies
The above analysis describes the static and dynamic nature of technology use for a given
physician. We aggregate both outcomes and costs across technologies to measure aggregate
productivity in health care spending. That is, consider Equation (9) but now extended to a
variety of k different technological innovations or treatments. Aggregate productivity for a given
increase in spending will depend on the relative diffusion of each of these specific technological
innovations and their respective value in improving outcomes. Summing the change in
expenditures over all treatments yields
 ( q t x t )  q t x t  x t q t   q kt x kt  x kt q kt ,
k

where qt is the year-specific aggregate price index and we have already summed over all j health
care providers. Ignoring the “revaluation” of existing lifespan because of change in the marginal
value of life Ψt , the change in the economy-wide value of the quality-adjusted survival due to
health care treatments (x) is approximated by:
(10)

t st   t {s kt ( xkt ) xkt s 'kt ( xkt )  q kt xkt }
k

where Λskt(xkt) is the shift in the kth input production function, evaluated at xkt.17 Combining (9)
and (10), the net improvement in health outcomes relative to expenditures is:
(11)

t st   ( qt xt )   t s kt ( xkt ) xkt  q kt xkt t s 'k ( xkt 1 )  q kt xkt
k

Thus, Equation (11) can be used to parse productivity gains as the sum of three components. The
first term measures in part traditional technological innovation in health care as noted above; this
may also include the development of complementary technologies that make existing
technologies more productive. But it will also reflect any secular change in relative technical
17

That is, Λskt is the shift in the production function from t to t+1, holding factor inputs constant, or technological
progress in the absence of technical or productive inefficiency (See Jacobs, Smith, and Street, 2006; also see Figure
1 of Färe et al., 2004). This equation ignores potential productivity spillovers, for example as was found in Chandra
and Staiger (2007), or other interactive effects.
p. 18

inefficiency, for example if in the aggregate, hospitals or provider groups move closer to the
production possibility frontier (Färe et al., 1994). The second term represents changes in the real
price q of inputs x. Some view the level of q as the primary reason why health care costs so
much in the United States (Anderson, et al., 2003).18 More relevant here is whether q is growing
more rapidly in the U.S. than elsewhere. While Gaynor and Vogt (2003) have shown that market
consolidation can lead to cost increases, the magnitude of such effects are modest relative to
aggregate trends. Conversely, technological innovations producing the same inputs x but at
lower cost q could lead to productivity gains (Weisbrod, 1991), a point to which we return in
Section 6.4.
The third term reflects the net productivity benefit of the kth treatment (the term in brackets,
or the difference between the value of extra health less its costs) times the speed at which the kth
treatment diffuses (Δxkt, as in Equation 9). While this latter term affects our overall measure of
productivity, it arises because of allocative inefficiency, in that the marginal rates of substitution
for each input are not equal to their marginal rates of transformation (Garber and Skinner,
2008).19
At this point, we can begin to see how the nature of preexisting distortions in health care
might affect the aggregate productivity of health care expenditures. First, consider a
conventional competitive non-health sector of the economy where the marginal value of
production always equals social cost. In this case, the third term in (11) would drop out. But in
health care, there is both enormous heterogeneity in the cost-effectiveness of specific treatments,
and heterogeneity in the speed at which inputs diffuse across treatment categories. Regions or
countries will experience attenuated productivity growth (conditional on total spending) when
the fastest growing treatments are also those with poor net value. This could occur both because
the new technology has poor cost-effectiveness (Ψt skt ' - qkt < 0) or because the health care
system fails to sort patients and deliver care to those who would benefit the most.
In considering medical technology, we therefore group technologies into three categories
18

Even at a point in time, the case of price differences is difficult to establish. Two nations may have the same
number of hospitalization days or physician visits per capita. Because the intensity of these visits may be very
different in terms of what was done and prescribed, these unmeasured differences in utilization will manifest
themselves as price differences.

19

This formulation sidesteps both the controversy surrounding how one accounts for future costs when a current
innovation increases future survival probabilities, or future costs (e.g., Lee, 2008).

p.19

based on their average cost-effectiveness: (I) Highly effective care including “home run”
treatments with cost effectiveness ratios of as little as $50 per life-year (e.g. Cutler, 2004) and
for whom the social productivity of expanding use is strongly positive (Ψsk' is much larger than
qk); (II) Treatments where there are clear positive gains for a subset of people receiving
treatment, but with considerable heterogeneity in the marginal effectiveness across the
population; and (III) technology with poor cost-effectiveness for the overwhelming majority of
patients or where we simply don’t know the value because of a lack of clinical studies.
4.1 Category I: “Home Run” Technologies
The first category of medical technologies includes those that are cost-effective and useful
for nearly everyone in the relevant population. Perhaps the most famous example of such an
intervention is Joseph Lister’s recommendation that surgeons wash their hands, use gloves, and
swab wounds with carbonic acid (Lister, 1867).20 Improved health behaviors, arising for example
from the publication of the 1964 Surgeon General’s Report on smoking, also fit into this
category of innovation (Cutler and Kadiyala, 2003).
Cutler, Deaton, Lleras-Murray (2006) argue that new drugs, primarily antibiotics such as
sulphonamide drugs, played an important role in reducing US mortality between the 1930s and
1960. In particular, the development of these drugs allowed for progress against a range of
bacterial killers including pneumonia, tuberculosis, dysentery and venereal disease. Similarly,
the development of low-cost antibiotic “sulfa” drugs led to remarkable improvements in
outcomes following outbreaks of bacterial meningitis. After the 1950s, there were incremental
gains in meningitis mortality, but a large portion of the new developments, such as the thirdgeneration cephelosporins, were designed to treat infections that had developed resistance to the
first- and second-generation antibiotics.
Another example of highly cost-effective interventions comes from the introduction of
surfactants to treat neonatal acute respiratory distress for newborns. In the last quarter of 1989
the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved the use of two new formulations of this class
of drugs. Schwartz et al. (1994) estimated that this drug reduced the odds of in-hospital mortality
20

Lister acknowledged that his research was influenced by the Austrian physician, Ignaz Semmelweis. Semmelweis
demonstrated that maternal mortality from puerperal fever (an infection of the genital tract after giving birth) could
be reduced from 12.2 percent to 2.4 percent by making physicians wash their hands with chlorinated lime between
autopsy and obstetrical rotations.
p. 20

by 30 percent, and attribute to it 80 percent of mortality decline between 1989 and 1990. In
addition to being a miracle drug for thousands of low birth-weight babies, surfactants also
proved to be protective of cost, which declined by 10 percent for survivors, and 30 percent for
decedents.
Often highly productive treatments diffuse slowly. In some cases, policies that relax capacity
or financial constraints, for example expanding coverage to highly productive neonatal care, can
generate large productivity shifts (Currie and Gruber, 1997). In other cases, overall productivity
gains are enhanced when overtreatment is limited. For example, consider the technologies
characterized by initial large benefits for a segment of the population, but where –s″ is large in
magnitude, as illustrated in Figure 4. Even when the marginal productivity is pushed to s’(s) =
0, as shown at x*, the average productivity of this innovation since its introduction – that is, the
area under the curve in Figure 4 (gross benefits) less the shaded rectangle (costs) is still
substantial.
In other words, Category I treatments aren’t always low-cost. The best example is antiretroviral drugs for the treatment of HIV patients to prevent the development of full-blown
AIDS, a treatment which, despite its high costs of both development and treatment, exhibits
favorable cost-effectiveness ratios under $25,000 per life year (Duggan and Evans, 2005;
Lichtenberg, 2006). One study has found that the marginal dollar value to patients in terms of
future life expectancy is roughly 20 times the costs of development (Philipson and Jena, 2006).
Given the serious side-effects of the drug, however, no physician would ever prescribe it to
anyone without HIV/AIDS.21
Another example of a Category I success story is the treatment of testicular cancer. Before
1970, diagnosis was followed by near-certain early death. Since that time, new developments in
the treatment of testicular cancer have exhibited dramatic success, with remarkable costeffectiveness or even cost-saving (Shibley et al., 1990). However, few men would agree to
undergo an orchiectomy (don’t ask) without a confirmed diagnosis, limiting the growth in
expenditures on testicular cancer. And unfortunately, the AIDS and testicular cancer success
stories are the exception rather than the norm, limiting their use as paradigms for health care
productivity.
21

The curve is not discontinuous however; treatment may start too early.

p.21

4.2 Category II: Potentially Cost-Effective Technologies with Heterogeneous Benefits
A more interesting set of medical technologies are those which are cost-effective in some
patients but have declining marginal benefits in others (so that –s″ is small). Despite clear
benefits to some patients, such technologies can still exhibit modest or even poor average costeffectiveness across all patients. 22 A leading example is angioplasty, more commonly known as
PCI (percutaneous coronary intervention), an invasive procedure in which a cardiologist inserts a
thin wire into the coronary arteries, and inflates a balloon at the tip of the wire to restore blood
flow because of an arterial occlusion. Typically a wire mesh cylinder, known as a stent, is also
inserted in the artery to prevent blockage from occurring again. The price depends on who pays
for it, but generally runs above $15,000. These have been shown to dramatically improve
survival following a heart attack only if performed within the first 12 or 24 hours following its
onset, and it is highly cost-effective for this use (Hartwell et al., 2005; Hochman et al., 2006).
For stable coronary disease, roughly one-third of all PCI procedures, clinical trials have found no
survival benefit and modest improved functioning relative to optimal medical therapy (Boden et
al., 2007; Weintraub et al., 2008). Its value, as measured by survival, is also higher for relatively
younger patients, and is highly cost effective for this group, but it is of lesser value in older
populations.23 Other examples of Category II innovations include the development of
antidepressants (Berndt, et al., 2002), and the continued diffusion of Cesarean sections.
We therefore draw this innovation as having quite different characteristics from Category I
advances. Figure 5 shows a hypothetical graph of Category II benefits and costs using PCI as an
example. While there are some who clearly benefit (i.e., primary PCI just after a heart attack),
there are many more people who gain small or near-zero benefits; on net as represented in Figure
5, the average productivity of this innovation could in theory be zero or even negative.
Schwartz (1987) offers a related view of technological diffusion and cost growth. He notes
that new technologies involve fewer risks, for example the use of laporoscopy rather than open
surgery to remove inflamed gallbladders, and therefore they increase costs not because each
22

While heterogeneity in treatment effects is typically the norm, Category II treatments also include homogeneous
treatments with uniform yet similarly uninspiring cost-effectiveness ratios of (say) $200,000 per life year.

23

Chandra and Staiger (2007) note that the causal effect of intensive treatments for heart attacks improves one year
survival by 18.5 percent in patients less than the age of 80, but increases one year survival by only 3.5 percent in
those over the age of 80 (the latter result was not statistically different from zero).
p. 22

procedure is more expensive, but because so many more patients may now experience relative
gains. As a consequence, per patient costs fall but total costs increase as the new procedure
diffuses (Cutler and Huckman, 2003).
It is well known that across physicians, there are differences in the perception of benefits for
specific procedures; furthermore they appear to predict overall spending across regions (Sirovich
et al., 2005). For example, stent (PCI) rates in Elyria, Ohio were three times the national U.S.
average, and nearly six times the Canadian average (Abelson, 2006; Lucas et al., 2006; Alter et
al., 2006). The higher rates arose both from the strongly-held beliefs by Elyria cardiologists that
a wider swath of elderly people could benefit from a stent, and that more stents (per person)
should be inserted (Abelson, 2006). These beliefs would be reinforced by lower complication
rates among incremental patients with minimal arterial blockage.
This phenomenon can be illustrated as well in Figure 6, which shows how higher perceived
(or actual) productivity, as shown by the dotted line, affects utilization. When health care
systems are constrained or –s” is large, differences in perceptions have little impact on
utilization; Figure 6 shows optimal utilization, where the marginal productivity is equal to q, at
M and M’; these differ by only a small amount. However, when there are few if any constraints,
and –s” is small, very large utilization variations arise, as shown by the differences between X’
and Z. As can be seen by the much larger cost “box” in Figure 6, these small differences in
beliefs by providers can have very large effects on overall health care productivity.
Similarly, imaging technologies offer enormous incremental value for a subset of patients,
but their efficacy in marginal patients is hard to establish. Iglehart (2006) notes that physicians
are now using computed tomography (CT), MRIs, and even positron-emission tomography
(PET) for an ever-expanding list of diseases, leading to double-digit growth rates during some
years (see Baker et al., 2003). Despite this rapid growth, some suggest low marginal
effectiveness (MedPAC, 2003; Miller, 2005). In other words, there are specific uses of imaging
with unequivocal value, but at the margin the value approaches zero or even becomes harmful
given the risk of false positives, incidental findings unrelated to the original inquiry
(“incidentalomas”) or risks of radioactive exposure.24
24

One study suggested 1.5 to 2 percent of all cancers in the U.S. were caused by CT radiation exposure (Brenner
and Hill, 2007).

p.23

A final issue with Category II relates to differences in preferences across patients regarding
the benefits and side-effects entailing loss of quality-of-life. This idea can also be captured by
Figure 6; think of the dotted line as representing someone who is willing to risk the potential
adverse outcomes associated with PCI (such as complications from surgery resulting in death) in
return for functioning gains. Alternatively, the individual may have a lower discount rate, and
therefore value the benefits of increased survival at a higher rate. Thus when –s” is small,
modest differences in demand can also lead to large differences in utilization.
An example where preferences should matter is the treatment of prostate cancer for men.
There is good evidence that, once clinically apparent, there are benefits of treatment through
surgery or radiation therapy for men under age 65 (Bill-Axelson et al., 2008). More
controversial is the prostate-specific antigen (PSA) test, which is predictive of prostate cancer
years before it becomes clinically apparent but cannot distinguish between benign and virulent
prostate cancers. While a large U.S. randomized trial showed no mortality benefit from PSA
screening, a recent Scandinavian study found PSA screening led to a large reduction in prostate
cancer deaths, albeit with identical overall mortality rates. 25 Unfortunately, the side effects
associated with the treatments include the potential loss of sexual functioning and incontinence,
as well as exposure to radiation. Thus choices surrounding prostate cancer for men – like breast
cancer screening for women under age 50 -- should depend not on "cookie cutter" guidelines, but
on how patients trade off longevity with quality of life. For these procedures, the key to
productivity growth is ensuring that only well-informed people who want the procedure actually
get it (Meltzer et al., 2005).
4.3 Category III: Technologies with Modest or Uncertain Effectiveness
If Category I treatments are highly cost-effective, and Category II less so, this final category
captures treatments where the average value of the procedure leads to poor (or non-existent)
cost-effectiveness, or where there is considerable uncertainty about its benefits. The classic
example is a trial published in the New England Journal of Medicine on arthroscopic surgery for
osteoarthritis of the knee, in which surgeons enter the knee and clean out particles from the joint
25

Schroder et al. (2009) and Huggoson, et al. (2010); also see Andriole et al., 2009. Preston and Ho (2009) show a
marked drop in U.S. prostate cancer deaths beginning in the early 1990s. The mystery is why mortality rates
dropped so rapidly at that time; PSA testing, which first diffused in the late 1980s, yields no survival benefits for at
least a decade (Huggoson et al., 2010).
p. 24

(Moseley et al., 2002). Over 650,000 such surgeries had been performed each year at a cost
exceeding $5,000 per surgery. In the study, those in the control group received “placebo
surgery”— skin incisions and simulated surgery. The trial found no gain from arthroscopic
surgery relative to sham surgery.
For ethical and logistical considerations, it is difficult to conduct double-blinded trials to
establish the efficacy of every medical and surgical therapy. For many surgeries that target
quality of life instead of well-defined clinical endpoints such as death or an acute hospitalization,
measuring outcomes is more difficult and may be subject to patient biases, particularly where
“sham” treatments would be unethical. More generally, there is often considerable uncertainty
about the benefits of a procedure for a specific patient – even if randomized trials show little
average benefit, physicians may believe that because of heterogeneity in the population and the
physician’s considerable skill and experience, their patients will benefit (Kolata, 2009). While
this may be true in some cases, aggregate productivity depends on the average benefit, so
continued use of such procedures with zero average benefit – given their positive cost – is
guaranteed to reduce productivity.
Other Category III intensity measures include the frequency of office visits, ICU days for the
chronically ill, and referrals to specialists (see Barnato et al., 2007). Strictly speaking, these
treatments do clearly benefit some patients – for example, Doyle (2010) suggested higher ICU
days contributed to lower mortality for Florida tourists (but not Florida residents) admitted to
emergency rooms. On the other hand, patients treated aggressively in the hospital for advanced
lung cancer experienced worse quality of life and shorter life expectancy relative to palliative
care (Temel et al., 2010). More commonly, treatments are included in Category III because so
much of their utilization is of unknown value.
One of the real challenges in evaluating new technology is that innovations whose benefits
are not well understood could be viewed initially as Category III and thus not approved for use
(Schreyögg, Bäumler, and Busse, 2009). It could take years for randomized (or observational)
studies to establish them as Category II or even Category I treatments. For example, the use of
stents for recent heart attacks was once considered “off-label”, until randomized trials
demonstrated effectiveness. In contrast, arthroscopic surgery for knee osteoarthritis was a
Category II technology before the Moseley et al. (2002) study moved it to Category III.
p.25

Recognizing the wide differences in cost-effectiveness ratios for specific Category I, II, and
III treatments, ranging from just a few hundred dollars to millions per life-year, also helps to
make sense of otherwise puzzling empirical patterns (Weinstein and Skinner, 2010). Most
studies of health care spending and outcomes find modest positive or even negative associations
between spending and longer-term outcomes (Fisher et al., 2003a,b; Baicker and Chandra, 2004;
Skinner et al., 2006; Silber et al., 2010; Barnato et al., 2010). Some view this evidence as
implying “flat-of-the-curve” (or nearly flat-of-the-curve) health care. A different interpretation
is that these weak associations reflect the near-independence of hospital-level investments in
Category I treatments (that save lives) and Category III treatments (that cost money). For
example, hospitals quickest to adopt Category I treatments for heart attack patients such as
aspirin and β blockers spent slightly less than average on their patients. However, within each
hospital, spending more (conditional on their adoption of Category I treatments) still yielded
better outcomes, but at a rapidly diminishing rate (Skinner and Staiger, 2009).

5. Aggregate Growth in Expenditures and Health Outcomes
Armed with typology of treatments it is natural to ask: How much of these gains in survival,
and how much in costs, during the past several decades have been driven by growth and
diffusion of Category I, II, and III treatments? After all, during the past several decades, the
average productivity of health care spending has been found to be quite large. Murphy and
Topel (2006) estimate an increase in the value of health roughly three times accumulated health
care costs during 1970-2000. Similarly, Lakdawalla et al. (2010) finds high average costeffectiveness for cancer treatments conditional on the stage at which the cancer was diagnosed.
These average returns reflect the weighted means of survival gains and costs across Category I,
II, and III treatments.
What has been the relative contribution of each of these categories for health outcomes? A
study by Ford et al. (2007) addressed this question by allocating the decline in mortality from
coronary disease during 1980-2000 into specific causal factors. Cardiovascular disease is a
particularly good example because of its dominant role in improving survival during the past
several decades (Cutler, Rosen, and Vijan, 2006). As shown in Table 2, the study found that
61.2 percent of the drop in mortality of 340,000 deaths was the consequence of declines in
p. 26

smoking, physical activity, blood pressure, and cholesterol not related to medical treatments, but
with 17.4 percent of the decline clawed back by rising obesity and diabetes rates. Thus 43.8
percent of the reduction in deaths was the consequence of changing risk factors related to
behaviors rather than health care per se. 26
Table 2 further considered which medical and surgical treatments led to the remaining
improvements. Twenty-two percent of the decline in mortality was the consequence of
inexpensive but highly effective Category I treatments: aspirin, beta blockers, blood-thinning
drugs, anti-hypertensives, and diuretics. Another 13.2 percent of the gains in survival occurred
because of pharmaceuticals such as ACE inhibitors, anti-cholesterol drugs (statins), and
thrombolytics (“clot-busters”); these might be classified as Category I+ because their net benefit
is substantial and marginal cost of production is modest, even if overuse poses some risks.
Category II treatments include surgical interventions such as angioplasty (stents), bypass
surgery, and the diffusion of cardiac rehabilitation and cardio-pulmonary resuscitation (such as
automated defibrillators); these contribute to an additional 11.5 percent of the mortality decline
(Ford et al., 2007). The remaining 9.6 percent of the mortality decline is not explained by
existing treatment changes, and could be attributed to Category III treatments with benefits not
yet well understood in clinical studies.
Doing this same breakdown for costs is trickier. Growth in Category I (and 1+) treatments
(e.g., aspirin) accounted for only a small fraction of total growth in U.S. health care costs. The
role of Category II treatments in cost growth such as stents and bypass surgery is much larger
(e.g., Groeneveld, et al., 2010) and likely to comprise a much larger fraction of growth in health
care costs, but in 2000, stents and bypass surgery accounted for only about10 percent of total
spending on cardiovascular disease.27 This suggests a larger role for Category III spending to
26

Thus Murphy and Topel (2006) attribute too much of the overall improvement in life expectancy to health care
expenditures given that behavioral factors accounted for nearly half of the survival improvement. But their
conclusion that biomedical research exhibits extraordinarily high social returns still holds if medical research
includes the landmark epidemiological studies (such as those linking tobacco to lung cancer) that provided the basis
for behavioral changes.

27

Using data from Holmes, Kozak, and Owings (2007), we estimate 330,000 bypass surgeries and 550,000
angioplasty (stents) in the U.S. during 2000. The incremental cost of such surgeries is more difficult to estimate,
since in some cases they replace a hospital admission with medical management, but we assume $15,000
incremental costs for angioplasty and $20,000 incremental costs for bypass surgery. This yields approximately 10
percent of total costs for the treatment of heart, hypertension, and high cholesterol diseases in 2000 (Roerhig et al.,
2010).

p.27

explain the unusually rapid growth in U.S. spending relative to GDP. In part, this can be inferred
from the stagnation in productivity growth over time. Even when averaged across all three
categories of treatments, the average cost of saving an additional life-year has risen three-fold
since the 1970s, to as much as $246,000 per life-year (Cutler et al., 2006; Garber and Skinner,
2008).
There is also evidence that less effective Category II and III treatments in the U.S. have
diffused more widely than in other countries, potentially explaining the much higher growth in
health care spending relative to GDP. We consider four examples below. First, cardiovascular
procedures in the U.S. (587 per 100,000) lead those in Germany (357), and are far ahead of
Denmark (207) and Switzerland (115) (Peterson and Burton, 2007). The greater availability of
primary PCI for heart-attack patients saves lives in the U.S., but its corresponding greater use for
patients with little benefit (e.g., Tu, et al., 1997), attenuates overall productivity gains.
Second, the US is a leader in the diffusion of expensive new Category III technologies with
unproven benefits. One example is “robotic” surgery tools, which require an up-front investment
of $1 million to $2.5 million per unit. By 2009, the leading manufacturer of such devices had
sold 1400 units in the United States, compared to just 400 in the rest of the world, increasing
costs by as much as $2.5 billion (Barbash and Glied, 2010). Similarly, proton-beam therapy for
prostate cancer require facilities costing up to $100 million and has experienced rapid growth in
the U.S., but without a consensus on its benefits relative to conventional radiation therapy
(Terasawa et al., 2009).
A third example comes from the use of intensive care unit (ICU) hospital beds. In the U.K.,
the use of ICU beds is similar to that in the U.S. for conditions such as cardiac surgery that
clearly indicate post-surgical ICU care. However, among elderly people over 85, 1.3% die in an
ICU in the U.K., compared to 11.0% in the United States (Wunsch et al., 2009). This by itself
does not tell us whether the U.K. is using too few ICU days, or the U.S. too many. But the rapid
U.S. growth in ICU use since the 1990s, coupled with the likely cost-ineffectiveness of those
incremental ICU days (Barnato et al., 2010), are consistent with poor productivity in U.S. health
care spending.28
28

Average ICU days per Medicare enrollee in the last six months of life increased from 1.2 days in 1994 to 3.5 days
in 2005 ( www.dartmouthatlas.org ).
p. 28

Finally, the U.S. often experiences rapid diffusion of expensive pharmaceutical treatments
with uncertain benefits. Ezetimibe, a costly ingredient in the cholesterol-reducing drug Vytorin,
was not recommended as a first-line treatment, nor has it subsequently been shown to be
relatively effective at reducing cardiovascular disease. In 2006 Ezetimibe accounted for 15
percent of U.S. cholesterol-lowering drug sales, compared to just 3 percent in Canada
(Jackevicius, et al., 2008). Another example comes from the FDA approval of Avastin for
recurrent glioblastoma (brain tumors) in the U.S. based on the results of an uncontrolled trial.
Citing the same results, the European Medicines Agency reached the opposite decision.29
Differences in spending growth between the U.S. and other countries cannot be explained
simply by slower innovation in Europe: drug-eluting stents were approved for use in Italy a year
before FDA approval in the U.S. (Schreyögg, Bäumler, and Busse, 2009). And acknowledging
that the U.S. is more likely to adopt Category II and III technologies doesn’t explain why it
happens. One potential explanation stems from Weisbrod’s (1991) 'induced innovation'
hypothesis. The willingness of the U.S. insurance programs to reimburse for nearly any new
innovation leads to dramatic growth in these categories of care. It is less clear whether
innovation occurs differentially because of market-size, insurance expansions, or factor prices
(see Acemoglu and Linn, 2004; Acemoglu, Cutler, Finkelstein, and Linn, 2006). But we should
still expect a far more rapid rate of innovation when there is an implicit promise that those
innovations will be reimbursed, regardless of whether the innovation yields good value for the
extra cost.30
Another key explanation of differences in health care spending relative to GDP growth is
the ability to finance health care spending, as shown originally by Getzen (1992). Recall from
Table 1 that all of the other high-spending countries in 1980 (except for the U.S.) experienced,
on average, less than a one-percentage point increase in the share of GDP devoted to health care.
Many of these high-spending countries began the 1980s with an already heavy tax burden (with
roughly half of GDP devoted to taxation in Sweden and Denmark), limiting their ability to raise
taxes further to support health care cost growth (Baicker and Skinner, 2011). By contrast, the
29

See the debate between American and European researchers in Wick, Weller, van den Bent and Stupp (2010) and
Friedman et al. (2010).

30

And in the longer-term, the newly developed product could become cost-effective once off-patent. One could also
argue that successful innovations developed in the U.S. benefits everyone in the world. But US norms for ineffective
Category II or III treatments could also diffuse to other countries, saddling them with excess costs.

p.29

U.S. began the 1980s with an aggregate tax effort of about 30 percent, and funded much of the
increase in health care costs through the less salient mechanism of rising insurance premiums
reflected in sluggish take-home wage growth.

6. Future Prospects for Controlling Health Care Costs
We return to our initial question regarding the twin trends in technology and cost growth in
health care: How can countries ensure that a rising share of GDP devoted to health care is a good
thing, and not a cause for concern? We categorize potential reforms by considering each
component from the model in Equation 9: capacity constraints (μ), demand-side changes (p, ψ),
more cost-effectiveness analysis to understand the shape of s(x), and improving incentives faced
by physicians and other health care providers (π, ω). We consider approaches to improving
health outcomes and reducing both the level and growth rate of inefficient spending. 31
6.1 Capacity Constraints
In the U.S., Medicare regulatory boards evaluating new technology are concerned solely with
whether drugs or procedures provide positive benefits, but rarely reference costs. Elsewhere,
regulatory boards such England’s National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE),
use explicit cost factors in setting standards for the use of Category II or Category III treatments.
In theory, these capacity constraints (μ) should ensure that any growth in costs should be limited
to cost-effective treatments. Typically these rulings are limited to specific and discrete choices,
for example whether specific drugs can be used for a specific disease. In practice, Category II
treatments with heterogeneous benefits are more difficult to classify under “cover/not cover”
decision rules.
Medicare accounts for 20 percent of total spending, but what about the larger fraction of
health care spending (32 percent) in private insurance markets? Here the legal system – not so
much malpractice per se, but the inability of private insurance companies to deny coverage for
procedures with unproven (Category II or III) benefits – may be at fault for failing to control cost
growth (Ferguson, Dubinsky and Kirsch, 1993). These pressures are strengthened by the fact
31

We assume here that rising costs are not a symptom of “Baumol’s cost disease”: sectors of the economy that rely
heavily on human interactions fail to share in overall productivity gains. Health care seems particularly well posed
to enjoy large productivity gains, for example from the diffusion of information technology.
p. 30

that Medicare does not reimburse with regard to economic value, making it very difficult for
private insurers, especially a single private insurer, to use value in guiding their own coverage
decisions.
As well, U.S. corporate laws make it very difficult for insurers and hospitals individually to
reduce the use of Category II and III technologies, even when physicians are employed by the
hospital. These provisions prohibit any interference by insurers or hospitals with the medical
judgment of physicians, on the grounds that only physicians hold medical licenses. State laws
also require insurers to pay for any medically necessary service as determined by a physician.
Together, these incentives undercut the ability of an insurer to act as a residual claimant, so
insurers seek to restrain spending growth by negotiating lower prices with providers, rather than
scaling back utilization.
Historically, the U.S. has not relied on quantity restrictions in health care planning, except for
sometimes ineffective certificate of need programs (Ho, Ku-Goto, and Jollis, 2009). In theory,
regional restrictions to discourage duplication and overbuilding of surgical units, MRIs, and
hospital or ICU beds could control unrestricted growth in Category II or III procedures. But this
approach to market-level quantity restrictions would require a tectonic shift in the U.S.
regulatory and policy environment.
6.2 Demand-side incentives
Economists are naturally drawn to the idea of raising the price (p) faced by consumers to
ensure that patients truly value the treatments they receive. Consequently, there is widespread
support for limiting the income-tax exclusion for employer-sponsored health insurance, thereby
raising the out-of-pocket costs of health insurance (Gruber, 2009). Health savings accounts
(HSA), tax-preferred savings designed to be accumulated over time for health care bills, are
another approach to reducing moral hazard. These are typically coupled with a catastrophic
insurance cap on health care spending that may depend in turn on household income. Once
above the cap, however, moral hazard still intrudes; even with a $5,000 deductible, the patient
has no cost incentive to choose procedure A costing $10,000 over procedure B costing $20,000.
For this reason, one recent proponent of demand-side incentives suggested a catastrophic cap of
$50,000 – thus effectively dismantling the risk-sharing component of health insurance for low
and middle-income households (Goldhill, 2009).
p.31

In the conventional approach to improving cost-sharing, the copayment is either uniform
across different types of treatment (ranging from highly effective to ineffective), or is set
depending on the elasticity of demand for the service. For well-informed patients who are
cognizant of marginal costs and benefits, this is sufficient (Pauly and Blavin, 2008). But patients
may not always make appropriate decisions about the use of services when faced with higher
copayments and coinsurance.32 A different approach is to use “value-based” insurance plans that
have higher prices for Category III and some Category II payments, but lower prices for
Category I treatments. Prices (or more generally, the size of patient-cost sharing) could be based
on the results of clinical trials. While this approach has been applied to lowering prices of
Category I treatments with some success (e.g. Chernew et al., 2008), insurance plans that assess
significant copayments for Category II or III treatments are rare, perhaps because of the
difficulty in determining the medical necessity of specific hospital or ICU admission, or the
idiosyncratic benefit that a patient may attach to these services.
How will a demand-side approach affect the adoption or diffusion of new technology? If the
expansion of health insurance coverage under Medicare in 1966 led to rapid technological
diffusion (Finkelstein, 2007), then why shouldn’t cost-sharing reverse the tide? There is at least
anecdotal evidence that high-income patients would just say no to cost-ineffective treatments if
asked to pay out-of-pocket, suggesting that cost-sharing would discourage the most expensive
new and marginally effective technologies.33 But even with demand-side incentives for a larger
fraction of the population, government agencies must decide whether (or how much) Medicaid
and Medicare will cover for new treatments, or how to adopt coverage and cost-effectiveness
rules as Ψ, the implicit value of additional health benefits, evolves over time.
6.3 Comparative-Effectiveness Analysis
To the extent that inefficiency is partially caused by providers not knowing the shape of s(x),
more trials or well-designed observational studies could improve the productivity of health care
spending (Chandra, Jena, and Skinner, 2011). But many Category II and III interventions require
32

Although most evidence suggests that health is not adversely affected by greater patient cost-sharing on average;
see Newhouse (1993) and Chandra, Gruber, and McKnight (2010).
33

One former corporate finance officer whose insurance covered the $93,000 prostate cancer drug Provenge was
explicit about his willingness-to-pay: “’I would not spend that money,’ because the benefit doesn't seem worth it.”
(Marchione, 2010). Others have pointed out the difficulty of judging “true” demand for health care, particularly
among those near the end of life (Becker, Murphy, and Philipson, 2007).
p. 32

estimating treatment effects across a wide variety of phenotypes and genotypes, requiring much
larger study sample sizes and lengthier study periods than typically available. Complicating
decisions further, the benefits of an intervention vary not only by type of patient but also by type
of provider who delivers the treatment (Wennberg et al., 1998; Chandra and Staiger, 2007).
None of these concerns lessen the value of what can be learnt from trials and observational
studies, but it does suggest that a serious attempt to embrace comparative effectiveness research
would require many trials and a large budget – albeit a budget justified by the considerable
world-wide benefits of improved physician and patient decision-making.
6.4 Changing health care provider incentives
Growth rates may vary because of the evolution of ω, or the marginal importance of financial
factors for health care providers. Certainly the rapid real growth rate in spending observed in
McAllen TX, 8.3 percent during 1992-2006, in contrast to El Paso TX which grew at just 3.4
percent, is consistent with the evidence of a growth in McAllen’s “entrepreneurial” activities
during the period of analysis.34 Another cause for ω to evolve is the time-varying intensity of
market competition affecting both income and prices. For example, Rau (2010) has documented
a very rapid growth in diagnostic and surgical facilities in Provo, Utah during the 2000s as
multiple health care providers sought to expand market share.
More generally, a change in payment incentives away from traditional fee-for-service care
could also affect growth in both outcomes and costs. For example, if the incentive model were
expanded to include more profitable reimbursements π for improved health outcomes, one could
observe both better outcomes and lower costs. However, current incentives provide little scope
for this type of innovation (Cutler, 2010). In one case, a back pain clinic began to steer patients
to low-cost rehabilitation, rather than sending them to the hospital immediately for diagnostic
tests and back-surgery. Despite improved outcomes and lower costs, the hospital was forced to
petition the insurance company to reimburse it for some of the lost profits on MRIs not
performed (Fuhrmans, 2007).
The current system in the U.S. is not particularly supportive of competition among insurance
34

As Gawande (2009, p. 38) characterized the change in ω: “The surgeon came to McAllen in the mid-nineties, and
since then, he said, ‘the way to practice medicine has changed completely. Before, it was about how to do a good
job. Now it is about “How much will you benefit?”’”

p.33

carriers or providers. Medicare is explicitly prohibited from selectively contracting with more
efficient physicians. In contrast, hospitalizations are reimbursed by bundled payments measured
as DRGs (diagnosis-related groups), thus limiting the incentives to over-provide hospital care. In
the Medicare program, there has been very little per capita real growth since 1992 in these types
of DRG-related categories, more likely to encompass Category II treatments. By contrast,
growth in home-health care, outpatient visits, office visits and diagnostic testing—all Category
III areas of care where reimbursements are based on volume and the “right rate” is not known –
have exhibited very rapid growth (Chandra et al., 2010). And at least for home health care, the
additional spending appeared to have no impact on health outcomes (McKnight, 2006).
Rewarding cost-savings would be a natural place to increase the productivity of health care
spending. This dilemma also confronted Weisbrod (1991), who optimistically described the
prospective payment system (PPS) then recently introduced by Medicare:
With a hospital’s revenue being exogenous for a given patient once admitted, and
an HMO’s revenue being exogenous for a member for the given year, the
organization’s financial health depends on its ability to control costs of treatment.
Thus, under a prospective payment finance mechanism, the health care delivery
system sends a vastly different signal to R & D sector, with priorities the reverse
of those under retrospective payment. The new signal is as follows: Develop new
technologies that reduce costs, provided that quality does not suffer “too much.”
(p. 537, italics in original text.)
Weisbrod was perhaps too sanguine about PPS; in retrospect it has not fundamentally
changed the incentives to innovate, as it created DRGs for new procedures (McClellan, 1996),
created incentives to “unbundle” post-acute care, and exempted certain capital costs from the
expenditure cap, thereby failing to discourage capital spending (Newhouse, 2002; Acemoglu and
Finkelstein, 2006). Currently, less than 0.5% of new innovations would qualify as Weisbrod’s
cost-saving technologies (Nelson et al., 2009).
But the fundamental message in Weisbrod is still correct – only when health care is
reimbursed on the basis of its fundamental value will innovations be directed at highly costeffective treatments. The greatest saving could arise not so much from new cost-saving devices,
but instead from reducing the organizational fragmentation inherent in U.S. health care (Cebul et
al., 2008). The more than two-fold differences in risk- and price-adjusted costs across topranked U.S. academic medical centers treating heart attack patients (Fisher et al., 2004) are not
due to “what” is provided, since nearly all academic medical centers have access to the latest
p. 34

technology. Instead, differences are related to “how” it is provided or the organization of the
health care treatment – the frequency of follow-up visits, referrals to subspecialists, hospital
days, and the intensity of diagnostic testing and imaging procedures.
To confront problems of fragmented care, some have embraced the idea of an integrated
delivery system. Because such systems retain the savings from better prevention, lower
readmission rates, and greater compliance with medications, they have better incentives to avoid
therapies of dubious benefit. The 2010 U.S. health care reforms focused on “accountable care
organizations” (ACOs); examples include the traditional integrated systems such as
Intermountain in Utah or the Geisenger Clinic in Pennsylvania, but can also encompass
traditional hospital-physician networks (Fisher et al., 2009). Such a construct could come closer
to the ideal expressed by Weisbrod by providing incentives for cost-saving innovations.
However, we do not know how well ACOs could sidestep cost-ineffective technologies,
particularly if the latest shiny innovation enhanced market share (Chernew, et al., 2010).

7. Conclusion
There are no easy solutions to the problem of rising costs in health care, as has become
evident in the political debate over the 2010 U.S. health care reform bill. Douglas Holtz-Eakin,
then-director of the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) put it best: “Social-Security is Grenada.
Medicare is Vietnam.” (Wolf, 2005) Still, our lengthy survey of the economics and medical
literature suggests several observations.
First, attributing cost growth and improvements in outcomes to “technology growth” is too
simplistic and tells us little about where the cost growth is occurring, whether such growth
should be tamed, and if so, how it should be done. Some countries and some regions in the U.S.
have managed to avoid the very rapid growth in expenditures that is now threatening the
financial health of many federal and state budgets around the world. The key point is that U.S.
growth in health care costs is neither inevitable nor necessarily beneficial for overall productivity
gains. Instead, cost growth is the aggregated outcome of a large number of fragmented decisions
regarding the use and spread of both old and new health technologies.
Second, there is wide heterogeneity in the productivity of medical treatments, ranging from
p.35

very high (aspirin for heart attacks and surfactants for premature births) to low (stents for stable
angina), or simply zero (arthroscopy for osteoarthritis of the knee). This fact motivated our
distinguishing among three different types of treatments, arrayed by their contributions to
productivity gains. The Category I set of effective treatments appears to be the largest
contributor to survival and functioning gains, while the Category III set of low-productivity
group or with uncertain benefits, is most strongly associated with health care cost growth. It is
perhaps tautological, but still worth noting that countries or systems of care that encourage the
first group of innovations but discourage the third group are most likely to exhibit high aggregate
productivity growth and a slower overall growth rate relative to GDP.
Finally, the most difficult questions relate to health care policy going forward, where there
does not appear to be a single magic bullet to “solve” the health care problem. The U.S. and
other countries are struggling with rising costs and a diminished ability to raise taxes or health
insurance premiums. As well, the U.S. leads the world with the extent of waste in their health
care system (McKinsey Global Institute, 2008). The extent of waste in the U.S. could, ironically,
prove to be a boon if a fundamental restructuring of health care unleashed some of this lost
productivity; gradually eradicating 30 percent of waste would depress cost growth rates by 1.3
percentage points over the next two decades. The alternative to not making such changes is far
more worrisome: Rising political and economic resistance against tax hikes, insurance premium
increases, or coverage expansion could serve as particularly inefficient brakes on both health
care costs and health care innovation.

p. 36

References
Aaron, Henry J., and William B. Schwartz (with Melissa Cox). 2005. Can We Say No? The
Challenge of Rationing Health Care. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press.
Abelson, Reed. 2006. “Heart Procedure Is Off the Charts in an Ohio City.” The New York Times.
August 18, page A1.
Acemoglu, Daron, and Joshua Linn. 2004. “Market Size in Innovation: Theory and Evidence
from the Pharmaceutical Industry.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(3): 1049-1090.
Acemoglu, Daron, David Cutler, Amy Finkelstein, and Joshua Linn. 2006. "Did Medicare
Induce Pharmaceutical Innovation?" American Economic Review, 96(2): 103-107.
Aldy, Joseph E., and W. Kip Viscusi. 2008. “Adjusting the Value of a Statistical Life for Age
and Cohort Effects.” Review of Economics and Statistics 90(3): 573-81.
Alter, David A, Therese Stukel, and Alice Newman. 2006. “Proliferation of Cardiac Technology
in Canada: A Challenge to the Sustainability of Medicare.” Circulation, 113: 380–387.
Anderson, Gerard F., Uwe E. Reinhardt, Peter S. Hussey, and Varduhi Petrosyan. 2003. “It’s The
Prices, Stupid: Why The United States Is So Different From Other Countries.” Health Affairs,
22(3): 89-105.
Andriole, Gerald L., et al. 2009. “Mortality Results from a Randomized Prostate-Cancer
Screening Trial.” New England Journal of Medicine, 360(13): 1310-19.
Ashenfelter, Orley, and Michael Greenstone. 2004. “Using Mandated Speed Limits to Measure
the Value of a Statistical Life.” Journal of Political Economy, 112(1): 226-267.
Baker, Laurence, et al. 2003. “The Relationship between Technology Availability and Health
Care Spending.” Health Affairs, 22: w537-w551.
Baicker, Katherine, Kasey S. Buckles, and Amitabh Chandra. 2006. "Geographic Variation in
the Appropriate Use of Cesarean Delivery." Heath Affairs, 25(5): w355-w367.
Baicker, Katherine, and Amitabh Chandra. 2004. “Medicare Spending, the Physician Workforce,
and the Quality Of Health Care Received By Medicare Beneficiaries.” Health Affairs, 23: w184w197.
Baicker, Katherine, Elliott S. Fisher, and Amitabh Chandra. 2007. "Malpractice Liability Costs
and the Practice of Medicine in the Medicare Program." Health Affairs, 26(3): 841-852.
Baicker, Katherine, and Jonathan Skinner. 2011. “Health Care Spending Growth and the Future
p.37

of U.S. Tax Rates.” NBER Working Paper No. 16772.
Barbash, Gabriel I., and Sherry Glied. 2010. “New Technology and Health Care Costs – The
Case of Robot-Assisted Surgery.” New England Journal of Medicine, 363(8): 701-04.
Barnato, Amber E, et al. 2007. “Are Regional Variations in End-of-Life Care Intensity Explained
by Patient Preferences?: A Study of the US Medicare Population.” Medical Care, 45(5): 386393.
Barnato, Amber E., et al. 2010. "Is Survival Better at Hospitals With Higher "End-of-Life"
Treatment Intensity?" Medical Care, 48(2): 125-132.
Becker, Gary, Kevin Murphy, and Tomas Philipson. 2007. “The Value of Life near its End and
Terminal Care.” National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 13333.
Berndt, Ernst R., et al. 2002. "The Medical Treatment of Depression, 1991-1996: Productive
Inefficiency, Expected Outcome Variations and Price Indexes." Journal of Health Economics,
21(3): 373-396.
Bill-Axelson, Anna, et al. 2008. “Radical Prostatectomy Versus Watchful Waiting in Localized
Prostate Cancer: the Scandinavian Prostate Cancer Group-4 Randomized Trial.” Journal of the
National Cancer Institute, 100(16): 1144-54.
Boden, William E., et al. 2007. “Optimal Medical Therapy with or without PCI for Stable
Coronary Disease.” New England Journal of Medicine, 356(15): 1503-1516.
Brenner, David J., and Eric J. Hall, 2007. “Computerized Tomography – An Increasing Source
of Radiation Exposure.” New England Journal of Medicine, 357: 2277-2284.
Cebul, Randal, James B. Rebitzer, Lowell J. Taylor, and Mark E. Votruba. 2008. "Organizational
Fragmentation and Care Quality in the US Health Care System." Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 22(4): 93-113.
Chandra, Amitabh, Anupam B. Jena, and Jonathan Skinner. 2011. “A Pragmatist’s Guide to
Comparative Effectiveness Research,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, forthcoming.
Chandra, Amitabh, Jonathan Gruber, and Robin McKnight. 2010. “Patient Cost-Sharing and
Hospitalization Offsets in the Elderly.” American Economic Review, 100(1): 193-213.
Chandra, Amitabh, and Douglas Staiger. 2007. "Testing a Roy Model with Productivity
Spillovers: Evidence from the Treatment of Heart Attacks." Journal of Political Economy.
115(1): 103-140.
Chernew, Michael E., et al. 2008. “Impact of Decreasing Copayments on Medication Adherence
within a Disease Management Environment.” Health Affairs, 27(1): 103-112.
p. 38

Chernew, Michael E, Lindsay Sabik, Amitabh Chandra, and Joseph P. Newhouse. 2009.
“Ensuring the Fiscal Sustainability of Health Care Reform.” The New England Journal of
Medicine, 362(1) January 7: 1-3.
Chernew, Michael E., Lindsay M. Sabik, Amitabh Chandra, Teresa Gibson, and Joseph P.
Newhouse. 2010. “Geographic Correlation Between Large-Firm Commercial Spending and
Medicare Spending.” American Journal of Managed Care, 16(2) February: 131-138.
Claxton, Gary, Bianca DiJulio, Heidi Whitmore, Jeremy D. Pickreign, Megan McHugh, Awo
Asei-Anto, and Benjamin Finder. 2010. “Health Benefits in 2010: Premiums Rise Modestly,
Workers Pay More Toward Coverage.” Health Affairs Online doi: 10.1377/hlthaff.2010.0725.
Currie, Janet, and John Gruber. 1997. “Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of Recent
Expansions of Medicaid Eligibility for Pregnant Women.” Journal of Political Economy, 104(6):
1263-96.
Currie, Janet, and W. Bentley MacLeod. 2008. "First Do No Harm? Tort Reform and Birth
Outcomes," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(2): 795-830.
Cutler, David M. 2004. Your Money or Your Life: Strong Medicine for America's Health Care
System. New York: Oxford University Press.
Cutler, David M., and Robert S. Huckman. 2003. “Technological Development and Medical
Productivity: The Diffusion of Angioplasty in New York State.” Journal of Health Economics,
22(2): 187-217.
Cutler, David M., and Srikanth Kadiyala. 2003. “The Return to Biomedical Research: Treatment
and Behavioral Effects,” in Measuring the Gains from Medical Research: An Economic
Approach, eds. Kevin M. Murphy and Robert H. Topel. Chicago: The University of Chicago
Press.
Cutler, David M. 2010. “Where are the Health Care Entrepreneurs? The Failure of
Organizational Innovation in Health Care,” in Innovation Policy and the Economy, Volume 11.
Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Cutler, David, Angus Deaton, and Adriana Lleras-Muney. 2006. “The Determinants of
Mortality,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20(3): 97-120.
Cutler, David M., Allison B. Rosen, and Sandeep Vijan. 2006. “The Value of Medical Spending
in the United States, 1960-2000.” New England Journal of Medicine, 355: 920-927.
Cutler, David M. and Richard Zeckhauser. 2004. “Extending the Theory to Meet the Practice of
Insurance,” in Brookings-Wharton Papers on Financial Services, eds. Robert E. Litan and
Richard Herring, 1-53. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press.
Dockins, Chris, et al. 2004. “Value of Statistical Life Analysis and Environmental Policy: A
p.39

White Paper.” U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, National Center for Environmental
Economics.
Doyle, Joseph J. Jr. 2010. “Returns to Local-Area Health Care Spending: Using Health Shocks
to Patients Far From Home.” National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 13301.
Duggan, Mark, and William Evans, 2005. “Estimating the Impact of Medical Innovation: A Case
Study of HIV Antiretroviral Treatments,” National Bureau of Economic Research, Working
Paper 11109.
Enkoji, M.S. 2002. “FBI Targets 2 Heart Doctors: Redding MDs are Suspected of Possible
Health-Care Fraud.” Sacramento Bee, November 1, Page A1.
Färe, Rolf, Shawna Grosskopf, Mary Norris, and Zhongyang Zhang. 1994. “Productivity
Growth, Technical Progress, and Efficiency Change in Industrialized Countries.” American
Economic Review, 84(1): 66-83.
Ferguson, John H., Michael Dubinsky, and Peter J. Kirsch. 1993. “Court-Ordered
Reimbursement for Unproven Medical Technology: Circumventing Technology Assessment.”
Journal of the American Medical Association, 269(16): 2116-2121.
Finkelstein, Amy. 2007. “The Aggregate Effects of Health Insurance: Evidence from the
Introduction of Medicare.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(1): 1-37.
Finkelstein, Amy, and Kathleen McGarry. 2006. “Multiple Dimensions of Private Information:
Evidence from the Long-Term Care Insurance Market.” American Economic Review, 96(4): 938958.
Fisher, Elliott S., David E. Wennberg, Thérèse A. Stukel, and Daniel J. Gottlieb. 2004.
“Variations In The Longitudinal Efficiency Of Academic Medical Centers.” Health Affairs, 23:
var-19—var-32.
Fisher, Elliott S., et al. 2009. “Fostering Accountable Care: Moving Forward in Medicare.”
Health Affairs, 28(2): w219-w231.
Fisher, Elliott, David Wennberg, et al. 2003. “The Implications of Regional Variations in
Medicare Spending. Part 1: The Content, Quality, and Accessibility of Care.” Annals of Internal
Medicine, 138(4): 273-87.
Fisher, Elliott, et al. 2003. “The Implications of Regional Variations in Medicare Spending. Part
2: Health Outcomes and Satisfaction with Care.” Annals of Internal Medicine, 138(4): 288-98.
Fisher, Elliott S., Julie P. Bynum, and Jonathan Skinner. 2009. “Slowing the Growth of Health
Care Costs – Lessons from Regional Variation.” New England Journal of Medicine, 360(9): 849852.
p. 40

Ford, Earl S., et al. 2007. “Explaining the Decrease in U.S. Deaths from Coronary Disease,
1980-2000.” New England Journal of Medicine, 356: 2388-2398.
Friedman, Henry S., et al. 2010. “Reply to W. Wick et al.” Journal of Clinical Oncology, 28(12):
e190 - e192.
Fuchs, Victor. 1998. Who Shall Live? Health, Economics, and Social Choice. River Edge, NJ:
World Scientific Publishing Company.
Fuhrmans, Vanessa. 2007. “A Novel Plan Helps Hospital Wean Itself off Pricey Tests.” Wall
Street Journal, January 12, page A1.
Garber, Alan, and Jonathan Skinner. “Is American Health Care Uniquely Inefficient?” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 22(4): 27-50.
Garber, Alan M., and Charles E. Phelps. 1997. “Economic Foundations of Cost-Effectiveness
Analysis.” Journal of Health Economics 16: 1-31.
Gaynor, Martin, and William Vogt. 2003. “Competition Among Hospitals.” The Rand Journal of
Economics 34(4): 764-785.
Gawande, Atul. 2009. “The Cost Conundrum,” The New Yorker. June 1.
Getzen Thomas E. 1992. “Population Aging and the Growth of Health Expenditures.” Journal
of Gerontology, 47(3): S98-S104.
Goertz, Roland A. 2004. “Spending, Workforce, and Quality: A Response.” Health Affairs.
Goldhill, David. 2009. “How American Health Care Killed My Father.” The Atlantic, September.
Groeneveld, Peter, et al. 2010. “Increasing Use of Cardiovascular Devices and Rising Health
Care Costs.” Quality of Care and Outcomes Research in Cardiovascular Disease and Stroke
2010 Scientific Sessions. Washington, DC., May.
Grossman, Michael. 1972. “On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for Health.”
Journal of Political Economy, 80(2): 223-55.
Gruber, Jonathan. 2009. “A Win-Win Approach to Financing Health Care Reform. New England
Journal of Medicine, 361(1): 4-5.
Hall, Robert, and Charles I. Jones. 2007. “The Value of Life and the Rise in Health Spending,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(1): 39-72.
Hartwell, D., et al. 2005. “Clinical Effectiveness and Cost-Effectiveness of Immediate
Angioplasty for Acute Myocardial Infarction: Systematic Review and Economic Evaluation.”
Health Technology Assessment, 9(17).
p.41

Hayes, Keven J., Julian Pettengill, and Jeffrey Stensland. 2007. “Getting the Price Right:
Medicare Payment Rates For Cardiovascular Services.” Health Affairs, 26: 124-136.
Ho, Vivian, Meei-Hsiang Ku-Goto, and James Jollis. 2009. “Certificate of Need for Cardiac
Care: Controversy over the Contributions of CON.” Health Services Research, 22(2 Part 1): 483500.
Hochman, Judith S., et al. 2006. “Coronary Intervention for Persistent Occlusion after
Myocardial Infarction.” New England Journal of Medicine, 355(23): 2395-2407.
Holmes, Julia S. Lola Jean Kozak, and Maria F. Owings. 2007. “Use And In-Hospital Mortality
Associated with Two Cardiac Procedures, By Sex and Age: National Trends: 1990-2004.”
Health Affairs 26(1): 169-177.
Huggoson, Jonas, et al. 2010. “Mortality Results from the Goteborg Randomised PopulationBased Prostate-Cancer Screening Trial.” The Lancet, 11(8): 725-732.
Iglehart, John K. 2006. “The New Era of Medical Imaging — Progress and Pitfalls.” New
England Journal of Medicine, 354(26): 2822-2828.
Jackevicius, Cynthia A., et al. 2008. "Use of Ezetimibe in the U.S. and Canada." New England
Journal of Medicine, 358(17):1819-1828.
Jacobs, Rowena, Peter C. Smith, and Andrew Street, 2006. Measuring Efficiency in Health Care:
Analytic Techniques and Health Policy. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Jacobson, Mireille, Craig C. Earle, Mary Price, and Joseph P. Newhouse. 2010. “How
Medicare’s Payment Cuts for Cancer Chemotherapy Drugs Changed Patterns of Treatment”
Health Affairs, 29(7) July: 1391-1399.
Kaplow, Louis. 2008. The Theory of Taxation and Public Finance. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Kolata, Gina. 2009. “Older Bypass Method is Best, a Study Shows.” New York Times, November
5, page A20.
Lakdawalla, Darius N., Eric C. Sun, Anupam B. Jena, Carolina M. Reyes, Dana P. Goldman, and
Tomas J. Philipson. 2010. “An Economic Evaluation of the War on Cancer.” Journal of Health
Economics, 29(3), May: 333-346.
Lee, Robert H. 2008. “Future Costs in Cost-Effectiveness Analysis” Journal of Health
Economics, 27(4): 809-818.
Leonhardt, David. 2009. “Like Having Medicare? Then Taxes Must Rise.” The New York Times,
February 25, page B1.
p. 42

Lichtenberg, Frank R. 2006. “The Impact of Increased Utilization of HIV Drugs on Longevity
and Medical Expenditures: An Assessment Based on Aggregate U.S. Time-Series Data.” Expert
Review of Pharmacoeconomics and Outcomes Research, 6(4): 425-436.
Lister, Joseph. 1867. “On the Antiseptic Principle in the Practice of Surgery.” Lancet, 90 (2299):
353-356.
Lucas, FL, MA DeLorenzo, AE Siewers, and DE Wennberg. 2006. “Temporal Trends in the
Utilization of Diagnostic Testing and Treatments for Cardiovascular Disease in the United
States, 1993–2001.” Circulation, 113: 374–379.
Marchione, Marilyn. 2010. “$93,000 Cancer Drug: How Much is a Life Worth?” CBS News,
September 27th. http://www.cbsnews.com/stories/2010/09/27/health/main6905221.shtml
Manning, Willard G., et al. 1987. “Health Insurance and the Demand for Medical Care: Evidence
from a Randomized Experiment.” American Economic Review, 77(3): 251-277.
McClellan, Mark. 1996. “Medicare Reimbursement and Hospital Cost Growth,” in Advances in
the Economics of Aging, ed. David Wise, 149-190. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
McClellan, Mark, and Jonathan Skinner. 2006. “The Incidence of Medicare.” Journal of Public
Economics, 90(1-2): 257-276.
McGuire, Thomas G. 2000. "Physician Agency" in: A. J. Culyer & J. P. Newhouse (ed.),
Handbook of Health Economics, Edition 1, Vol. 1. Elsevier: 461-536.
McGuire, Thomas G. 2009. “Income Effects and Health Care Cost Growth in Medicare.”
Mimeo, Harvard Medical School.
McKnight, Robin. 2006. “Home Health Care Reimbursement, Long-term Care Utilization, and
Health Outcomes.” Journal of Public Economics 90(1-2) January: 293-323.
Medicare Payment Advisory Committee (MedPAC). 2003. “Commission Report to the
Congress: Variation and Innovation in Medicare.” Washington, D.C.
Mello, Michelle M., Amitabh Chandra, Atul A. Gawande, and David M. Studdert. 2010.
“National Costs Of The Medical Liability System,” Health Affairs, 29(9): 1569-1577.
Meltzer, David O., Elbert Huang, Sydney Brown, and Qi Zhang. 2005. “Implications of patient
self-selection for preference elicitation for cost-effectiveness analysis” Quality of Life Research
14(9): 2113.
Miller, Mark. 2005. “Testimony before the House Ways and Means Subcommittee on Health.”
Committee on Ways and Means, Washington, D.C.
p.43

Moseley, J. Bruce, et al. 2002. “A Controlled Trial of Arthroscopic Surgery for Osteoarthritis of
the Knee,” New England Journal of Medicine, 347(2): 81-88.
Muennig, Peter A., and Sherry A. Glied. 2010. “What Changes in Survival Rates Tell Us About
U.S. Health Care,” Health Affairs 29(11), November: 1-9.
Murphy, Kevin M., and Robert H. Topel. 2006. “The Value of Health and Longevity,” Journal
of Political Economy, 114(5): 871-904.
Nelson, Aaron L., Joshua T. Cohen, Dan Greenberg, and David M. Kent. 2009. “Much Cheaper,
Almost as Good: Decrementally Cost-Effective Medical Innovation.” Annals of Internal
Medicine, 151(9): 662-7.
Newhouse, Joseph P. 1992. “Medical Care Costs: How Much Welfare Loss?” The Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 6(3): 3-21.
Newhouse Joseph P. 1993. Free for all? Lessons from the RAND Health Insurance Experiment.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Newhouse, Joseph P. 2002. “Medicare Policy,” in American Policy in the 1990s, eds. Jeffrey
Frankel and Peter Orszag. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Nyman, John A. 1999. “The Value of Health Insurance: The Access Motive.” Journal of Health
Economics, 18(2):141-152.
OECD, 2010. OECD Health Data.
http://www.oecd.org/document/33/0,3746,en_2649_37407_34973665_1_1_1_37407,00.html
Pauly, Mark V., 1980. Doctors and Their Workshops: Economic Models of Physician Behavior.
NBER and University of Chicago Press.
Pauly, Mark V., and Fredric E. Blavin, 2008. “Moral Hazard in Insurance, Value-Based Cost
Sharing, and the Benefits of Blissful Ignorance.” Journal of Health Economics, 27: 1407-17.
Peterson, Chris L., and Rachel Burton. 2007. “U.S. Health Care Spending: Comparison with
Other OECD Countries.” CRS Report for Congress. Washington, D.C.: Congressional Research
Service.
Philipson, Tomas J., and Anupam B. Jena. 2006. “Who Benefits from New Medical
Technologies? Estimates of Consumer and Producer Surpluses for HIV/AIDS Drugs.” Forum for
Health Economics & Policy, 9(2): Article 3.
Preston, Samuel H., and Jessica Y. Ho. 2009. “Low Life Expectancy in the United States: Is the
Health Care System at Fault?” National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 15213.
Pritchard, RS et al. 1998. “Influence of Patient Preferences and Local Health System
p. 44

Characteristics on the Place of Death: SUPPORT Investigators Study to Understand Prognoses
and Preferences for Risks and Outcomes of Treatment.” Journal of the American Geriatric
Society, 46(10): 1242-1250.
Rau, Jordon. 2010. “Increase in Health Tests, Procedures is Raising Costs in Frugal Utah.” The
Washington Post. May 18: A04.
Rizzo, John, and Richard Zeckhauser. 2003. “Reference Incomes, Loss Aversion, and Physician
Behavior.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 85(4): 909-922.
Roehrig, Charles, George Miller, Craig Lake, and Jenny Bryant. 2009. “National Health
Spending by Medical Condition, 1996-2005.” Health Affairs 28 March:w358-w367.
Rothberg, Michael B., et al. 2010. “Patients’ and Cardiologists’ Perceptions of the Benefits of
Percutaneous Coronary Intervention for Stable Coronary Disease.” Annals of Internal Medicine,
153(5): 307-13.
Schreyögg, Jonas, Michael Bäumler, and Reinhard Busse. 2009. “Balancing Adoption and
Affordability of Medical Devices in Europe,” Health Policy, 92: 218-34.
Schwartz, William B. 1987. “The Inevitable Failure of Current Cost-Containment Strategies:
Why They Can Provide Only Temporary Relief.” Journal of the American Medical Association,
257(2): 220-224.
Schwartz, Rachel M., Anastasia M. Luby, Scanlon, John W., Kellogg, Russell J. 1994. “Effect of
Surfactant on Morbidity, Mortality, and Resource Use in Newborn Infants Weighing 500 to 1500
g,” New England Journal of Medicine, 330: 1476-1480.
Schroder Fritz H., et al. 2009. “Screening and Prostate-Cancer Mortality in a Randomized
European Study.” New England Journal of Medicine, 360 (13): 1320-28.
Shibley, Louise, Martin Brown, James Schuttinga, Mace Rothenberg, and Judith Whalen. 1990.
“Cisplatin-Based Combination Chemotherapy in the Treatment of Advanced-Stage Testicular
Cancer: Cost-Benefit Analysis,” Journal of the National Cancer Institute (JNCI) 82(3): 186-192.
Silber, Jeffrey. H., Robert Kaestner, Orit Even-Shoshan, Yanli Wang, and Laura J. Bressler.
2010. “Aggressive treatment style and surgical outcomes.” Health Services Research 45(6 Pt 2):
1872-92.
Sirovich, Brenda, Daniel J. Gottlieb, H. Gilbert Welch, and Elliott S. Fisher. 2005. “Variations in
the Tendency of Primary Care Physicians to Intervene.” Archives of Internal Medicine, 165:
2252-2256.
Skinner, Jonathan, and Douglas Staiger. 2009. “Technology Diffusion and Productivity Growth
in Health Care.” National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 14865.
p.45

Skinner, Jonathan, Douglas Staiger, and Elliott Fisher. 2006. “Is Medical Technology Always
Worth It? The Case of Acute Myocardial Infarction.” Health Affairs, 25(2): w34-w47.
Stein, Ben. 2006. “Note to the New Treasury Secretary: It’s Time to Raise Taxes.” The New York
Times, June 25.
Temel, Jennifer S., et al. 2010. “Early Palliative Care for Patients with Metastatic Non-SmallCell Lung Cancer.” New England Journal of Medicine, 363: 733-42.
Terasawa, Teruhiko, et al. 2009. “Systematic Review: Charged-Particle Radiation Therapy for
Cancer.” Annals of Internal Medicine, 151:556-565.
Tu, Jack V., Chris L. Pashos, C. David Naylor, Erluo Chen, Sharon-Lise Normand, et al. 1997.
“Use of Cardiac Procedures and Outcomes in Elderly Patients with Myocardial Infarction in the
United States and Canada.” New England Journal of Medicine, 336(21) May 22: 1500-05.
Wade, Nicholas. 2009. “Tests Begin on Drugs That May Slow Aging.” New York Times. April
17, page D1.
Weinstein, Milton, and Jonathan Skinner, 2010. “Comparative Effectiveness and Health Care
Spending: Implications for Reform.” New England Journal of Medicine, 362: 460-465.
Weisbrod, Burton A. 1991. “The Health Care Quadrilemma: An Essay on Technological
Change, Insurance, Quality of Care, and Cost Containment.” Journal of Economic Literature,
24: 523-552.
Wennberg, David E., et al. 1998. “Variations in Carotid Endarterectomy Mortality in the
Medicare Population: Trial Hospitals, Volume, and Patient Characteristics.” Journal of the
American Medical Association, 279(16): 1278-81.
Wennberg, John E., Elliott S. Fisher, and Jonathan Skinner. 2002. “Geography and the Debate
over Medicare Reform.” Health Affairs, 21(2): w96-w144.
Weintraub, William S., et al. 2008. “Effect of PCI on Quality of Life in Patients with Stable
Coronary Disease.” New England Journal of Medicine, 359: 677-687.
White, Chapin. 2007. “Health Care Spending Growth: How Different is the United States from
the Rest of the OECD?” Health Affairs 26(1):
Wick, Wolfgang. Michael Weller, Martin van den Bent, and Roger Stupp. 2010. “Bevacizumab
and Recurrent Malignant Gliomas: A European Perspective.” Journal of Clinical Oncology,
28(12): e188 - e189.
Wolf, Richard. 2005. “As Social Security Surges and Medicare Takes Off, the Deficit Will Soar.
The Result: ‘Fiscal Hurricane.” USA Today, November 15.
p. 46

Table 1: Health Care Share of GDP for OECD Countries, 1980 and 2008
Healthcare Share of GDP
Country

1980

2008 Increase

Annual Growth Rate
(1980-2008)
Healthcare
Spending

GDP Per
Capita

Countries with Low 1980 Health Spending (as a % of GDP)
Spain

5.3

9.0

3.7

4.5%

2.5%

Portugal

5.3

9.9*

4.6

4.4%

2.4%

UK

5.6

8.7

3.1

3.8%

2.2%

Greece

5.9

9.7

3.8

3.1%

1.5%

New Zealand

5.9

9.8

3.9

3.0%

1.1%

Australia

6.1

8.5

2.4

2.9%

1.8%

Belgium

6.3

10.2

3.9

3.3%

1.4%

Finland

6.3

8.4

2.1

3.0%

1.9%

Iceland

6.3

9.1

2.8

2.4%

1.0%

Japan

6.5

8.1

1.6

2.5%

1.8%

Countries with Medium 1980 Health Spending (as a % of GDP)
Canada

7.0

10.4

3.4

2.9%

1.5%

France

7.0

11.2

4.2

3.1%

1.4%

Norway

7.0

8.5

1.5

4.3%

3.5%

Switzerland

7.3

10.7

3.4

2.4%

1.0%

Austria

7.4

10.5

3.1

2.8%

1.6%

Netherlands

7.4

9.9

2.5

3.1%

2.1%

Countries with High 1980 Health Spending (as a % of GDP)
Ireland

8.2

8.7

0.5

4.2%

3.8%

Germany

8.4

10.5

2.1

1.8%

1.6%

Denmark

8.9

9.7

0.8

1.9%

1.7%

Sweden

8.9

9.4

0.5

1.6%

1.4%

United States

9.0

16.0

7.0

4.0%

1.8%

Source: OECD, 2010. Data for either 2008, 2007, or 2006(*). For Germany, the 1980 values are
for West Germany. Alternatively, one can calculate growth in health care spending relative to
GDP for 1980-1990 and for 1992-2008 (thereby avoiding the transition). This yields an increase
of 0.8 percentage points of GDP in health care expenditures.
p.47

Table 2: Accounting for the Decline in U.S. Deaths from Coronary Disease: 1980-2000
Number of
Deaths
Prevented/
Postponed

Percent of
Total
Mortality
Decline

209,000

61.2%

-59,370

-17.4%

149,630

Type of Medical/Surgical Treatment or Risk Factor Change

Health risk reduction: Declines in prevalence of smoking,
hypertension, cholesterol, physical inactivity
Health risk increase: Rise in prevalence of
body-mass index (BMI) and diabetes

43.8% Subtotal: Deaths prevented or postponed because of health
risk factors

83,285

21.9 %

Category I: Aspirin, heparin, warfarin, anti-hypertensives,
β-blockers, diuretics

45,225

13.2%

Category I+: Statins, ACE Inhibitors, IIb/IIIa antagonists,
thrombolytics

30,830

11.5%

Category II: Angioplasty/stents, bypass surgery (CABG),
cardio-pulmonary resuscitation, cardiac rehabilitation

159,340
32,775
341,745

46.6% Subtotal: Deaths prevented or postponed by medical/surgical
treatments
9.6% Unexplained by model
100.0% Total deaths prevented or postponed

Source: Ford, et al., 2007.

p. 48

P ercen t o f GD P S p en t o n H ealth care

16.0

Canada
France
Germany
Japan

12.0

United Kingdom
United States

8.0

4.0

19
60
19
62
19
64
19
66
19
68
19
70
19
72
19
74
19
76
19
78
19
80
19
82
19
84
19
86
19
88
19
90
19
92
19
94
19
96
19
98
20
00
20
02
20
04
20
06

0.0

Figure 1. Percent of GDP spent on healthcare. Data for Germany refer to West Germany.
Source: OECD.

p.49

18000
16000
14000
12000
10000
8000
6000
4000

Miami
San Francisco
East Long Island
McAllen TX
Salem
US Average

2000

19
1 99 2
1 99 3
1 99 4
1 99 5
1 99 6
1 99 7
1 99 8
2 09 9
2 00 0
2 00 1
2 00 2
2 00 3
2 00 4
2 00 5
06

0

Figure 2: Variations in Medicare Expenditure Growth, Selected Hospital Referral Regions
1992-2006. Source: Dartmouth Atlas of Healthcare (www.dartmouthatlas.org). Estimates are
age, sex, and race adjusted, drawn from the 5% Continuous Medicare History Survey, and
adjusted by the GDP implicit price deflator, with all prices in 2006 dollars.

p. 50

Value of Quality-Adjusted Life Year

Ψ s’(x)
λUK
q
λ≥p
Number of Procedures

xUK x* x**

x’

Figure 3: Quantity of health care spending given constraints facing health care providers
and the marginal productivity of health care spending. Note: In the figure above curve
Ψs’(x) is the value of life multiplied by the marginal productivity of healthcare spending. In a
hypothetical country ‘UK’ supply constraints are sufficiently stringent that their combined
impact is greater than the optimal social cost q; this country delivers less than the optimal
amount x*. The optimum is at X*, while a country spending beyond the optimum is where λ, the
combined set of quantity restrictions on utilization for the provider, is less than q. Note that λ is
at least as large as p, the price facing the consumer; this ensures that the patient’s benefits are at
least as large as her out-of-pocket payments p for the procedure.

p.51

Value of Quality-Adjusted Life Year

Ψ s’(x)

Total Value of Treatment

Cost per patient

Total Cost

x*

Number of procedures

Figure 4: Benefits (area under the curve) and Costs of Category I Innovation Note: The
vertical axis is scaled to reflect a constant value per quality-adjusted live year (e.g., $100,000 per
life year).

p. 52

Value of Quality-Adjusted Life Years

Ψ s’(x)

Cost per PCI

Total Cost

Number of Procedures

X’

Figure 5: Benefits (area under the curve) and Costs of Category II Innovation Note: The
vertical axis is scaled to reflect a constant value per quality-adjusted live year (e.g., $100,000 per
life year).

p.53

Value of Quality-Adjusted Life Years

Ψ s’(x)
Different beliefs about s’(x)

M*
M

Cost per PCI

Total Cost
Z
Number of Procedures

X’

Figure 6: Differences in Utilization arising from Variation in Physician Beliefs or in
Demand. The dotted line represents a higher perceived benefit schedule from the procedure,
whether because of physician belief or patient demand. Differences in utilization widen where
the –s” is small (i.e., between X’ and Z) compared to steeper sections of the marginal
productivity curve (M versus M’). The vertical axis is scaled to reflect a constant value per
quality-adjusted live year (e.g., $100,000 per life year).

p. 54

