                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    EXPORTING CHRISTIANITY:
 GOVERNANCE AND DOCTRINE IN THE GLOBALIZATION OF US DENOMINATIONS

                                         Gordon H. Hanson
                                           Chong Xiang

                                        Working Paper 16964
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16964


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2011




We thank Eli Berman, Bob Gibbons, Avner Greif, Murat Iyigun, Larry Iannaccone, and Bob Staiger
for helpful comments; Anna Allen, Yuri Bots, Sohini Chowdhury, Oana Hirakawa, Kanako Hotta,
Bryan Lofland, Lyndsay Oldenski, Lindsay Rickey, and Chase Stafford for research assistance; and
the Templeton Foundation and the Center on Pacific Economies at UCSD for financial support. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Gordon H. Hanson and Chong Xiang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Exporting Christianity: Governance and Doctrine in the Globalization of US Denominations
Gordon H. Hanson and Chong Xiang
NBER Working Paper No. 16964
April 2011
JEL No. F23,H4

                                             ABSTRACT

In this paper we build a model of market competition among religious denominations, using a framework
that involves incomplete contracts and the production of club goods. We treat denominations akin
to multinational enterprises, which decide which countries to enter based on local market conditions
and their own “productivity.” The model yields predictions for how a denomination’s religious doctrine
and governance structure affect its ability to attract adherents. We test these predictions using data
on the foreign operations of US Protestant denominations in 2005 from the World Christian Database.
Consistent with the model, we find that (1) denominations with stricter religious doctrine attract more
adherents in countries in which the risk of natural disaster or disease outbreak is greater and in which
government provision of health services is weaker, and (2) denominations with a decentralized governance
structure attract more adherents in countries in which the productivity of pastor effort is higher. These
findings shed light on factors determining the composition of religion within countries, helping account
for the rise of new Protestant denominations in recent decades.


Gordon H. Hanson
IR/PS 0519
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0519
and NBER
gohanson@ucsd.edu

Chong Xiang
Department of Economics
Purdue University
403 West State Street
West Lafayette, IN 47907-2506
and NBER
cxiang@purdue.edu
                                              1.   INTRODUCTION
        Rivalry between religious groups is a constant feature of human society. Historically,
competition was often resolved by military conflict (Iyigun, 2008), with victors imposing their
religion on the vanquished. Today, it is common for religious groups to compete for adherents
through the market.        Over the last 50 years, options for religious practice have expanded
globally, as the end of colonialism, the demise of communist regimes, and the spread of
democracy have weakened the control of state-sponsored churches and reduced the prevalence of
governments based on anti-clericalism (Michelthwait and Wooldridge, 2009).1                           Religious
groups, be they Christian, Jewish, or Muslim, are increasingly international in outlook, with the
goal to build global bodies of believers, rather than simply national ones (Thomas, 2010).
        In this paper, we build a model of market competition among religious groups and apply
it to the foreign operations of Protestant denominations headquartered in the US. We treat a
denomination akin to a multinational enterprise, which chooses which markets to enter, based on
the combined objectives of attracting members and generating revenues.2 A denomination enters
a market by choosing to recognize local congregations as members of its global organization,
which is analogous to international licensing or franchising. In our theoretical model, three
attributes of a denomination affect its membership. One is its attractiveness to believers, which
we treat as a characteristic similar to firm productivity (Melitz, 2003). A second is its religious
doctrine. We apply Iannaccone’s (1994) insight that stricter religious groups are more efficient
in organizing the production of quasi-public goods, which attract believers. A third attribute is
organizational structure. Some denominations are centralized, placing authority over pastors and
doctrine in the hands of international bodies, whereas others are decentralized, giving individual
congregations control (Chaves, 1993a). We use a model with incomplete contracts (Grossman
and Hart, 1986) to show how centralization affects denomination performance. In the empirical
estimation, we examine the number of adherents that US-headquartered denominations attract in
foreign markets. The US is the largest exporter of Protestant Christianity, with the country’s
history of religious freedom fomenting a competitive religious market with churches active in
expanding abroad (Brouwer, Gifford, and Rose. 1996).

1
  Recent work has applied market analysis to the Protestant Reformation and the Counter-Reformation (Ekelund,
Hebert and Tollison, 2006), the development of religion in America (Finke and Stark, 2008), and the designation of
Catholic saints (Barro, McCleary, and McQuoid, 2010).
2
  See Iannaccone (1998) for a discussion of literature on treating churches as payoff maximizing firms.

                                                        1
        Christian denominations may seem an unusual application for the analysis of
multinational enterprises. Four aspects of global Christianity motivate our study. One is its
scale and diversity. Between 1970 and 2005, the share of Christians in the global population
remained stable at 33%,3 whereas the share of Protestants among Christians rose from 26% to
35%, with their growth displacing the traditional church (Catholics and Orthodox).                             US
headquartered denominations have been at the forefront of the recent global expansion in
Protestantism, building on the earlier work of missionaries who in the 19th century began to
evangelize Africa, Asia, and Latin America (Woodberry and Shah, 2004). However, not all
Christian groups have been equally successful. Strikingly, it is Protestant denominations with
the most restrictive religious doctrine and distinctive worship practices that have enjoyed the
most growth (Brouwer, Gifford, and Rose, 1996). In 2010, Pentecostalism, a movement that
originated in the United States in the early 1900s involving ecstatic worship and a literal reading
of the Bible, along with other so-called “renewalist” groups, had 400 to 600 million adherents
worldwide, accounting for a quarter of all Christians. While the global expansion of these groups
has attracted interest from other social sciences (e.g., Meyer, 2004, Robbins, 2004, and
Woodberry, 2008), it has received little attention from economists.
        A second motivation is that the growth of Protestant Christianity tends to create a more
dynamic religious marketplace, challenging religious and political elites (Freston, 2001;
Woodberry and Shaw, 2004). Protestant denominations vary in their impacts on the political
landscape. For example, evangelical Christians are prominent in the United States, whereas
Pentecostal and charismatic Christians have acquired political clout in Ethiopia, Kenya, and
elsewhere in East Africa.4 Recent literature examines the dominance of single religions and
overall religiosity at the national level.           Barro and McCleary (2005) identify factors that
determine which countries have state religions; McCleary and Barro (2006) find that the fraction
of the population that participates in religious activities is decreasing in per capita income and
government regulation of religion; and Barro and Hwang (2007) relate conversion to major
religions in a country to religious pluralism, state controls on religion, and the education of the
populace. We extend the literature by examining competition among many religious groups,
which allows us to examine determinants of the composition of religion and to evaluate the

3
  According to the World Christian Database (http://www.worldchristiandatabase.org), the share of Christians in the
global population was 34.5% in 1900, 33.4% in 1970, and 33.0% in 2005.
4
  “Slain by the Spirit,” The Economist, July 3, 2010.

                                                        2
market value of specific denominational characteristics.
        A third motivation for our paper is to examine how the provision of social services
affects the relative demand for religion. The functions of a congregation include organizing
worship, educational activities, and charitable undertakings, in which individual congregants are
both consumers and producers.               These services have the quality of club goods, giving
congregants an incentive to free ride on the efforts of others. In seminal work, Iannaccone
(1992) identifies strictness as a means for religious groups to reduce free riding. Having a
stricter religious doctrine constrains individual choice, which raises the cost of secular goods,
thereby increasing the incentive for individuals to participate in church life. A related line of
work suggests that the demand for religion expands when the government decreases the supply
of public services that compete with church-supplied club goods. Hungerman (2005) finds that
member donations and community spending increased in the US Presbyterian church following
welfare reform in 1996, which reduced government-provided social services; and Gruber and
Hungerman (2007) find that the expansion in social services under the US New Deal crowded
out charitable religious activities. In international settings, Berman (2000) and Chen (2010) use
Iannaccone (1992) to explain the organization of ultra-orthodox Judaism in Israel and the
expansion of Islamic worship following the Indonesian financial crisis, respectively.5
        We bring these strands of literature together by examining how demand for and supply of
public services affect the relative success of strict denominations in a large number of countries.
Across countries, there is wide variation in the provision of public services and in exposure to
health or income shocks that affect demand for these services. Controlling for denomination and
country fixed effects, and for the interaction between strictness and a large number of country
characteristics, we find that stricter denominations attract more members in countries with a
weaker provision of health services and with higher incidence of natural disasters and disease
outbreaks. Placebo tests show no such interaction effect between these country characteristics
and theoretically irrelevant features of religious doctrine, such as the frequency of communion.
To take an example from recent headlines, prior to the 2010 earthquake in Haiti, the largest
Protestant groups in the country (which included Adventist and Pentecostal churches) were US
based denominations that maintain a strict religion doctrine. In the aftermath of the earthquake,

5
  Similarly, Scheve and Stasavage (2006) find that across advanced countries there is a negative correlation between
the intensity of religious belief and government social spending.

                                                         3
it appears to be these groups that have seen the sharpest increases in church activity.6
        A final motivation for our study is to apply recent theoretical developments in
organizations and international trade (Antràs and Rossi-Hansberg, 2009). In our framework,
each denomination decides which countries to enter based on local market conditions and its own
“productivity,” organizational structure, and religious doctrine. Important for our analysis, a
denomination’s organization and doctrine are relatively stable over time and common across
congregations (Melton, 1989; Chaves, 1993b). We can therefore examine how organizational
form affects denominational performance, which is distinct from the usual context in which
multinational organizational structure is endogenous (e.g., Nunn, 2007; Rajan and Wulf, 2006;
Marin and Verdier, 2008).           Bloom, Sadun, and Van Reenen (2009) examine what makes
multinational firms more decentralized; we ask the complementary question of where
decentralized organizations are more likely to succeed. In our model, entry into a market is
subject to a fixed cost, which similar to Melitz (2003) keeps low productivity groups from
entering countries with small markets or high barriers. To reach adherents, a denomination must
hire a local pastor to manage a congregation. Following Antràs (2003) and Antràs and Helpman
(2006) we assume that transactions between a pastor (manager) and a denomination
(headquarters) are subject to incomplete contracts.7 In decentralized denominations, the pastor
has greater authority, which increases his incentive to exert effort in serving his congregation; in
centralized denominations, the denominational headquarters has greater authority, which gives it
more control over how congregations operate.
        The model predicts that in countries in which the productivity of pastor effort is higher,
decentralized denominations will have larger membership, due to pastors having stronger effort
incentives. To test the prediction, we capture the productivity of pastor effort in a country using
the availability of communication and transportation infrastructure. In linking labor productivity
with infrastructure, we follow recent literature in public finance and macroeconomics (e.g.,
Fernald, 1999; Roller and Waverman, 2001). The return on pastor effort depends on his ability
to connect with congregants, which is a function of the ease of local communications and the
cost of internal transport. We find that decentralized denominations attract more members in

6
  See Tom Phillips, “Religion Fills Void Left by Aid Agencies,” The Guardian, Jan. 25, 2010; Anne Barnard,
“Suffering, Haitians Turn to Charismatic Prayer”, New York Times, November 24, 2010; Kwame Dawes, “Amid
Disasters, A Preacher Holds Fast to His Faith in Haiti,” USA Today, Jan. 5, 2011; and Christophe Wargny, “Haiti in
the Hands of the NGOs,” Counterpunch, Jan. 7, 2011.
7
  See Allen (1995) for an incomplete contracts view of church organization.

                                                        4
countries with better communications and land transportation. Placebo tests show that no such
interaction effect exists for air transportation, which is unlikely to affect pastor productivity.
The relative success of less hierarchical organizations thus appears to depend on the productivity
of agents with managerial responsibilities.
        In section 2, we present our data on the size, religious doctrine, and governance structure
of denominations. In section 3, we present a model of entry and competition among religious
groups and derive the empirical specifications. In section 4, we present results from estimating
the model. And in section 5, we offer final discussion.


                                 2. DATA AND EMPIRICAL SETTING
2.1 Christian denominations
        The data for our analysis are from the World Christian Database (WCD). The WCD
tracks religious affiliation for Christian denominations across countries, giving numbers of
affiliated members and congregations in 1970 and 2005.8 Each denomination is identified by its
name, religious tradition (e.g., Baptist, Holiness-Pentecostal, Reformed-Presbyterian), and
megabloc, and is accompanied by information on its international affiliation. Megablocs include
Roman Catholics, Orthodox, and Anglicans, which constitute the historic or traditional church;
conventional Protestants; Independents, which includes churches that have split from Protestant
denominations or that are unaffiliated with international church bodies; and Marginals, which are
groups considered outside the Christian mainstream, the largest of which are the Mormons and
the Jehovah’s Witnesses. With some abuse of terminology, we use the term Protestant to refer to
four WCD blocs: Anglicans, traditional Protestants, Independents, and Marginals.
        In the raw WCD, there are over 6,300 individual denominations, which represent a much
smaller number of denominational aggregates that share an international governing body,
internal organizational structure, and religious doctrine. We form denominational aggregates by
combining sub-denominations that have a common (a) megabloc, (b) religious tradition, and (c)
8
  The WCD is maintained by Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary and builds on material originally published in
the World Christian Encyclopedia (WCE) by Barret, Kurian, and Johnson (2001). The WCE compiled periodic
censuses that individual Christian denominations conduct of their membership and produced initial estimates of the
number of adherents by denomination in 1970. These estimates were cross-checked against information obtained
from national censuses, national church bodies, and interviews of church leaders. The WCD further updates
denomination counts in the WCE to 2005, based on cross-correlated information from 5,000 questionnaires of
national church bodies, field surveys in 200 countries, a large body of published and unpublished contemporary
material provided by individual churches, and interviews of bishops, church leaders, and theologians.

                                                        5
name or association with an international governing organization.9
         In the empirical analysis, we focus on Protestant denominations headquartered in the
United States. Three features of the data motivate this choice. First, because of the history of
religious freedom and separation of church and state in the United States, US denominations
survive because of their success in the marketplace and not because of preferential government
treatment (Finke and Stark, 2008).10 Second, the US is the largest single exporter of Protestant
Christianity. Figure 1 shows the share of global Protestants outside of the United States by the
headquarters country of the denomination.11 Between 1970 and 2005, the share of Christians
belonging either to the Anglican Church (headquartered in the UK) or to other non-US-
headquartered denominations each fell, the former from 14% to 10% and the latter from 17% to
15%. Denominations headquartered in the United States saw their market share rise from 13% to
23%. Third, outside sources, including The Handbook of Denominations in the United States,
(Mead, Hill, and Atwood, 2001), allow us to identify the universe of US denominations and
thereby verify the completeness of the WCD. Our sample includes 130 US denominations that
have adherents abroad enumerated in the WCD.12
         The denominations in our sample have distinct historical origins. Mainline traditions
include movements brought from Europe to the United States in the 17th and 18th centuries (e.g.,
Congregationalists, Lutherans, Methodists, Presbyterians, and Quakers). They include the oldest
US Protestant groups and tend to be relatively liberal in religious doctrine. Figure 2 shows that
in 2005 mainline denominations accounted for 12% of adherents outside of the United States that
belong to US denominations, down from 23% in 1970.                              Evangelical and fundamentalist
denominations, such as Southern Baptists, include groups that split off from mainline
denominations in the 19th and early 20th centuries, typically over doctrinal disputes. These groups
9
   In some countries, owing to government regulation of religion, the WCD groups denominations into “union of
bodies of different traditions.” We drop a country from the sample if more than 20% of its affiliated Christians fall
into this category. These include six large nations (Australia, Canada, China, Congo, Germany, and Pakistan) and
10 small ones, which in 2005 represented 13% of Christians in the WCD.
10
    While religious organizations in the United States receive preferential tax treatment, these benefits are available to
all religious institutions and do not favor specific groups.
11
    Unclassified or Independent denominations are congregations with an unknown denominational affiliation
(mainly very small congregations) or that have no denominational affiliation.
12
    We begin with 204 Protestant denominations headquartered in the United States. Of these, 16 are not found in the
WCD (including some older groups that have been subsumed into newer denominations and some very small groups
not captured by the WCD), 42 have no congregations in the WCD outside of the US (including old denominations in
the process of dying out and a few recently created entities with minimal foreign presence), 8 have congregations
outside the US but only in countries excluded from the sample owing to aggregation problems (see note 9), and 8 are
very small denominations on which we could find no information on their organization or doctrine.

                                                            6
maintain strict religious beliefs.         From 1970 to 2005, their share of foreign adherents in US
denominations fell somewhat, from 29% to 25%.13
         The fastest growing traditions are Christian renewalists, which include Pentecostals and
Charismatics, and non-mainstream groups, including the Seventh Day Adventists, Mormons, and
Jehovah’s Witnesses. Pentecostalism, now a century old, has a strict religious doctrine similar to
evangelicals and fundamentalists but also espouses a belief that speaking in tongues (glossolalia)
is evidence that one has been baptized spiritually. Speaking in tongues, and other ecstatic
practices including healing and prophesying, are essential to Pentecostal worship, which makes it
distinct theologically from other Protestants (Robbins, 2004). For the last 100 years, there has
been debate within Christianity over speaking in tongues, with many fundamentalists rejecting
the practice (Melton, 1989).14 Between 1970 and 2005, the share of foreign adherents in US
denominations belonging to Pentecostal or other renewalist groups rose from 22% to 37%.
         Mormons and Jehovah’s Witnesses are considered outside the Christian mainstream
because they accept religious texts other than the Christian Bible. Additionally, Mormons
maintain a strict dietary regimen, rigid guidelines on charitable giving, and a requirement that
young men provide two years of missionary service; Jehovah’s Witnesses have an elaborate
theology surrounding the end of the world and are required to go door-to-door to convert non-
believers. Between 1970 and 2005, these two groups, plus Seventh Day Adventists, saw their
share of foreign adherents belonging to US denominations rise from 16% to 21%.15
         Table 1 lists the 35 largest Protestant denominations worldwide (based on their adherents
outside the US), of which 24 are headquartered in the United States. The size of denominations
varies immensely, with the largest US denomination (Assemblies of God) having 42.4 million
adherents outside of the United States in 2005, the 10th largest (United Methodist Church USA)
having 3.7 million, the 30th largest (Pentecostal Church of God) having 0.6 million, and all
denominations below the 80th rank having fewer than 0.1 million. Figure 3a plots for US
denominations the number of adherents abroad against the number of adherents in the United
States. The strong positive relationship indicates that denominations successful in the United

13
   Another schismatic tradition, the Holiness Movement, split off from mainline Methodists in the late 19th century.
It emphasizes the restrictive doctrine of sanctification, in which believers purify themselves of sin (and are then to
sin no more). Between 1970 and 2005, their share of foreign adherents of US denominations fell from 12% to 6%.
14
   The Charismatic movement, which emerged in the United States in the 1960s, includes individuals who left
mainline denominations and now embrace speaking in tongues.
15
   The other Marginal category in Figure 2 includes very small denominations outside the Christian mainstream.

                                                          7
States are also successful globally, consistent with a Melitz (2003) style framework.
        There is also variation in the number of countries in which denominations operate. Most
denominations are present in fewer than a dozen countries. Table 2 shows the number of
countries in the estimation sample in which US denominations have a presence in 1970 and in
2005. In 1970, only 10.9% of country-denomination cells have positive entries; by 2005, the
share rises to 13.5%. As seen in Figure 3b, US denominations that attract more adherents in the
United States (and presumably are more “productive”) are present in more countries abroad. In
the empirical analysis, we address the entry of denominations into countries in order to control
for possible selection bias in estimating determinants of denomination size.


2.2 Denominational doctrine and governance
        In the production of religious services, the church is the factory, the pastor is the
manager, and, given that worship is a collective activity, congregants are both workers and
consumers (Iannaccone, 1998). The denomination provides the intellectual property used in
production, which includes religious doctrine and a system of governance (Chaves, 1993a).
Denominations range in form from loose membership associations to rigidly hierarchical bodies.
We code denominations according to the their governance structure and the strictness of their
religious doctrine, using information from Melton (1989), Barrett, Kurian, and Johnson (2001),
the World Christian Database, and denomination websites. In many cases, the core elements of a
denomination’s doctrine and governance were established by a religious entrepreneur who
founded the organization.16 In the early years of a movement, some elements of doctrine and
structure are malleable but once codified tend to change only slowly over time (Melton, 1989;
Chaves and Sutton, 2004; Finke and Stark, 2008).
        Congregations that belong to a denomination share a defined religious doctrine, given in
the denomination’s statement of faith. The doctrine is a system of belief that is in part what
attracts adherents to church. Christianity is organized around the life and teachings of Jesus
Christ, as described in the New Testament of the Christian Bible. Following Hoge (1979),
Iannaccone (1998), and Ekelund, et al. (2006), we define strict religious doctrine to include the
following beliefs: (a) the Bible is the literal word of God and therefore infallible, (b) to become

16
  For example, Aimee Semple McPherson founded the Foursquare Church, Joseph Smith founded the Mormons,
Charles Taze Russell founded the Jehovah’s Witnesses. See Allen (1995) for case studies of church foundings.

                                                     8
a Christian one must openly repent one’s sins and accept Christ as lord and savior (be “born
again”), (c) one should try actively to convert others to Christianity, (d) Christ will return to earth
soon and believers should prepare for his second coming, (e) those who have not converted are
damned to an eternal life of suffering in hell, (f) one should dress modestly, avoid smoking or
drinking, keep sexual activity within marriage, and avoid situations that conflict with these
mores, (g) believers should be sanctified and thereby purified from sin (as in the Holiness
movement; see note 13), (h) speaking in tongues is evidence of one’s baptism in the Holy Spirit
(as in Pentecostalism), and (i) divine healing is an ongoing practice available to believers. Each
of these beliefs imposes time costs, lifestyle constraints, and impediments to maintaining
relationships with non-Christians or Christians in other denominations. In the language of
Iannaccone (1992), they stigmatize believers, raising the cost of participating in secular activities
and helping other adherents identify those willing to be active in the life of a congregation.
       Table 3 gives the share of US denominations that abide by the beliefs (a)-(i), above.
Some beliefs – evangelism, repentance and conversion, infallibility of the Bible, and damnation
of non-believers – are common to most groups, with at least 70% of US denominations adopting
one of these beliefs. The others – the imminence of Christ’s second coming, sanctification,
speaking in tongues, restrictions on dress, and divine healing – are less common. The second set
of beliefs represents the dimensions along which strict groups differentiate themselves. For
example, the Assemblies of God, a Pentecostal denomination, endorses speaking in tongues but
not sanctification. The Church of the Nazarene, a conservative denomination associated with the
Holiness Movement, endorses sanctification but not speaking in tongues. Both endorse divine
healing, though they differ on the imminence of Christ’s second coming.
       To measure strictness in an environment in which denominations are differentiated, we
define a denomination to be strict if the row mean of the nine doctrinal dummy variables is
greater than or equal to 0.5, which applies to 45% of the denominations in the sample. Figure 4
shows the distribution for the row mean of the nine doctrine variables for US denominations.
The cutoff of 0.5 captures a break in the distribution between the top two quintiles of
denominations and the rest; the cutoff divides denominations between those above the median
and those at the median or below. Empirical results presented in section 4 are robust to raising
the strictness cutoff to 0.6, which reduces the share of strict denominations to 32%, and to
dropping any individual dimension of strictness from the calculation of the row mean.

                                                  9
        In Iannaccone’s (1992) club good model of religious organizations, which we incorporate
into our model of denominations in section 3, stricter groups elicit greater participation from
their members by raising the perceived cost of secular goods and services. To examine how
strictness relates to religious participation among the denominations in our data, we use the
General Social Surveys in 2000, 2002, and 2004, which sample the U.S. population on religion,
politics, and social behavior. The GSS contains detailed data on the denominational affiliation of
individuals who self-identify as Protestant, where the GSS denominations span two thirds of
those in our data.17        In unreported results, we find that, controlling for age, gender, and
educational degree, individuals in the GSS belonging to strict denominations (according to our
definition) are 25% more likely than individuals in non-strict denominations to attend religious
services at least once a week. These findings are consistent with survey evidence from other
sources (Iannaccone, 1998), which show that the strictness of the religious group to which
individuals belong correlates positively with the time and money that individuals contribute to
church organizations. In the US, strict denominations thus succeed in attracting individuals with
a relatively strong willingness to participate actively in church life.
        In terms of organization, belonging to a denomination means a congregation agrees to
govern itself according to a pre-specified structure. There is well-recognized variation in the
degree of centralization among denominational governance systems.18 The most decentralized
system is a congregational polity, in which the congregation retains control over the hiring and
firing of pastors and religious doctrine (Chaves, 1993b). The denomination, through national or
international bodies, operates at arms’ length. It provides congregations with a range of services,
including recommending pastoral candidates, providing guidance on theology, publishing
educational material, training pastors and lay leaders, extending loans for church construction,
organizing national ministries to reach new converts, raising funds to support global operations,
and organizing relief in response to disasters (as in Haiti following the 2010 earthquake). In
return for these services, congregations pay fees to the denomination.19 Local churches, in
effect, use the denomination as a consulting service.
17
    For one-third of the individuals in the GSS, the denomination affiliation given (e.g., Other Baptist, Other
Presbyterian, Church of God) is too aggregate to match to the denominations in our sample.
18
   Bloom, Sadun, and Van Reenen (2009) suggest that regional variation in the organization of religion may affect
organizational choices by private firms. They find that multinational firms are more prone to centralized decision
making in regions in which hierarchical religions (Catholicism, Eastern Orthodoxy, and Islam) are more prevalent.
19
   In the United States, individual congregations on average keep 79% of the revenues they generate, a share that has
remained stable over time (Chaves, 1998).

                                                         10
       In centralized denominations, control rights reside not in the congregation but higher up
in the denominational hierarchy.        Denominational bodies above the congregation screen
applicants to the ministry, assign pastors to churches, discipline pastors, and set religious
doctrine for member churches. The denomination, in effect, has the power to license its brand –
including the denomination name, religious doctrine, and governance structure – to individual
congregations and decide who will manage each church. There are two common forms of
centralized governance.     In an episcopal (or connectional) structure, power resides in the
bishopric, as in the United Methodist Church, the Evangelical Lutheran Church, and the Mormon
Church. The chief authority over congregations within a region is a bishop, who ordains pastors,
assigns pastors to churches, adjudicates disputes, and performs administrative duties. A council
of bishops controls church doctrine. A second hierarchical system is the presbyterian structure,
as in the Presbyterian Church USA and the Reformed Church. Power resides in a regional
governing body known as the presbytery, which consists of a pastor and an elder from each
congregation, and other church leaders. The presbytery ordains, installs, and removes pastors
and establishes and dissolves congregations. Above the presbytery is a general assembly, which
resolves disputes at the presbytery level and settles issues of religious doctrine.
       We define a denomination to be decentralized if it has a congregational polity, which as
seen in Table 3 applies to 55% of denominations. Among the denominations, the correlation
between having a congregational polity and being strict is -0.16, implying that decentralized
denominations are modestly less likely to have a strict religious doctrine.


2.3 Global expansion by denominations
       Denominations tend to enter a country by supporting missionaries or organizing mass
revival meetings (Brouwer, Gifford, and Rose, 1996). Once it has established itself in a market,
it may grow either by attracting additional members to existing congregations or by adding
congregations. Figure 5 plots the log number of affiliated Christians against the log number of
congregations, where each data point represents the worldwide total for a denomination. The log
linear relationship between affiliated Christians and congregations suggests that global expansion
by a denomination occurs more on the extensive margin (adding congregations) than on the
intensive one (adding members to existing congregations).
       To examine the intensive and extensive margins more formally, we follow Eaton, Kortum

                                                 11
and Kramarz (2004) and use the identity, N jk  ( M jk / N jk )  M k  ( M jk / M k ) , where Njk is the

number of congregations for denomination j in country k, Mjk is the number of affiliated
Christians for denomination j in country k, and Mk is the total number of Christians in country k.
We then estimate the following two regressions (with robust standard errors in parentheses and
the constant terms dropped):
                                             M jk
     ln N jk  0.846 ln M k  0.794 ln
                                              Mk
                   (0.006)        (0.007)
          M jk                               M jk
     ln           0.154 ln M k  0.206 ln
          N jk                               Mk
                  (0.006)        (0.007)
where the sample includes the 130 US denominations across the countries in which they operate.
By the logic of least squares, across the two regressions the constant and error terms sum to zero
and the coefficients on each variable sum to one. The magnitude of the coefficients indicates
how aggregate variation in market size relates to the number of congregations (the extensive
margin) and Christians per congregation (the intensive margin). In response to a 10% increase in
country market size (Mk), the number of congregations increases by 8.5% and members per
congregation by 1.5%; similarly, in response to a 10% increase in market share for a
denomination in a country (Mjk /Mk), the number of congregations increases by 7.9% and
members per congregation by 2.1%. This is further evidence most adjustment in the size of
denominations occurs at the extensive margin, through adding congregations.



                                                    3. THEORY
          In this section, we present a model of competition between denominations within national
markets. We proceed by deriving the demand for participation in denominations, characterizing
the interaction between denomination headquarters and pastors in supplying religious services,
solving for the market equilibrium, and, finally, deriving comparative statics for denomination
size, where we distinguish denominations by their strictness and governance structure.


3.1. Model setup and the demand for religion

                                                       12
         Each country, k, has many regional markets, indexed by m. In market m of country k, a
total number of Okm individuals choose among religious organizations. To enter a country, a
denomination incurs a fixed cost, fk, which captures the cost of sending missionaries abroad or
organizing a ministry. To be present in a regional market, a denomination must establish a
congregation, which requires a fixed cost, fck.20 A denomination provides the congregation with
access to its credence goods, whose value in utility is δjk. Each congregation is managed by a
pastor, who serves members at marginal cost, gk, plus the cost of his effort, given by,
         c(emjk )  exp(hk emjk ),                                                                          (1)

per member of the congregation, where hk > 0 affects effort costs. Following Besley and
Ghatak’s (2005) formulation of objectives in non-profit organizations, we assume that the pastor
values both the number of congregation members, with weight γ, and monetary income from
serving the congregation. Likewise, a denomination values the number of believers it attracts,
also with weight γ, as well as the monetary income its congregations generate.21
         Members of the congregation enjoy services provided by the church and contribute time
and money to help provide worship services, outreach to new members, charitable activities, and
other club goods. We adopt a discrete choice framework and specify that the utility for person i
in country k from participating in denomination j in local market m, uijkm , is given by,

         uijkm  ( jk   k emjk )  V jkm (., p mjk )   ijkm , αk > 0,                                  (2)

where e mjk is the pastor’s effort level and the term αk e mjk captures the pastor’s contribution to the

quality of religious services perceived by congregants. When αk is high, the marginal impact of
pastor effort on utility is large. The price, p mjk , is a per-person membership fee, which may take




20
   Effectively, we assume that to serve a market a denomination must engage in foreign direct investment, implying
that there is no “export” option. In practice, some denominations do reach members through radio and television
programming, which are forms of exporting religious services. Since we lack data on the extent to which individual
denominations use radio and TV ministries, such activities are outside of the scope of our analysis.
21
   As compared with Besley and Ghatak (2005), we (i) assume that the principal and the agent have the same
mission objective (i.e., congregation membership) and so abstract away from the matching between principals and
agents, and (ii) consider an incomplete-contract environment. The weighting parameter, γ, affects the price level
(see equations (5) and (8)) and so denomination size, but does not affect how denomination size varies with the key
parameters of our model, αk, hk, and πSjk. Therefore, Propositions 1 and 2, below, still hold even if the denomination
and the pastor place different utility weights on the number of believers.

                                                                   13
the form of volunteer work or donations.22  ijkm is an iid extreme value error term, observable to

person i. We motivate V jkm (.) using the club-good model of Iannaccone (1992), where each

congregation is a club and members take congregation size as given. Each member consumes a
secular good, whose quantity is Sijkm and whose shadow price is πSjk, and participates in the

congregation at intensity level Rijkm , with shadow price πRjk. We assume shadow prices are

constant across regions within a country. The quality of club goods produced by a congregation
is increasing in the average participation intensity of its members, Q mjk . Congregation members

choose Sijkm     and Rijkm to maximize sub-utility, uc ( Sijkm , Rijkm , Q mjk ) , taking the choices of other

members as given, and subject to the budget constraint, πSjk Sijkm + πRjk Rijkm ≤ I ijkm – p mjk , where I ijkm

is income and we assume an interior solution with positive participation.23 For each member of
the congregation, V jkm (πSjk, πRjk, I ijkm – p mjk ,Qjk) is the indirect utility of the club good at the Nash

equilibrium.
         Following Iannaccone (1992) we model the strictness of a denomination as a tax that
increases the shadow price of the secular good: πSjk = πSk + πSj, where πSj is high if denomination
j is strict. Strictness imposes time costs or other constraints on consuming secular goods, which
lowers real income.24 But strictness also raises individual and average participation intensity in a
congregation (as long as the secular good and church participation are substitutes), consistent
with our findings from the GSS discussed in section 2. Iannaccone (1992) shows that the utility
gains from higher participation can more than offset the loss in real income: ∂ V jkm /∂πSjk > 0. We

show in an appendix the conditions under which it is also true that ∂2 V jkm /∂(πSjk)2 > 0, meaning

that an increase in the price of secular goods increases marginal utility more for strict groups
than for less strict ones. Throughout the analysis, we assume these conditions hold. Finally, it is
easy to show that –β ≡ ∂ V jkm /∂ p mjk < 0; an increase in the membership fee decreases members’


22
   We leave unspecified whether the membership fee is paid in donations of time or money owing to Gruber’s
(2004) empirical finding that religious giving and religious attendance are substitutes.
23                   m
   In other words, p jk does not affect the marginal cost of participation intensity, as we implicitly assume that the
                                                                m       m
pastor and the denomination do not internalize the effect of p jk on Rijk .
24
   Consistent with this conception of the costs of religious participation, Lipford and Tollison (2003) find that
increased religious participation is associated with lower individual income.

                                                           14
disposable income and thereby reduces utility. Summarizing the properties of indirect utility,
                     V jkm               V jkm                   2V jkm
           –β ≡               < 0,                 > 0, and                   > 0.                              (3)
                     p mjk                Sjk                ( Sjk )2

           To match our data we focus on individual choices among Protestant denominations, with
other religious groups remaining in the background.25 To derive the total number of individuals
who participate in denomination j, X mjk , we apply Anderson, de Palma and Thisse (1992) and

Feenstra (2004), to obtain the following expression,
                                             exp[ jk   k e mjk  V jkm ]
            X   m
                jk     O , 
                        m
                        jk
                              m
                              k
                                     m
                                     jk
                                                          Pkm

            Pkm   j exp[ jk   k e mjk  V jkm ] ,                                                          (4)

where  mjk is the market share of denomination j in market m and Pkm measures the

competitiveness of market m, akin to a price index for religious services. While we focus on
Protestant denominations, other religious groups are implicitly captured in the term, Pkm , which

we control for in the estimation using country fixed effects. By equation (4), ∂ln X mjk /∂ p mjk = – β,

such that the parameter β > 0 measures the elasticity of demand for church membership; a high β
indicates elastic demand. Equation (4) also implies that ∂ln X mjk /∂ e mjk = αk, such that

denomination size is increasing in the productivity of pastor effort.


3.2 Organizational structure and pastor incentives
           To consider the determination of denomination membership fees and pastor effort, we
assume timing is as follows. (i) The denomination decides whether or not to enter country k and
market m. (ii) Price and effort levels, p mjk and e mjk , are chosen, which determine congregation


25
     Our assumption in equation (2) that  ijk is iid extreme value implies independence of irrelevant alternatives (IIA).
                                                      m



IIA allows us to estimate the model with data on a subset of the religious choices available to individuals in a
country. This approach applies to the following decision structures: (a) a nested structure in which individuals first
choose among religious aggregates (e.g., Protestantism, Catholicism, Judaism, Islam, etc.), before choosing among
individual denominations or groups within these aggregates, in which case our analysis would apply to the
subbranch of the decision tree that applies to choice among Protestant denominations; or (b) a non-nested structure
in which individuals choose among all religious groups simultaneously, in which case we would be applying IIA
and estimating outcomes among the Protestant subset of choices available. Under either structure, we control for
unobserved religious options using country fixed effects, which capture market competitiveness, as seen in (4).

                                                                             15
membership. (iii) The denomination and pastor bargain over the monetary surplus generated in
market m (Grossman and Hart, 1986). Bargaining results from incomplete contracts, as we
assume that no contract can be written at stage (ii) to govern trade at stage (iii). We assume both
parties’ outside options are 0 and that each gets half the monetary surplus.
          We classify the organizational structure of a denomination as decentralized (D) or
centralized (C), which is chosen by the denomination at an earlier time and taken as given.
Under the D structure, the pastor has control rights over a congregation, which gives him the
right to choose the membership fee, p mjk .26 The joint monetary surplus for the congregation is

X mjk ( p mjk – gk), meaning the pastor’s payoff is, X mjk γ + 0.5 X mjk ( p mjk – gk) – fck – X mjk c( e mjk ).27

The first order conditions for effort and the membership fee are, respectively,
                                             1
         c '(ekD )   jk c(ekD )   jk [  ( pkD  g k )] ,                                                (5)
                                             2
                  1
          pkD         g k  2[c (ekD )   ] .                                                              (6)
                  

Due to logit demand in (4), indirect utility, V jkm , and market competitiveness, Pkm , do not affect

fees or effort, though they do affect the number of adherents; in the rest of this subsection, we
drop the index for region (m) and denomination (j). Equation (5) says that a higher fee provides
the pastor with stronger incentives to exert effort, as the left-hand side of (5) is increasing in
effort. Equation (5) also says that the pastor has stronger incentives to exert effort when his
productivity is higher (αk is larger) or his marginal effort cost, hk, is lower. Equation (6) says that
an increase in effort cost, c(ekD ) , leads to a more than one-for-one increase in membership fees.
This is due to the hold-up problem under incomplete contracts. Since the pastor captures only
half of the monetary surplus, he is not fully compensated for his effort. To alleviate hold-up, he

26
   Consider the following extension to incorporate elements of the framework describing the delegation of authority
in Aghion and Tirole (1997). Suppose the project of congregation-building is the vector (connection, membership
fee), where a successful connection between the pastor and members of the congregation causes the utility of
members to rise. There is uncertainty about the correct way to connect with members, with a pastor-preferred
connection option and a denomination-preferred connection option. The D structure allocates formal authority over
the vector (connection, membership fee) to the pastor. Compared with our current framework, the pastor has even
stronger effort incentives under the D structure since he can choose not only his preferred price but also his preferred
connection. Such a setting would strengthen results derived below.
27
   In our setting the allocation of control rights has no impact on bargaining power. To relax this assumption,
suppose control rights increase bargaining power. Then under the D structure the pastor has even stronger incentives
since he receives more than half the surplus. This setting would strengthen our results. In other words, our results
hold up as long as control rights do not decrease bargaining power too much.

                                                                 16
over-compensates his effort in pricing. In (6), the pastor internalizes only his own non-monetary
benefit to believers and not the denomination’s. The other terms in (6) say that the membership
fee is high if variable cost, gk, is high, or demand is inelastic (β is low). From (5) and (6),
                 1    
         ekD      ln k .                                                                                  (7)
                 hk 2  hk
Equation (7) says that pastor effort is high when effort has a large marginal contribution to
demand (αk is high) or when the effort cost, hk, is low.
        Under the C structure, the control rights over the congregation rest with the
denomination, such that the denomination chooses the membership fee.                                   Since the
denomination’s payoff is θXjk + Xjk(pjk – gk)/2 – fck,28 it chooses the fee,
                 1
         pkC         g k  2 .                                                                          (8)
                 
Equations (6) and (8) imply that the membership fee is lower under the C structure than under
the D structure:        pkC < pkD . This is because the cost of pastor effort does not enter into the
denomination’s payoff, leading the denomination to ignore the effort cost in pricing. Equations
(1) and (4) still hold under the C structure, and the first order condition for pastor effort is still
equation (5), except that fee is pkC . Plugging (8) into (5) we obtain

                 1        k
         ekC      ln                .                                                                     (9)
                 hk 2  ( hk   k )
Equations (6) and (9) say that the effort level is lower under the C structure than the D structure:
ekC < ekD . Under the C structure, the price-setting right rests with the denomination, which
ignores the effort cost in its pricing decision. For the pastor, lack of control rights under the C
structure aggravates the hold-up problem, creating weak incentives to invest in effort.
        To summarize, the denomination and the pastor disagree about pricing; the denomination
prefers the lower price, pkC , (as defined in (8)) but the pastor prefers the higher price, pkD (as
defined in (6)). Relative to the C structure, the D structure provides stronger incentives to the
pastor by allocating control rights to him, which results in high effort but also a high membership



28
  We choose to have the denomination bear the church fixed cost, fck, in order to simplify the expressions for the
entry threshold and the number of churches and believers. Who bears fck has no effect on the first order conditions.

                                                        17
fee.29 Since we do not observe effort levels or membership fees in our data, we next examine
predictions about the numbers of believers and congregations under the C and D structures.


3.3 Market equilibrium and denomination size
          To examine the number of adherents and congregations in country k for denomination j
we aggregate across religious markets m within country k for a given denomination. We first
derive results under the D structure; results for the C structure are analogous. Under the D
structure, the denomination is active in markets where pastor utility is non-negative. Plugging (6)
and (7) into pastor utility, the denomination enters local market m if and only if
                                           1
          X mjk,D B ≥ fck,          B=        ,                                                             (10)
                                          2

where X mjk,D is given by (4) with price and effort level equal to pkD and ekD . Intuitively, the

denomination enters larger markets and markets with lower entry and trade costs. We rewrite the
population in local market m as Okm = Oksm, where sm is the size of local market m, with cdf Gk(.)
and pdf gk(.), and Ok is a shifter reflecting the total population of country k. It follows that the
regional competitiveness index is given by Pkm =  Djk Oksm, where  Djk is given by (4) with price,

pkD , and effort, ekD .  Djk , the market share of denomination j, is constant across markets in k

where j is present. Equation (10) gives the threshold market size for entry:
                        f ck
          skD                  ,                                                                             (11)
                      BOk  Djk

Equation (11) says that a denomination enters more markets the lower is the fixed cost, the larger
is country k, or the higher is a denomination’s market share. In country k, the denomination has
                                                                                         
n Djk =      skD
                    g ( skm ) dskm = 1  Gk ( skD ) congregations and X Djk =  Djk Ok  D skm g ( skm )dskm adherents.
                                                                                          sk


Following the urban economics literature (Gabaix, 2009), we assume the distribution of regional
market size, Gk(.), is Pareto with lower bound b and shape parameter a, such that Gk(s) = 1 –
(b/s)a. It follows that,30


29
   Consistent with these predictions, in US congregations pastor salaries rise more quickly with church attendance in
denominations with congregational polities than in hierarchical denominations (McMillan and Price, 2003).
30
   Pk and Vjk are invariant across markets because price, effort level, and market share are invariant across markets.

                                                             18
        ln  Djk  k ekD   jk  V jkD (., pkD )  ln Pk ,

                          Bb
        ln n Djk  a ln         a ln Ok  a ln  Djk
                          f ck

                     aba B a 1
        ln X  ln
               D
                                  a 1
                                        a ln Ok  a ln  Djk .                                                   (12)
                  (a  1)( f ck )
               jk



Equation (12) implies that the intensive margin, X Djk / n Djk , does not depend on market size or

market share and that all the adjustment of X Djk is through the extensive margin, n Djk , broadly

consistent with the empirical findings in subsection 2.3. Such predictions are typical of models
with firm heterogeneity (Melitz, 2003). To determine the condition under which a denomination
enters country k, note that the denomination receives variable profits 0.5 X mjk ( p mjk – gk) from
                                                                      1 D                           1 D
regional market m and total variable profit                    
                                                               skD     2
                                                                         ( pk  gk ) X mjk dG(skm ) = ( pk – gk) X Djk from
                                                                                                     2
country k. Using the expression for X Djk in (12), denomination j enters country k if

           pkD  g k         ab a B a 1
        ln            ln                 a 1
                                                a ln Ok  a ln  Djk ≥ ln fk.                                    (13)
               2          (a  1)( f ck )
       Under the C structure, we can derive the entry threshold, market share, and total number
of congregations and adherents analogously:
                  f ck         1
        skC             ,B      ,
                BOk  jk
                       C
                              2

        ln  Cjk  k ekC   jk  V jkC (., pkC )  ln Pk ,

                          Bb
        ln n Cjk  a ln         a ln Ok  a ln  Cjk
                          f ck

                           aba B a 1
        ln X Cjk  ln                        a ln Ok  a ln  Cjk ,                                              (14)
                        (a  1)( f ck )a 1
Under the C structure, denomination j enters country k if
              pkC  g k B(a  1)           ab a B a 1
        ln[                     ]  ln                 a 1
                                                              a ln Ok  a ln  Cjk ≥ lnfk.                       (15)
                  2      ab a
                                        (a  1)( f ck )
       With these results in hand, we derive comparative statics. We first examine the effect of
religious doctrine on denomination size. We consider how shocks to the market for secular goods


                                                                   19
affect the relative size of strict groups. From club-good utility, changes in the price of the
secular good change the demand for strictness. For denomination j in country k, we assume that
the shadow price for the secular good can be decomposed as, πSjk = πSj + πhk + πdk, for all local
markets m. πSj is high for the adherents of denomination j if denomination j is strict; πhk is high
for the population of country k if country k has a weak supply of social services (implying higher
queuing costs and therefore higher shadow prices for these services); and πdk is high for country
k if there is strong demand for social services. The first property follows Iannaccone’s (1992)
conception that membership in a strict religious group raises the cost of consuming secular
goods. The second property follows from the standard notion that price is negatively correlated
with supply shocks. And the third property holds because the indirect utility function, Vjk(.),
implies that the marginal utility of the secular good is ∂uc(.)/∂Sjk = [∂V(.)/∂Ik]πSjk, where uc(.) is
the (direct) club-good utility. Strong demand for social services increases the marginal utility of
the secular good and so raises its price, πSjk.31
        What happens to participation in denominations when the shadow price of the secular
good increases? Suppose, for instance, that the availability of social services in country k falls.
Then πhk increases, and utility increases for all denominations in country k, strict or not, since
∂V/∂πS > 0, by equation (3). This outcome is consistent with the findings that church-provided
services compete with government-run welfare programs in Hungerman (2005) and Gruber and
Hungerman (2007). However, there is an additional effect, as well. The increase in indirect
utility is higher for strict denominations, for which πSjk is higher, since ∂2V/∂(πS)2 > 0 by equation
(3).   In other words, strict denominations face a relatively large increase in demand if
government provision of social services falls. Summarizing,

        Proposition 1 Weaker government provision of (and/or stronger demand for) social
        services raise the size of strict denominations by more than less strict ones:

            2 ln G Ojk               2 ln G Ojk
                             0,                         0, where G = X, n and O = D, C.
         ( hk )( Sj )           ( dk ) ( Sj )

The appendix contains the proof.
        Turning to the effect of organizational structure on size, by equations (12) and (14), the

31
  We assume that the increase in the marginal utility of the secular good dominates the change in the marginal
utility of income. This holds, for example, when the club-good utility, uc(.), is homothetic in income.

                                                               20
size of a decentralized denomination relative to a centralized one is,
              n Djk            X Djk
         ln       C
                         ln       C
                                         a[ k (ekD  ekC )  (V jkD  V jkC )] .                           (16)
              n   jk           X   jk


Equation (16) implies that there is an ambiguous ranking of absolute size for centralized and
decentralized denominations, as such a comparison depends on all the elements of the indirect
utility function Vjk(.). However, we can examine the differential impacts that a change in the
marginal contribution (or cost) of pastor effort has on the size of decentralized and centralized
denominations. Suppose αk increases (or hk decreases). Then pastor effort increases and size
increases for both C and D structures. Intuitively, given that the D structure provides the pastor
with stronger incentives, the increase in αk should have a larger impact under the D structure. We
show in an appendix that32

         Proposition 2. A change in the marginal contribution or marginal cost of pastor effort has
         a larger impact on the size of decentralized (D) denominations than centralized (C)
         denominations:

          ln(G Djk / G Cjk )                   ln(G Djk / G Cjk )
                                         0,                           0, where G = X, n.
                        k                           hk

         To summarize, our model generates two predictions: (1) Doctrine: Weaker provision of
(or stronger demand for) social services raises the number of adherents and congregations more
for strict denominations than less strict ones (Proposition 1); and (2) Organization: An increase
in the marginal value of pastor effort (or decrease in effort cost) raises the numbers of adherents

32
  It is possible to extend the analysis to ownership of church property. Following Grossman and Hart (1986), we
assume that ownership and control rights rest with the same party. Under the D structure the local congregation
owns the church, but under the C structure the denomination owns the church. In practice, under a congregational
polity, the congregation tends to own church buildings, while under episcopal or presbyterian polities, the
denomination typically controls church property. Ownership affects the pastor’s incentives by changing his outside
option, should bargaining fail. Under the D structure, the denomination’s outside option remains 0, but the pastor
controls the church and should bargaining fail the pastor converts the church into an independent entity, in which
case the denomination input no longer affects demand. We assume that the monetary surplus shrinks to the fraction
     D                                                                                           D
d k < 1 of the size when bargaining is successful. The denomination then gets fraction (1 – d k )/2 of the monetary
                                                                                     D
surplus in bargaining, while the pastor receives fraction (1+ d k )/2. Under the C structure, the denomination owns
the church. Should bargaining fail, pastor effort no longer affects demand and the monetary surplus collected by the
                                                     C
denomination shrinks to the fraction d k < 1 of the size under successful bargaining. The pastor’s outside option is 0.
                                                            C
The denomination receives the share (1+ d k )/2 of the monetary surplus in bargaining and the pastor receives the
              C
share (1 – d k )/2. Other derivations go through and Propositions 1 and 2 hold.

                                                                           21
and congregations more for a decentralized denomination than a centralized one (Proposition 2).
Although we have focused on Protestant denominations in deriving these predictions, our
framework can be applied to competition among other religious groups, as well.


3.4 Empirical Specifications
        To take our predictions to the data, we show in an appendix that we can obtain the
following second-order Taylor approximation for the indirect utility function:

        V jkO    pkO  c0  c1 I k  J ( Sjk ,  Rjk ) ,   O = D, C,                       (17)

where J ( Sjk ,  Rjk ) is a second-order polynomial involving the shadow prices for secular goods,

πSjk and πRjk, and the c’s are constants. We assume that πRjk is country-k specific and denote the
vector (Ik, πRk) by Zk. We also assume that the general quality of denomination j’s credence
good in country k is δjk = ςj – c3tjk, where

        t jk   k  d jk   jk .                                                             (18)

τk is trade costs common to denominations in country k, djk is trade costs in k specific to
denomination j (e.g., distance to denomination headquarters), and ηjk is an iid random cost
(which allows the ranking of denominations across countries to differ). Finally, we measure πhk
and πdk using the vector Hk, which includes the supply of and demand for social services in
country k, and πSj by the strictness of denomination j, STRj (recall that πSjk = πdk + πhk + πSj). We
then have the following empirical specification for V jkO   jk :

        V jkO   jk = γj + γk + c2ZkSTRj + η1HkSTRj – c3tjk,              O = D, C,           (19)

where γj and γk are denomination and country fixed effects, which absorb the variables with j-
and k-specific subscripts (e.g. pkO , Zk, and ςj). By Proposition 1, the coefficient η1 < 0.
        Plugging equation (19) into (12) and (14), it follows that,

        ln X Ojk  f O ( k , hk ) + γj + γk + c2ZkSTRj + η1HkSTRj – c3tjk,

        ln nOjk  f O ( k , hk ) + γj + γk + c2ZkSTRj + η1HkSTRj – c3tjk,                     (20)

where the c’s are constants, O = {Decentralized, Centralized}, and the fixed effects γj and γk

                                                               22
have absorbed the j (denomination) and k (country) specific variables. In equation (20), X Ojk and

nOjk are, respectively, the numbers of adherents and congregations that denomination j has in

country k, and αk (hk) is the marginal value (cost) of pastor effort in country k. Proposition 2
implies that f D / k  f C / k (i.e., increases in the marginal product of pastor effort have a

larger positive impact on the size of decentralized denominations than on centralized ones) and
that f D / hk  f C / hk . We approximate f O (.) by λ1Rk + η2RkDECj, where Rk measures the
productivity of pastor effort in country k and DECj measures the decentralization of
denomination j, where by Proposition 2, η2 > 0. Equation (20) implies the following regressions:

         ln X jk = γj + γk + η2RkDECj + η1HkSTRj + λ3ZkSTRj + λ4tjk + ujk,

         ln n jk = γj + γk + η2RkDECj + η1HkSTRj + λ3ZkSTRj + λ4tjk + vjk.                             (21)

In equation (21), ujk and vjk are error terms capturing unobserved trade costs (assumed
uncorrelated with the regressors), and Zk is expanded to include the competitiveness of the
country’s religious market (Pk) and country size (Ok). By Proposition 1, η1 < 0: stronger supply
of (or weaker demand for) social services reduces the size of strict denominations by more than
non-strict ones; by Proposition 2, η2 > 0: higher productivity of pastor effort increases the size of
decentralized denominations by more than centralized ones.


                              4. EMPIRICAL RESULTS
4.1 Regression variables and estimation method
        Following equation (21), we regress the log size of a denomination in a country,
measured as the number of adherents or congregations in 2005, on country fixed effects, γk,
denomination fixed effects, γj, and interactions between country and denomination
characteristics.33 Denomination effects absorb doctrinal strictness and governance structure, the
quality of a denomination’s credence goods, other determinants of denomination productivity,
and entry barriers specific to a denomination and constant across countries. Country effects
absorb national market size (related to population, urbanization, average income, education,

33
  Although the WCD counts adherents in 1970 and 2005, we lack data for most regressors prior to 1970, limiting
our analysis to the 2005 cross section. However, we do use the 1970 WCD data in our treatment of selection bias.

                                                      23
etc.), barriers to the import of religion common across denominations, variable costs in providing
services to congregants common across denominations, and the competitiveness of the religious
market in a country (as defined in equation (4)), which captures the variety of religious options
available in a country (whether Protestant or not). The key regressors are interactions between a
denomination’s governance structure (DECj =1 if a denomination has a congregational polity and
is decentralized) or religious doctrine (STRj =1 if the denomination is above the median in terms
of doctrinal strictness) and country characteristics that capture the productivity of pastor effort or
the supply of and demand for social services. Table 4 provides summary statistics.
         Consider first measures of social service demand and supply, Hk. Berman (2000) and
Chen (2010) stress the mutual insurance quality of many of the services that religious groups
provide, which include child care, free meals, help in finding work, basic health care, and other
charitable offerings. Hungerman (2005) and Gruber and Hungerman (2007) find that in the
United States state expansion of social services crowds out church activities. Consistent with
these findings, we assume that the club goods produced by congregations substitute for social
services provided by the state. In terms of state-provided social services, we focus on public
resources that assist individuals in weathering health shocks. In many countries, governments
are the primary providers of health services, especially for the poor or middle class. We examine
whether more expansive public health services means weaker demand for services provided by
religious groups, where we measure availability of health services using medical personnel
(nurses and midwives) per capita,34 log hospital beds per capita, and health expenditure as a
share of GDP, from World Development Indicators averaged over 1970-2004.
         The demand for social services provided by the state is likely to be greater where the
incidence of adverse shocks is higher. We measure aggregate shocks using the incidences of
natural disasters and disease outbreaks based on data from the International Emergency Event
Database (www.emdat.be). While such shocks are temporary, they are often severe in nature,
leading to large disruptions in consumption. Anthropological evidence from traditional societies
shows that the number of religions present in a region is positively correlated with disease load

34
   Physicians are an obvious additional type of medical personnel. However, in many poor countries physicians play
a relatively small role in the delivery of health care, with nurses being far more prevalent (Clemens, 2007). Among
the poorest 30 countries in the sample, the median nation has 0.5 physicians and 5 nurses per 10,000 people, such
that the ratio of nurses to physicians is 10 to one. In the rest of the sample, the ratio of nurses to physicians is 3 to
one. Below, we discuss results including physicians per capita interacted with strictness as a regressor but we do not
include the variable in estimating the principal components of health services.

                                                          24
(Fincher and Thornbill, 2008), consistent with the idea that religious organizations provide
insurance against the risk of contagion. We measure shock incidence as the number of events
that occurred in a country over 1970 to 2004 (for disasters) or 1995-2004 (for disease
outbreaks),35 divided by the number of years in the period, which is the annualized shock
incidence. We define a serious natural disaster as an earthquake over seven on the Richter scale,
a windstorm (i.e., hurricane) lasting five days or more, or a landslide or volcanic eruption that
affects more than 1000 people. Disease measures cover cholera, dengue fever, influenza/SARS,
and meningococcal outbreaks that affect more than 1000 people. Serious natural disasters are
unfortunately common events, with mean annual probabilities of occurrence of 1% (hurricanes)
to 3% (earthquakes, volcanic eruptions). Mass disease outbreaks are also common, with mean
annual occurrence probabilities of 0.3% (influenza/SARS) to 2% (cholera). We also examine
how strictness interacts with financial development, which may capture the potential to hedge
against environmental risk through financial markets.
         Our measure of the productivity of pastor effort, Rk, is the quality of communications and
transportation infrastructure, including telephone mainlines per capita, cellular subscriptions per
capita, road network (total length and fraction of roads paved), and passenger cars per capita.36
A pastor’s responsibilities include communicating with congregants (to learn about their
preferences and encourage participation in church events), reaching out to new converts, and
conferring with church leaders on managing the congregation. Pastor effort is likely to be more
productive (or less costly) the better are communication services in a country. The success of a
pastor also depends on the number of congregants he is able to attract to his church. A pastor’s
geographic reach will be more expansive in countries in which the cost of internal transport is
lower. These transport costs depend, in turn, on the size and quality of road networks and the
availability of passenger vehicles. Macroeconomics and public finance literatures give abundant
evidence on how public infrastructure affects industrial productivity. There is a robust positive
correlation between public infrastructure, measured in terms of roads and highways or
telecommunications capacity, and industrial TFP (e.g., Morrison and Schwartz, 1996; Fernald,
1999; Roller and Waverman, 2001).                   We examine whether the productivity effects of
35
   We use a shorter window for disease outbreaks than for natural disasters because country coverage of disease
outbreaks broken by type of disease is incomplete in the1970s and 1980s.
36
   As a matter of convention, we measure usage or access rates (e.g., cellular subscriptions per capita) in levels and
factor quantities (e.g., hospital beds or passenger cars) as log values (which implicitly are in log per capita terms,
given that log population interacted with strictness and decentralization appears as a regressor).

                                                         25
infrastructure depend on the governance structure of establishments, in our case religious
denominations. Infrastructure data are from the WDI, averaged over 1991-2005.37
        Although we control for country fixed effects, additional country characteristics (e.g.,
education, average income) may have different effects on strict versus non-strict (or centralized
versus de-centralized) denominations. If these characteristics are correlated with our main
regressors, the estimation may be subject to omitted-variable bias. To address this concern, we
include interactions between decentralization and strictness and country characteristics shown to
correlate with religiosity (Barro and McCleary, 2005; McCleary and Barro, 2006; Sacerdote and
Glaeser, 2001), including educational attainment, per capita GDP, population size, urbanization,
life expectancy, the fertility rate, distance from the United States, whether a country’s official
language is English, government regulation of religion (Grim and Finke, 2006), whether the
country had a state religion in the past, the rule of law, ethnic fractionalization, the fraction of the
population that had migrated to the US as of 1970, and indicators for whether Catholicism,
Islam, Orthodoxy, Hinduism or Buddhism, or Judaism is the dominant religion in a country. We
also employ placebo tests and examine individual types of natural disasters (e.g., earthquakes)
and disease outbreaks (e.g., influenza/SARS), as we explain in subsections 4.3 and 4.4.
        Another estimation issue is that most denominations are not present in most countries
(see Table 2), creating potential problems with sample selection. We present results based on
three estimation methods: OLS, a Heckman (1979) correction for sample selection, and a
nonparametric correction for sample selection, motivated by Das, Newey, and Vella, (2003).
The concern with OLS is that the regressors may be correlated with an omitted variable, which is
the expectation of the error term conditional on a denomination being present in the country.
        In either Heckman or nonparametric approaches, we need variables that are correlated
with a denomination’s presence in a country in 2005 but not independently correlated with the
error terms in equation (21). We use two instruments for denomination presence in 2005. One
(available for all denominations) is an indicator for whether the denomination was present in the
country in 1970, with the identifying assumption being that presence in 1970 is correlated with
the error for denomination size in 2005 only through denomination and country fixed effects. A
second instrument (available for most denominations) is the entry decisions in 1970 of


37
 Measures of communications infrastructure are unavailable for many countries before 1990, which accounts for
why we average their values over a shorter time span than for health services.

                                                      26
denominations with a similar number of adherents in the United States.38 The reasoning behind
this instrument is that size in the United States, the home country for all denominations in our
sample, captures a denomination’s average attraction to adherents, similar to firm sales being a
sufficient statistic for firm productivity in the Melitz (2003) model.                      Since denomination
productivity affects entry, the entry decisions of denominations with similar numbers of US
adherents are likely to be correlated. The identifying assumption is that the unobserved barriers
to entry of similarly US-sized denominations are uncorrelated. In nonparametric estimation, we
use a linear probability, probit, or logit model to estimate the probability a denomination is
present in a country in 2005 and then construct dummy variables that capture the value of the
predicted probability of presence based on dividing predicted values into 50 equal-sized bins.39
We include these dummies in the second-stage regression for log denomination size.


4.2 Main estimation results
         Table 5 presents baseline OLS results. We show coefficient estimates for four sets of
interactions: between denomination strictness and (a) country incidence of natural disasters, (b)
country incidence of disease outbreaks, and (c) country health infrastructure; and between a
denomination being decentralized and country communications and transportation infrastructure.
The data contain multiple measures of a country’s infrastructure, which are likely to be
correlated with each other. Because including these measures together introduces collinearity
into the regression, we begin by using the first principal component of the infrastructure
variables and later examine the results for the individual measures. We treat disasters, disease
outbreaks and health services similarly.40 By construction, the first principal components have
mean zero and a standard deviation of one.
         The first column of Table 5 shows that the interactions between strictness and the
38
   We define similar sized denominations using a size window of log 3 (matching to each denomination, other
denominations with log US size plus or minus 1.5). Because the window for neighboring denominations is
truncated for the largest and smallest groups, the instrument is not defined for these denominations.
39
   Results are similar when we use bins of 100 instead of 50 in the second-stage estimation. We also experimented
with using the polynomials of estimated propensity scores and obtained similar results.
40
   For disasters, we use the first principal component of four incidence variables: earthquakes, landslides, volcanic
eruptions, and windstorms; for disease outbreaks, we use the first principal component for four events: cholera,
dengue fever, influenza/SARS, and meningococcal outbreaks; for health services, we use the first principal
component of three variables: medical personnel per capita, log hospital beds, and health expenditure as a share of
GDP; and for communications and transportation infrastructure, we use the first principal component of five
variables: telephone mainlines per capita, cellular subscribers per capita, log road network per square kilometer,
percent roads paved, and log passenger cars

                                                         27
incidences of natural disasters and disease outbreaks are positive and precisely estimated. To
understand the results, recall that the regressions include country and denomination fixed effects.
Interpreting the within-denomination variation, the results indicate that a strict denomination will
tend to attract more adherents in countries with a higher incidence of disasters, be they
geological, meteorological, or biological in origin. Equivalently, the within-country variation
indicates that a country that has a higher incidence of disasters will tend to have its Christian
believers more concentrated in strict denominations. The coefficient estimates suggest that the
impact of disasters on denomination size is large. A one standard deviation increase in the
incidence index is associated with an increase in the relative size of strict denominations of 22
log points for either natural disasters (e.g., going from Austria to Nicaragua) or disease outbreaks
(e.g. going from Italy to Nepal). In column (1), we also see that the interaction between
strictness and the provision of health services is negative and precisely estimated. A strict
denomination will tend to have more adherents in countries with worse provision of health
services (or, equivalently, a country with worse health services will tend to have more of its
believers in strict groups).
        These results are consistent with Proposition 1, which says that the relative size of strict
denominations is larger in countries in which the shadow price of secular goods and services is
greater. Strict denominations do better in countries in which the net demand for social services
is stronger, where higher net demand may come from weaker government supply of social
services (measured here in terms of health infrastructure) or stronger public demand for services
associated with the risk of shocks to income or health. In our model, stronger demand for or
weaker availability of social services increases queuing and therefore the implicit price of
obtaining services, making membership in a strict religious organization (with its superior
capacity for producing club goods) more attractive.
        In the second column of Table 5, the interaction between denomination decentralization
and country provision of communication and transportation infrastructure is positive and
precisely estimated. Decentralized denominations attract more adherents in countries in which
the supply of communications and transportation infrastructure is greater.         This finding is
consistent with Proposition 2, which states that the relative size of decentralized denominations
is larger in countries in which the marginal productivity of pastor effort is higher. From our
model, higher productivity of pastor effort has a larger effect on the size of decentralized

                                                28
denominations, owing to stronger pastor effort incentives created by their having control rights.
Our finding of positive effects of infrastructure on relative denomination size is broadly
consistent with findings in the literature on how public infrastructure affects industrial
productivity, and provides empirical evidence that governance structure affects performance for
international organizations.
       In column (3), we combine the strictness and decentralization interactions in a single
regression, which leaves results unchanged. In columns (4)-(6), we measure denomination size
using the log number of congregations, instead of the log number of adherents. The results are
qualitatively the same. Because results for adherents and congregations are similar, we limit the
presentation of further results to regressions with log adherents as the dependent variable. Later
results are robust to using log congregations as the dependent variable, instead.
       Table 6 contains results for alternative estimators.          As Table 2 shows, many
denominations have chosen not to enter certain countries. To address sample selection, we
estimate two alternative models. Columns (1) and (2) show results for a Heckman estimator, in
which we use as instruments either denomination presence in the country in 1970 (first column)
or lagged presence plus average presence in 1970 of denominations that attract a similar number
of adherents in the United States (second column).         Columns (3)-(8) present results for a
nonparametric correction for sample selection, in which we first estimate the probability of
presence in 2005 using a linear probability, probit, or logit model and then use dummy variables
for the predicted probability of presence in 2005 as regressors in the second stage estimation of
log adherents in 2005. The instruments for presence in 2005 are the same as in the Heckman
model. Appendix table A1 presents first stage results. Both the Heckman and nonparametric
results are similar to column (3) of Table 5, suggesting that self-selection into entry does not
appear to matter much for the coefficient estimates. To streamline the exposition going forward,
we present results for two estimators: OLS and a nonparametric correction for sample section
based on a first stage probit model, which corresponds to column (7) in Table 6.
       The results in Tables 5 and 6 include controls for the interaction between strictness and
decentralization and a long list of country characteristics, which are shown in appendix table A2.
Among the notable results is that strictness interacts negatively with educational attainment
(holding constant the interaction between strictness and log per capita GDP). In particular, we
find that stricter denominations are smaller in countries in which a larger fraction of the

                                                29
population has a tertiary education. This finding extends Barro and McLeary’s (2006) result that
religiosity declines as countries become richer. It may indicate that reliance on religious groups
for social services is weaker in societies that are more educated (and more capable of self-
insuring against income shocks) or that in more educated societies individuals are less attracted
to stricter doctrines. Stricter denominations also attract relatively more adherents in countries
that are more urbanized and that have higher life expectancy.


4.3 Placebo tests
           In the regressions in Tables 5 and 6, we assume that we have included the relevant
denomination and country characteristics that capture the logic of Propositions 1 and 2. To
examine whether our results may simply be artifacts of the data, and unrelated to the workings of
our model, we conduct placebo tests by interacting country variables with theoretically irrelevant
denomination characteristics, and by interacting denomination strictness and decentralization
with theoretically irrelevant country characteristics.
           In Table 7, we consider placebos for health services and transportation infrastructure.
The public health services that we examine – medical personnel per capita, the supply of hospital
beds, and public health expenditure as a share of GDP – are labor, capital, or spending inputs that
are likely to help individuals weather health shocks that affect their productivity and life
expectancy. One concern is that these health services may be correlated with unobserved
components of country income, in which case the negative strictness-health service interaction
that we find may be a byproduct of richer countries having weaker preferences for strict religious
doctrine. As a placebo for health services, we consider the supply of dentists per capita, which is
increasing in average income, suggesting that dental care is a normal good.41 While greater
availability of dental care may enhance the quality of life, it does not represent the type of health
service that theory suggests substitutes for the club goods provided by religious groups. In
columns (1) and (2), we replace the strictness-health service interaction with the interaction
between strictness and dentists per capita. The coefficients on the interaction are small and very
imprecisely estimated, implying there is no relation between the availability of dental services
and the success of strict denominations. These results help allay concerns that we may have
misinterpreted the strictness-health service interaction in Tables 5 and 6.

41
     The correlation between log per capita GDP and dentists per capita is 0.64.

                                                           30
       A related issue applies to our estimates of the interaction between denomination
decentralization and communication and land transportation infrastructure. Infrastructure is
meant to capture the productivity of pastor effort.       However, the supply of transportation
infrastructure might be correlated with unobserved country characteristics.           For example,
suppose decentralized governance structures were more likely to be chosen in higher income
countries (which results in table A2 suggest is not the case, as decentralization interacts
negatively with per capita GDP), then the positive interaction that we find between
decentralization and infrastructure might simply be picking up a positive correlation between
decentralization and unobserved components of country income. To examine this possibility, we
use air transportation services, measured either as log passenger departures or log registered air
carrier departures, as placebos. Air transportation is not an input in the production of pastor
services because church members are drawn overwhelmingly from nearby regions.                  Thus,
according to our model, we should find no result for air transportation. Columns (3)-(6) of Table
7 show results for interactions between decentralization and air transport. Coefficients are
negative, rather than positive, and imprecisely estimated in all cases. These results suggest that
the positive interaction between decentralization and infrastructure is not driven by omitted-
variable bias. To threaten our identification, the omitted country variables must be correlated
with land transportation but uncorrelated with air transportation.
       Turning to theoretically irrelevant denomination characteristics, in Table 8 we replace
denomination strictness with the frequency of Holy Communion. Communion is a practice
conducted during worship services that symbolizes Christ’s last supper prior to his crucifixion, at
which he shared bread and wine with his disciples. Nearly all Christian denominations include
some form of communion in their liturgy, which centers on simulating the taking of bread and
wine, but they vary greatly in the frequency with which they practice the ritual. Some groups
share communion weekly, others monthly, and still others quarterly or annually. The Bible does
not dictate the frequency of communion. The frequency of its practice reflects, in part, the
preferences of believers for pomp and circumstance in worship. We use communion frequency
as a placebo for strict religious doctrine, as the ritual captures ceremonial features of worship but
is not related to the stigmatizing features of doctrine that matters in theory for the denomination
capacity to product club goods. We identify a denomination as practicing frequent communion
if it does so at least monthly, which applies to 39% of the sample; results are similar when we

                                                 31
define frequent communion to be either weekly or quarterly.             Monthly communion has a
correlation of -0.22 with strictness and -0.09 with decentralization.
       The first two columns of Table 8 are based on OLS; the second two columns are based on
a nonparametric correction for sample selection. Relative to Table 5, we replace the interaction
between strictness and disasters, disease, and health services with the interaction between
communion frequency and these country variables. All communion frequency interactions are
small quantitatively and imprecisely estimated. Thus, we find no significant interaction between
country characteristics and theoretically unimportant features of religious practice.


4.4 Extended regression results
       So far, we have focused on the interactions between key denomination characteristics and
the principal components of relevant country characteristics. Next, we examine interactions
between the denomination variables and the individual elements of disaster incidence, disease
outbreaks, health services, and communications and transport infrastructure.
       In Table 9, we present interactions between denomination strictness and the incidence of
specific types of natural disasters. Other regressors are the same as in Table 5. For disasters,
there is a positive and significant interaction between strictness and three of the four disaster
measures: earthquakes, landslides, and volcanic eruptions, which in Table 4 are the disasters
with a relatively high annual incidence. The impact of disaster incidence on denomination size is
large quantitatively. Using the results in panel (b), increasing the incidence of disasters by one
standard deviation is associated with an increase in the relative size of strict denominations by 19
log points for earthquakes (e.g., going from Italy to the Philippines) and 23 log points for either
landslides (e.g., going from Austria to Colombia) or volcanic eruptions (e.g., going from
Argentina to Papua New Guinea).
       Turning next to biological events, Table 10 presents interactions between strictness and
the outbreak incidences of cholera, dengue fever, influenza/SARS, and meningococcal illness.
Strictness interacts positively with all but meningococcal outbreaks, with the strongest results for
influenza/SARS. A one standard deviation increase in the incidence of influenza outbreaks is
associated with an increase in the relative size of strict denominations of 17 log points.
       In Table 11 we present the interactions between strictness and health services. There is a
negative and significant interaction between strictness and medical personnel per capita and log

                                                 32
hospital beds; for health expenditure as a share of GDP the interaction is negative but
imprecisely estimated. The results in panel (b) imply that increasing medical personnel by one
standard deviation is associated with a reduction in the relative size of strict denominations by 32
log points (e.g., going from Ghana to Poland), with a one standard deviation increase in hospital
beds associated with a 43 log point decrease in the relative size of strict groups (e.g., going from
Ghana to Uruguay). Two additional results in Table 11 are for physicians per capita and
financial development. The interaction of the former with strictness is imprecisely estimated,
whereas the latter is negative and precisely estimated. The absence of a significant interaction
between strictness and the supply of physicians may reflect the relatively small role that
physicians, as opposed to nurses, play in the delivery of health care in many poor countries (see
note 34). The negative interaction between strictness and financial development suggests that in
countries with well-organized financial markets individuals are less reliant on assistance from
religious organizations and more able to insure themselves against risk through private means.
         In Table 12, we consider the interaction between a denomination being decentralized and
individual communications and transportation infrastructure variables. Decentralization interacts
positively with telephone mainlines per capita, cellular subscribers per capita, log passenger cars,
and the size of a country’s road network, though coefficients are not precisely estimated in all
cases.     Whether intended or not, improvements in communications and transportation
infrastructure appears to result in larger market shares for less hierarchical religious groups.


4.5 Discussion
         What do our coefficient estimates imply about the relative performance of Protestant
denominations in sample countries? Consider the primary country characteristics that affect the
relative size of strict versus non-strict denominations: natural disasters, disease outbreaks, and
delivery of health services.42 Within sample countries, strict denominations are on average 18.2
log points larger than non-strict denominations. Based on coefficients from column (3) of Table
5, cross-country differences in the incidence of natural disasters explain 11.2% of this size
difference, cross-country differences in the provision of health services explain 8.2%, and cross-
country differences in the incidence of disease outbreaks explains less than one percent.

42
  The effects of communication and transportation infrastructure on the relative size of decentralized denominations
are similar, and we do not discuss them to save space; e.g., in the Guinea-Senegal example, the difference in
infrastructure explains 13.3% of the relative size difference in decentralized denominations.

                                                        33
       To further illustrate the quantitative significance of our results, we present two examples,
one involving Guatemala and Honduras, the other Guinea and Senegal. Both pairs consist of
neighboring countries that have similar per capita GDPs, and we examine which factors matter
for explaining within-pair differences in the relative size of strict denominations. The exercise
amounts to a double differencing as we consider the average log relative size of strict
denominations in one country minus that in another.
       First, consider Guatemala and Honduras, two Central American nations. In Guatemala,
the average size advantage of strict denominations is 41.7 log points, versus 23.8 in Honduras,
for a double difference of 17.9 log points. The two countries have relatively similar per capita
GDPs ($4675 in Guatemala, $3028 in Honduras), identical patterns of disease outbreaks, and
very similar delivery of health services. Where they differ is in the incidence of natural disasters.
Owing to its distinct geography, Guatemala has active volcanoes, whereas Honduras does not,
resulting in Guatemala having an over eight percent higher annual frequency of either volcanic
eruptions or of severe earthquakes. Using coefficient estimates from column (3) of Table 5, the
difference in the incidence of natural disasters can account for 17.7% of the relative size
difference in strict denominations between the two countries.
       Our next example is Guinea and Senegal, two neighboring countries in East Africa that
have similar per capita GDPs ($1012 in Guinea, $1373 in Senegal). The average relative size
advantage of strict denominations is 148.8 log points in Guinea and 59.4 log points in Senegal,
for a double difference of 89.5 log points. While the two countries have nearly identical
incidences of natural disasters, Guinea has a higher incidence of disease outbreaks and poorer
delivery of health services. Again using coefficients from column (3) of Table 5, these two
factors together can account for 11.0% of the relative size advantage of strict denominations in
Guinea versus Senegal. While Guatemala-Honduras and Guinea-Senegal are just two examples,
they illustrate the manner in which natural disasters, disease outbreaks and health services affect
the relative performance of strict denominations across countries.


                                  5. FINAL DISCUSSION
       In the last four decades, religious groups headquartered in the United States have
expanded rapidly across borders, much as US multinational enterprises have sought new markets
abroad. In both cases, globalization has been made possible by the dismantling of government

                                                 34
barriers, to foreign religious groups in the former case and to foreign direct investment in the
latter.    Much as US multinationals rely on their organizational advantages and superior
intellectual property to compete in foreign markets (Bloom, Sadun, and Van Reenan, 2009), US
Christian denominations succeed on the basis of their governance structure and religious
doctrine. Along these two dimensions, denominations are remarkably heterogeneous.
          US denominations with strict doctrine, including Pentecostals, Mormons, and Jehovah’s
Witnesses, have had among the most notable successes in attracting foreign adherents. The
literature provides explanations for why strict religious groups have prospered in Israel (Berman,
2000) and Indonesia (Chen, 2010) based on Iannoccone’s (1992) model of religious groups as
clubs that produce quasi-public goods (which have mutual insurance properties) for their
members. Our contribution is to show theoretically and empirically how denominations compete
for believers and how country characteristics affect the market value of a denomination’s
attributes. Strictness is more desirable in countries in which individuals are more exposed to
shocks associated with natural disasters and disease outbreaks. It is less desirable in countries
with better health services, a more educated population, and better developed financial markets.
One interpretation of these findings is that weak governments and weak institutions favor strict
religious organizations. What may in part account for the recent globalization of Protestant
Christianity is the lowering of state barriers to religion (Barro and Hwang, 2007), coupled with
the slow expansion of state capacity in many developing countries, leaving individuals without
public or private means to insulate themselves against risk.
          There are sharp differences across religious organizations in terms of governance. The
traditional Christian church, encompassing Catholics, Eastern Orthodox, and Anglicans, is
strongly hierarchical, with the bishopric controlling church doctrine and the hiring and placement
of pastors and other religious personnel. The Protestant Reformation introduced greater diversity
in organization form into Christianity (Ekelund, Hebert, and Tollison, 2006), but the advent of
Protestantism did not mean a complete break with centralized control.               Some Protestant
denominations maintain the hierarchical features of the traditional church, whereas as others
endow local congregations with considerable power.
          In theory, congregation control implies stronger incentives to pastors to invest in building
their churches. Our finding that decentralized denominations attract more adherents in countries
with better communication and transportation infrastructure is consistent with this reasoning, and

                                                  35
provides empirical evidence for the recent theoretical developments of organization and
international trade. Our results also help account for the attraction of the non-traditional church
in countries as they develop.        Development typically brings with it improvements in
infrastructure, creating advantages for more decentralized religious groups.          The rise of
independently run mega-churches in the United States is an example of this phenomenon
(Brouwer, Gifford, and Rose, 1996). The process of economic development thus appears to
change the composition of religious organizations, leading to less strictness (to the extent that
development brings greater insulation from risk, through either state programs or private
markets) and more decentralization (to the extent that improved infrastructure strengthens
managerial investment incentives).
       Finally, there is variation in doctrine and organization within non-Christian religions, for
which our framework is relevant. For example, the radical form of Sunni Islam practiced by al-
Qaeda and the Taliban is stricter than the main branches of Sunni Islam. Shia Islam (e.g. Iran,
Yemen) has a hierarchy of Imams and tends to be more centrally organized than Sunni Islam
(e.g. Egypt, Indonesia). Among the countries in which Shia and Sunni Islam are present, there is
variation in the government provisions of public services. Our finding that weak governments
and institutions favor strict religious groups suggests that future research could explore the link
between weak states or weak local and regional institutions and radical Islam.




                                                36
APPENDIX
1. Properties of the Indirect Utility Function, Equation (3)
Iannaccone (1992) shows that ∂Vjkm/∂ πSjk > 0 if
          r s 1   Fr  Rq
                             ,                                                                 (A1)
          ks       kq Fr
where F is the function mapping average participation to the club-good quality, Q, εij is the
elasticity of i with respect to j and kj is the expenditure share of j (e.g.  r s is the elasticity of
church participation with respect to the shadow price of the secular good, and kq is the shadow
expenditure share of the club-good quality, Q). Condition (A1) is more likely to hold if the
consumption of the secular good, S, is a close substitute for religious participation, R, (relative to
its expenditure share), the marginal contribution of Q to utility is high, and/or Q is strongly
complementary with R.
To derive the expression for ∂2Vjkm/∂(πSjk)2 we differentiate both sides of equation (11) in
Iannaccone (1992) to get (where we drop the subscripts and superscripts and Ue = V(.)):
        d 2U e    d  V V dQe          d  V  d  V dQe 
                                         S                      
        d s2
                 d s   s Qe d s  d s     I  d s  Qe d s 
                                            d  V     2V  dQe           2V dQe V d 2Qe 
                                                                         2
            S V S dQe V
                                  S                                                          ,
             s I Qe d s I           d s  I    Qe2  d s  Qe  s d s Qe d s2 
                                                                                                          
         e
where U = V(.) is the equilibrium utility level and Qe is the equilibrium level of the club-good
               2V           d 2Qe          2V             2V                 2V
quality. Let          VIS ,        QeS ,           VeS ,         VIe , and          Ve . Ve  0 by the
             I  s         d s2
                                           Qe  s         I Qe              Qe  2


quasi-convexity of the indirect utility function, but the signs of VIS, VeS, VIe and QeS are
ambiguous. After some manipulation we obtain
        d 2U e  S S  V
                                                                                                    2
                                     2  V     V          S V           dQe        dQe 
                                        2
               S             S         S      QeS 2            SVIe        Ve          ,
        d s2  I  s  I           I 2    Qe           Qe I          d s         d s 
                                             dQe                                       d 2U e
which is a 2nd-order polynomial in terms of       . The solution to ∂2Vjkm/∂(πSjk)2 =          > 0 is
                                             d s                                      d s2
                b  b 2  4ac          dQe     b  b 2  4ac                            S V                    
        max(0,                       )<      <                 , a = Ve  0 , b = 2                  SVIe  ,
                       2a               d s         2a                                   Qe I                   
             S S  V                V
                                         2
                                                V 
        c = S                   S2 2  S        QeS .                                                 (A2)
             I  s  I              I      Qe
Finally we use the numerical example in Iannaccone (1992) to illustrate the parameter values for
which conditions (A1) and (A2) hold. The setting is identical to Iannaccone (1992): utility from
the club good is ( S d  K d )1/ d , K = RαQ1-α, Q = R , α and d are constants between 0 and 1, and a
congregant’s income is I. We use the same parameter values as Iannaccone (1992); i.e. I = 1, πR
                                                                                 [( S )d (  1)  ( R )  d ]1/ d
= 1, α = 0.3, and d = 0.8. Applying the results in Iannaccone (1992), V =                                             ,
                                                                                       ( S )   ( R )  

                                                          37
where ρ = d/(1 – d) and δR = α1/d. Figure X1 plots V against πS, and it shows that V is a convex
function of πS when πS ≤ 4.2 and that V is an increasing convex function of πS when πS  [2.6,
4.2]. Figure A1 is similar to Figure 1 in Iannaccone (1992), except that the latter has log(V) and
log(πS) on the axes.


2. Proposition 1
                                  2 ln G Ojk      2 ln G Ojk   a 2V jkO
Since πSjk = πSj + πhk + πdk,                                        0 , G = X, n and O = D, C, where
                           ( hk )( Sj ) 2( Sjk )2 2 ( Sjk ) 2
the last inequality is by equation (3). The proof for is analogous.


3. Proposition 2
                            G Djk                                    
We first show that [ln         C
                                     ] /  jk > 0 if β > 0.22 or        > 0.77, where G = X, n. By equation
                            G   jk                                   h
            G Djk                              Djk
(16), [ln C ] /  jk > 0 if and only if [ln C ]/  jk > 0. In the derivations below we drop the
          G jk                                 jk
                                                                     Djk                           e D eC
subscripts j and k. By equations (12) and (14), [ln                      ]/     = e D
                                                                                         – e C
                                                                                               + α(         )+(
                                                                     Cjk       jk
                                                                                                     
 V D p D V C pC                                                           p D          D e
                                                                                                 D
                       ).  By equations   (3), (6) and (8), ∂V D
                                                                 /∂p D
                                                                       = –β,       =  2c’(e  )     , and
 p D  pC                                                                               
 p C                                                D                  V D p D             e D
       = 0. Equations (5) and (6) imply that c’(e ) =          , and so             =  (-2β)            =
                                                         2             p D             2  
     e D
        . Therefore, we have
      
                Djk                     eC
          [ln C ]/  jk = eD – eC                                                           (A3)
                jk                      
To see the intuition for equation (A3), suppose αjk increases. Then under the D structure, both
effort level and price increase, but the effect of effort level dominates, and the term eD reflects
the net effect of effort level on lnμD. Under the C structure, however, effort level increases but
                                                                                                    eC
price does not (since the denomination ignores pastor effort in pricing), and the terms eC 
                                                                                                     
reflect the total effect of effort level on lnμC. Using equations (7) and (9) we can show that the
                                                                                                     
effects on lnμD and lnμC both increase with , but the effect on lnμD increases faster with .
                                                  h                                                   h
                                                                        jk
                                                                          D

Therefore, when        is large the effect on lnμD dominates and [ln C ]/  jk > 0. To be rigorous,
                     h                                                   jk



                                                           38
                             eC   1              jk         1
                                                                  D
                                                                   h      h
by equations (9) and (X3),          and so [ln C ]/  jk = (ln            ) , which is
                              h               jk         h      h    h 
                                                             1     
positive if         > 0.77. In addition, since eC =             ln          > 0, we implicitly assume
                h                                             h 2 (h   )
                                  2                        
               1 , or        >          , which implies that   > 0.77 if β > 0.22.
2 (h   )              h        1  2                      h
                             G Djk
The proof for [ln                   ] / hk < 0, where G = X, n, is similar. Again, by equation (16),
                             G Cjk
     G Djk                               Djk
[ln C ] / hk has the same sign as [ln C ] / hk , and we again drop the subscripts j and k in the
    G jk                                 jk
                                                                              Djk            e D eC
derivations below. By equations (12) and (14),                        [ln         ]/ h = α(         ) + (
                                                                              Cjk             h   h
V D p D V C pC                                                     p C             p D
           C                                              D   D
                      ). By equations (3), (6) and (8),. ∂V /∂p = –β,       = 0, and         = 2c’(eD)
 p h p h
    D
                                                                        h               h
e D
          [c (e )]
                D
                             [c (e )]
                                   D
      + 2           , where             shows how much c(eD) shifts following a change in h,
 h          h                 h
         D                      D                V D p D       e D       [c (e D )]
holding e constant. Again, c’(e ) =        and so            = –α       – 2β             . Therefore,
                                       2          p D          h           h
              Djk         eC      [c (e D )]
         [ln C ]/ h =       2                                                                  (A4)
              jk          h          h
The intuition for equation (A4) is similar to (A3). Using equations (7), (9) and (A4), we have
     Djk                      1      h                       h     h
[ln C ]/ h = 2 (ln       ln              ln      ) = 2 (ln            ) , which is negative
     jk         h    2       h  h          2 h     h     h  h 
                    h      h                       jk      D
                                                                    
if and only if ln              > 0. Therefore, [ln C ]/ h < 0 if   > 0.77 or β > 0.22.
                      h    h                       jk            h




4. Approximation for the Indirect Utility Function, Equation (17)
To minimize notation we drop the subscripts j, k and the superscript m below. Suppose that
                                     1
utility from the club good is U(.) = ln( S d  K d ) , where S is consumption of the secular good,
                                     d
        α 1-α
K = R Q , R is participation, Q is the quality of the club good, and α and d are constants
between 0 and 1. Assume that Q equals R , average participation. A congregant’s income is I,
and his disposal income, conditional on participation, equals I – p, where p is the monetary
participation charge per congregant. This case is a simple variation of the numerical example in
Iannaccone (1992), and we can plug the solutions for S, R and Q = R derived there (equation
(14) in Iannaccone (1992)) into U(.) to obtain an expression for the indirect utility function:
                                                         39
                                                      1
       V = c + ln( I  p )  ln                       ln D ,
                                                      d
              S  R 
        (      )  ( ) , D = ( S )  d  ( S )(  1) d  ( R )  d  ( R )(  1) d ,   (A5)
              S       R
where ρ = d/(d – 1), δS = 1, δR = α1/d, πS is the price for the secular good, and πR is the marginal
cost for participation. Since V is linear in ln(I – p), the second order derivatives of V that involve
ln(I – p) are 0. Therefore, the second-order Taylor approximation for V is a polynomial with the
terms ln(I – p), πS, πR, πS2, πR2, and πSπR. We can further approximate the term ln(I – p) by its
first-order Taylor approximation, d0 + β(I – p), where β = –∂V/∂p > 0. This gives us the
following approximation for V
        V = M – βp, M = c0 + c1I + c3πS + c4πR + c5πS2 + c6πR2 + c7πSπR,                       (A6)
where the c’s are constants. Equation (A6) corresponds to equation (17) in the text.


                                     1.2




                                      1




                                     0.8
              Indirect Utility (V)




                                     0.6




                                     0.4




                                     0.2




                                      0
                                           1




                                                      2.1




                                                                    3.2




                                                                                     4.3




                                                                                                  5.4




                                                                                                               6.5




                                                                                                                            7.6
                                               1.55




                                                            2.65




                                                                             3.75




                                                                                           4.85




                                                                                                        5.95




                                                                                                                     7.05




                                                            Price of Secular Good (πS)




                                      Figure A1: Numerical Example for V and πS




                                                                             40
                               Table A1 First stage results for Heckman and nonparametric estimation

                   Model                       Linear Pr     Probit       Logit      Linear Pr      Probit      Logit
                                                  (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)
Presence 1970                                  0.887***    25.60***     76.57***    0.878***      25.97***    73.84***
                                                (0.005)     (0.764)      (1.718)      (0.006)      (0.866)     (1.901)
Ave. Presence 1970, Similar Denom.                                                  -0.131***      -2.899*     -6.070*
                                                                                      (0.049)      (1.582)     (3.115)

Strict*Natural disasters                        0.00295      0.0882       0.153       0.00148      0.0516        0.094
 (1st principal component)                      (0.003)     (0.090)      (0.179)      (0.003)      (0.129)     (0.239)
Strict*Disease outbreaks                       -0.00261      -0.069      -0.182      -0.00348       -0.145     -0.313
 (1st principal component)                      (0.004)     (0.104)      (0.205)      (0.004)      (0.124)     (0.240)
Strict*Health services                          0.00107      -0.184       -0.36       0.00188       -0.205      -0.431
 (1st principal component)                      (0.006)     (0.193)      (0.388)      (0.007)      (0.244)     (0.471)
Decentralized*Infrastructure                   -0.0146*     -0.0866      -0.219     -0.0184**      -0.232      -0.438
 (1st principal component)                      (0.008)     (0.243)      (0.470)      (0.009)      (0.296)     (0.553)

Adjusted R squared                              0.812          --           --         0.82          --           --
Observations                                    9,660        9,292        9,292        9,660       9,292        9,292


The dependent variable is the dummy variable for a denomination being present in a country in 2005. Columns 1, 3, 4 and 6 are the
first stage estimation for columns 3, 5, 6 and 8 of Table 6, respectively. Column 2 is the first stage for columns 1 and 4 of Table 6.
Column 5 is the first stage for columns 2 and 7 of Table 6.
                  Table A2 Additional results for OLS and nonparametric estimation
Estimation method                                  OLS               Nonparametric
1st stage estimation                                 --    Linear Pr     Probit        Logit
Strict*log(GDP per capita)                        -0.140     -0.062      -0.050       -0.044
                                                 (0.173)    (0.187)     (0.180)      (0.177)
Strict*State Religion 1970                        0.0082      0.060       0.106        0.122
                                                 (0.182)    (0.181)     (0.186)      (0.184)
Strict*(Mean % primary education)                 0.0031     0.0033     0.0029      3.45E-03
                                                 (0.010)    (0.009)     (0.009)      (0.009)
Strict*(Mean % secondary education)               -0.002     -0.002      -0.006       -0.006
                                                 (0.010)    (0.010)     (0.010)      (0.010)
Strict*(Mean % tertiary education)                -0.021   -0.038***  -0.043***    -0.042***
                                                 (0.013)    (0.013)     (0.013)      (0.014)
Strict*log(Population)                           -0.0714     -0.116    -0.0839       -0.0801
                                                 (0.072)    (0.076)     (0.079)      (0.079)
Strict*Share of Urban Population                2.281***    2.007**     1.848*        1.816*
                                                 (0.827)    (0.963)     (0.950)      (0.935)
Strict*log(Life Expectancy)                        2.676     3.190*     3.522*        3.434*
                                                 (2.064)    (1.863)     (1.982)      (1.953)
Strict*Fertility rate                             0.125      0.145       0.136        0.127
                                                 (0.165)    (0.183)     (0.179)      (0.179)
Strict*log(Distance to U.S.)                      -0.419     -0.255      -0.121       -0.127
                                                 (0.288)    (0.282)     (0.284)      (0.282)
Strict*English language                           0.261       0.185       0.295        0.307
                                                 (0.268)    (0.232)     (0.261)      (0.255)
Strict*Share of Immigrant Population              -0.223     -0.957      -1.459       -2.303
                                                 (9.404)    (7.607)     (8.408)      (8.167)
Strict*Islam dominant religion                    0.0929      0.454       0.242        0.243
                                                 (0.387)    (0.404)     (0.409)      (0.407)
Strict*Catholicism dominant religion              -0.153     0.0443       0.100        0.102
                                                 (0.296)    (0.252)     (0.287)      (0.283)
Strict*Orthodox dominant religion                  0.398      0.758    1.144**      1.153**
                                                 (0.592)    (0.550)     (0.528)      (0.521)
Strict*Judaism dominant religion                   0.158      0.525       0.29         0.291
                                                 (0.391)    (0.385)     (0.374)      (0.375)
Strict*Buddhism Hinduism dominant relig.          0.567       0.53        0.351        0.348
                                                 (0.387)    (0.403)     (0.405)      (0.399)
Strict*Regulation of religion index              -0.0163     -0.009      -0.028       -0.026
                                                 (0.054)    (0.050)     (0.055)      (0.054)
Strict*Rule of law index                           0.311    0.412**     0.369*        0.367*
                                                 (0.187)    (0.197)     (0.188)      (0.187)
Strict*Ethnic fractionization index              -0.0583     -0.135     0.0454        0.0421
                                                 (0.462)    (0.479)     (0.508)      (0.503)
Decent*log(GDP per capita)                 -0.859***   -0.630***   -0.547***   -0.546***
                                             (0.209)     (0.205)     (0.203)     (0.198)
Decent*State Religion 1970                     0.157      0.245       0.208       0.228
                                             (0.178)     (0.165)     (0.162)     (0.161)
Decent*(Mean % primary education)             -0.007      -0.009      -0.011     -0.009
                                             (0.009)     (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.010)
Decent*(Mean % secondary education)           -0.009      -0.012      -0.017      -0.016
                                             (0.011)     (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.010)
Decent*(Mean % tertiary education)            -0.008      -0.018      -0.025      -0.022
                                             (0.013)     (0.016)     (0.015)     (0.015)
Decent*log(Population)                        -0.021      -0.039      -0.049      -0.039
                                             (0.076)     (0.076)     (0.075)     (0.075)
Decent*Share of Urban Population           2.644***     1.841**      2.015**    2.016**
                                             (0.865)     (0.922)     (0.939)     (0.904)
Decent*log(Life Expectancy)                  2.937*      2.751*       3.054*     2.818*
                                             (1.734)     (1.493)     (1.626)     (1.653)
Decent*Fertility rate                          0.216       0.206       0.204      0.205
                                             (0.201)     (0.160)     (0.156)     (0.159)
Decent*log(Distance to U.S.)                   0.305       0.345     0.539**    0.522**
                                             (0.243)     (0.224)     (0.221)     (0.228)
Decent*English language                       -0.123       0.102       0.028     0.0433
                                             (0.283)     (0.254)     (0.240)     (0.243)
Decent*Share of Immigrant Population           12.76       9.616      12.12       11.57
                                            (10.030)     (9.391)     (8.038)     (7.958)
Decent*Islam dominant religion                 0.335       0.285       0.243      0.254
                                             (0.422)     (0.394)     (0.392)     (0.397)
Decent*Catholocism dominant religion        -0.359*       -0.161      -0.208      -0.219
                                             (0.213)     (0.218)     (0.203)     (0.203)
Decent*Orthodox dominant religion              1.071    1.560**     1.838***   1.863***
                                             (0.778)     (0.681)     (0.634)     (0.647)
Decent*Judaism dominant religion            -0.0142        0.44       0.169       0.146
                                             (0.377)     (0.422)     (0.404)     (0.410)
Decent*Buddhism Hinduism dominant relig.     0.0982     0.00644      0.00601   -0.000702
                                             (0.346)     (0.406)     (0.379)     (0.378)
Decent*Regulation of religion index         -0.0238     -0.0332      -0.0413    -0.0372
                                             (0.052)     (0.052)     (0.052)     (0.052)
Decent*Rule of law index                     0.0966        0.147      0.0872     0.0829
                                             (0.173)     (0.184)     (0.177)     (0.175)
Decent*Ethnic fractionization index           -0.375      -0.229      -0.414      -0.422
                                             (0.422)     (0.476)     (0.484)     (0.465)
Instrument set                                   --          B           B           B
Adjusted R squared                             0.633       0.675       0.671       0.672
Observations                                   1,602       1,415       1,415       1,415
Column 1 has the additional regressors for column 3 of Table 5. Columns 2, 3 and 4 have the
additional regressors for columns 6, 7 and 8 of Table 6, respectively.
                                            43
REFERENCES
Aghion, Philippe, and Jean Tirole. 1997. "Formal and Real Authority in Organizations."
   Journal of Political Economy, 105: 1-29.
Alesina, Alberto, and Eliana La Ferrara. 2005. “Ethnic Diversity and Economic Performance.”
   Journal of Economic Literature, 63(3): 762-800.
Allen, Douglas W. 1995. “Order in the Church: A Property Rights Approach.” Journal of
   Economic Behavior and Organization, 27: 97-117.
Anderson, James E. and van Wincoop, Eric. 2004. “Trade Costs,” Journal of Economic
   Literature, 42(3): 691-751.
Anderson, Simon P., Andre de Palma, and Jacques-Francois Thisse, 1992, Discrete Choice
   Theory of Product Differentiation, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Antràs, Pol. 2003. “Firms, Contracts, and Trade Structure.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
   118(4): 1375-1418.
Antràs, Pol, and Elhanan Helpman. 2004. “Global Sourcing,” Journal of Political Economy,
   112: 552-580.
Antràs, Pol, Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. 2009. “Organizations and Trade.” Annual Review of
   Economics. 1: 43-64.
Barro, Robert J., and Jason Hwang. 2007. “Religious Conversion in 40 Countries.” NBER
   Working Paper No. 13689.
Barro, Robert J. and Rachel M. McCleary. 2003. “Religion and Economic Growth Across
   Countries.” American Sociological Review, October 2003.
Barro, Robert J. and Rachel M. McCleary. 2005. “Which Countries Have State Religions?”
   Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(4): 1333-1270.
Barro, Robert J., Rachel M. McCleary, and Alexander McQuoid. 2010. “Economics of
   Sainthood”, mimeo.
Barrett, David B., George T. Kurian, and Todd M. Johnson, eds. 2001. World Christian
   Encyclopedia: A Comparative Study of Churches and Religions in the Modern World.
   Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Becker, Sasha, and Marc Muendler. 2009. “Margins of Multinational Substitution.” American
   Economic Review, forthcoming.
Berman, Eli. 2000. “Sect, Subsidy, and Sacrifice: An Economist’s View of Ultra-Orthodox
   Jews.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115(3): 905-953.
Blau, Judith R., Kent Redding, and Kenneth C. Land. 1998. “Ethnocultural Cleavages and the
   Growth of Church Membership, 1860-1930.” In N.J. Demerath III, Peter D. Hall, Terry
   Schmitt, and Rhys H. Williams, eds., Sacred Companies: Organizational Aspects of
   Religion and Religious Aspects of Organization, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bloom, Nicholas, Raffaella Sadun, John van Reenen. 2009. “The Organization of Firms across
   Countries.” NBER Worker Paper No. 15129.
Brouwer, Steve, Paul Gifford, and Susan D. Rose. 1996. Exporting the American Gospel:
   Global Christian Fundamentalism. New York: Routledge.
Calvo, Guillermo A. 1998. “Capital Flows and Capital-Market Crises: The Simple Economics
   of Sudden Stops.” Journal of Applied Economics, 1(1): 35-54.
Cavallo, Eduardo. 2007. “Trade, Gravity and Sudden Stops: On How Commercial Trade Can

                                            44
   Increase the Stability of Capital Flows,” mimeo, Harvard University.
Chaves, Mark. 1993a. “Denominations as Dual Structures: An Organizational Analysis.”
   Sociology of Religion 54(2): 147-169.
Chaves, Mark. 1993b. “ Intraorganizational Power and Internal Secularization in Protestant
   Denominations.” The American Journal of Sociology, 99(1): 1-48.
Chaves, Mark. 1998. “Denominations as Dual Structures: An Organizational Analysis.” In
   N.J. Demerath III, Peter D. Hall, Terry Schmitt, and Rhys H. Williams, eds., Sacred
   Companies: Organizational Aspects of Religion and Religious Aspects of Organization,
   Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Chaves, Mark, and John R. Sutton. 2004. “Organizational Consolidation in American Protestant
   Denominations, 1890-1990.” Journal of the Scientific Study of Religion. 43(1): 51-66.
Chen, Daniel. 2010. “Club Goods and Group Identity: Evidence from Islamic Resurgence
   during the Indonesian Financial Crisis.” Journal of Political Economy, 118(2): 300-352.
Clarke, Gerard. 2006. “Faith Matters: Faith Based Organizations, Civil Society, and
   International Development.” Journal of International Development, 18(6): 835-848.
Clemens, Michael, 2007. “Do Visas Kill? Health Effects of African Health Professional
   Emigration.” CGD Working Paper No. 114.
Das, Mitali, Whitney K. Newey, and Francis Vella. 2003. “Nonparametric Estimation of
   Sample Selection Models,” Review of Economic Studies, 70 (1): 33–58.
Eaton, Jonathan, Samuel Kortum, and Francis Kramarz. 2004. “Dissecting Trade: Firms,
   Industries, and Export Destinations,” NBER Working Paper No. 10344.
Ekelund, Jr., Robert B., Robert F. Hebert, and Robert D. Tollison. 2006. The Marketplace of
   Christianity. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Fearon, James D. 2003. “Ethnic and Cultural Diversity by Country,” Journal of Economic
   Growth, 8(2): 195-222.
Feenstra, Robert C. 2004. Advanced International Trade: Theory and Evidence. Princeton, NJ:
   Princeton University Press.
Fernald, John. 1999. “Roads to Prosperity? Assessing the Link between Public Capital and
   Productivity.” American Economic Review, 89(3): 619-638.
Fincher, Corey, and Randy Thornhill. 2008. “Assortative Sociality, Limited Dispersal,
   Infectious Disease, and the Genesis of the Global Pattern of Religion Diversity.”
   Proceedings of the Royal Society B, 275: 2587-2594.
Finke, Roger, and Rodney Stark. 2008. The Churching of America, 1776-2005: Winners and
   Losers in Our Religious Economy. Rutgers University Press, New Brunswick, New Jersey.
Freston, Paul. 2001. Pentecostals and Politics in Asia, Africa, and Latin America. Cambridge,
   UK: Cambridge University Press.
Gabaix, Xavier. 2009. “Power Laws in Economics and Finance.” Annual Review of Economics,
   1: 255-294.
Goff, Brian, and Michelle W. Trawick. 2008. “The Importance of Brand and Competition in
   Defining US Religious Markets.” Southern Economic Journal, 74(4): 1035-1048.
Grim, Brian J., and Roger Finke. 2006. “International Religion Indexes: Government
   Regulation, Government Favoritism, and Social Regulation of Religion.” Interdisciplinary
   Journal Research on Religion, 2(1): 1-40.
Grossman, Sanford J. and Oliver D. Hart, 1986, “Costs and Benefits of Ownership: A Theory of
   Vertical and Lateral Integration,” Journal of Political Economy, 94(3), August, 691-719.
Gruber, Jonathan, and Hungerman, Daniel M., 2007. "Faith-based charity and crowd-out during

                                             45
    the great depression," Journal of Public Economics, 91(5-6): 1043-1069.
Hoge, Dean R. 1979. “A Test of Denominational Growth and Decline.” In Dean R. Hoge and
    David A. Roozen, eds., Understanding Church Growth and Decline: 1950-1970, Hartford,
    CN: Hartford Seminary Foundation.
Hoge, Dean R. and Fenggang Yang. 1994. “Determinants of Religious Giving in American
    Denominations.” Review of Religious Research, 36(2): 123-148.
Hungerman, Daniel M. 2005. “Are Church and State Substitutes? Evidence from the 1996
    Welfare Reform.” Journal of Public Economics, 89: 2245–2267.
Iannaccone, Laurence R. 1992. “Sacrifice and Stigma: Reducing Free-riding in Cults,
    Communes, and Other Collectives.” The Journal of Political Economy, 100(2): 271-291.
Iannaccone, Laurence R. 1994. “Why Strict Churches are Strong.” The American Journal of
    Sociology, 99(5): 1180-1211.
Iannaccone, Laurence R. 1998. “Why Strict Churches are Strong.” In N.J. Demerath III, Peter
    D. Hall, Terry Schmitt, and Rhys H. Williams, eds., Sacred Companies: Organizational
    Aspects of Religion and Religious Aspects of Organization, Oxford: Oxford University
    Press.
Iyigun, Murat. 2008. “Luther and Suleyman”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123:4, 1465-94.
Lipford, Jody D., Robert D. Tollison. 2003. “Religious Participation and Income.” Journal of
    Economic Organization and Behavior, 51: 249-260.
Marin, Dalia, and Thiery Verdier. 2008. “Power inside the Firm and the Market: A General
    Equilibrium Approach.” Journal of the European Economic Association, 6(4): 752-788.
McCleary, Rachel M., and Robert J. Barro. 2006. “Religion and Political Economy in an
    International Panel.” Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, 45(2): 149–175.
McCleary, Rachel M. 2008. “Religion and Economic Development: A Two-way Causation.”
    Policy Review 148, April-May 2008.
McMillan, Becky R., and Matthew J. Price. 2003. "How Much Should We Pay the Pastor? A
    Fresh Look at Clergy Salaries in the 21st Century." Pulpit and Pew Research Reports 2: 2-
    22.
Melitz, Marc J. 2003. “The Impact of Trade on Intra-industry Reallocations and Aggregate
    Industry Productivity,” Econometrica, 71(6): 1695-1725.
Melton, J. Gordon. 1989. The Encyclopedia of American Religions, 3rd Edition. Detroit: Gale
    Research Inc.
Meyer, Birgit. 2004. “Christianity in Africa: From African Independent to Pentecostal-
    Charismatic Churches.” Annual Review of Anthropology, 33: 447-474.
Mickelthwait, John, and Adrian Wooldridge. 2009. God is Back: How the Global Revival of
    Faith is Changing the World. New York: The Penguin Press.
Morrison, Catherine, and Schwartz. 1996. “State Infrastructure and Productive Performance.”
    American Economic Review, 86(5): 1095-1111.
Nunn, Nathan. 2007. “Relationship-Specificity, Incomplete Contracts, and the Pattern of
    Trade.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(2): 569-600.
Nunn, Nathan. 2010. “Religious Conversion in Africa.” American Economic Review Papers
    and Proceedings, 100: 147-152.
Raddatz, Claudio. 2007. “Are External Shocks Responsible for the Instability of Output in Low
    Income Countries?” Journal of Development Economics, 84(1): 155-187.
Rajan, Raghuram G., and Julie Wulf. 2006. “The Flattening Firm: Evidence from Panel Data on
    the Changing Nature of Corporate Hierarchies”, Review of Economics and Statistics, 88(4):


                                             46
   759-773.
Robbins, Joel. 2004. “The Globalization of Pentecostal and Charismatic Christianity.” Annual
   Review of Anthropology, 33: 117–43.
Roller, Lars-Hendrik, and Leonard Waverman. 2001. “Telecommunications Infrastructure and
   Economic Development: A Simultaneous Approach.” American Economic Review, 91(4):
   909-923.
Sacerdote, Bruce, and Edward Glaeser. 2001. “Education and Religion”, NBER working paper
   8080.
Scheve, Kenneth and David Stasavage. 2006. “Religion and Preferences for Social Insurance.”
   Quarterly Journal of Political Science, 1(3): 255-286.
Thomas, Scott. 2010. “A Globalized God.” Foreign Affairs, 89(6): 93-101.
Woodberry, Robert. 2008. “Protestantism and Economic Development.” In J.D. Imber, ed.,
   Markets, Morals, and Religion. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 157-177.
Woodberry, Robert, and Timothy Shah. 2004. “The Pioneering Protestants.” Journal of
   Democracy, 15: 47-61.
Yang, Dean. 2008. “Coping with Disaster: The Impact of Hurricanes on International Financial
   Flows, 1970-2002.” B. E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy: 8(1) (Advances), Article
   13.




                                            47
               Table 1: The 35 largest Protestant denominations, 2005
                                                             Global       Share of    Number of
                                          Headquarters     adherents        global     countries
Denomination                              country          (millions)   Protestants      present
Anglicans                                 Britain                74.4        0.103          140
Assemblies of God                         US                     42.4        0.059          149
Seventh-day Adventist Church              US                     16.7        0.023          216
Southern Baptist Convention               US                     11.9        0.017          110
Jehovah's Witnesses                       US                     11.1        0.015          214
SIM Church                                US                     11.0        0.015            14
New Apostolic Church                      Switzerland             7.4        0.010          149
Church of God (Cleveland)                 US                      7.0        0.010          124
Ch of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints   US                      6.7        0.009          146
American Baptist Churches in the USA      US                      5.7        0.008           11
SFM/NPY/FFFM                              Swed/Norw/Finl          4.0        0.006            37
Church of the Foursquare Gospel           US                      3.7        0.005            59
United Methodist Church (USA)             US                      3.7        0.005            44
Presbyterian Church (USA)                 US                      3.4        0.005            20
Africa Inland Church                      Britain/US              3.2        0.004             7
Christian and Missionary Alliance         US                      3.2        0.004           50
Methodist Church of Great Britain         Britain                 2.9        0.004            18
Pentecostal Assemblies of God (Canada)    Canada                  2.9        0.004            29
United Pentecostal Church                 US                      2.4        0.003            90
Christian Aviation Ministries             US                      2.1        0.003             7
Christian Brethren (Open)                 US                      1.9        0.003            43
Baptist Unions/BWA                        US                      1.9        0.003            44
PEMS France                               France                  1.9        0.003             6
Pres Ch of East Africa (Ch of Scotland)   Britain                 1.8        0.003             3
Evangelical Alliance Mission              US                      1.6        0.002           28
Salvation Army                            US                      1.6        0.002            86
Apostolic Church Missionary Movement      Britain                 1.5        0.002             7
OMS International                         US                      1.4        0.002            11
Church of the Nazarene                    US                      1.2        0.002          102
Evangelical Lutheran Ch in America        US                      1.1        0.002            19
Church of God of Prophecy                 US                      1.0        0.001            81
Churches of Christ (Instrumental)         US                      1.0        0.001            31
Zion Christian Church                     South Africa            0.9        0.001             5
Former AUCECB                             Russia                  0.9        0.001            13
Moravian Church                           US                      0.9        0.001            31


This table is based on the global membership of denominations outside of the US.


                                               48
          Table 2: Presence of US denominations abroad in 1970 and 2005

                                    Denomination present in
                                           1970
                                                              0            1         Total
Denomination                  0                           9,891            2         9,893
present in 2005                                                                    (0.865)
                              1                             305        1,242         1,547
                                                                                   (0.135)
                          Total                          10,196         1,244      11,440
                                                         (0.891)      (0.109)

This table shows the number of cases in which a US denomination (N = 130) is present in a
country (N = 88) in 1970 and 2005.




    Table 3: Governance structure and religious doctrine of US denominations

 Variable                                                                 Mean      St. Dev.
 Denomination is decentralized (congregational polity)                    0.554      0.499
 Denomination is theologically strict (row mean > .5)                     0.446      0.499

 Is evangelism an essential function of all churches and believers?       0.808      0.396
 Is repentance and conversion essential for all believers?                0.754      0.432
 Is bible considered inerrant or infallible?                              0.746      0.437
 Is the damnation of non-believers emphasized?                            0.700      0.460
 Is imminence of 2nd coming of Christ emphasized?                         0.262      0.441
 Is sanctification emphasized?                                            0.223      0.418
 Is speaking in tongues emphasized?                                       0.208      0.407
 Are drinking, smoking, cultural activities, or dress restricted?         0.246      0.450
 Is ongoing practice of divine healing emphasized?                        0.292      0.457

The sample is 130 US Protestant denominations.




                                               49
         Table 4: Summary statistics for country variables
Variable                                             Mean    St. Dev.
log GDP per capita                                    7.63       1.60
log population                                       16.33       1.39
mean % primary education (Barro & Lee)               33.00      13.85
mean % secondary education (Barro & Lee)             33.12      19.07
mean % tertiary education (Barro & Lee)              10.46       8.48
urban population/total population                     0.40       0.22
log life expectancy                                   4.16       0.16
total fertility rate                                  3.74       1.69
log distance to US                                    8.93       0.45
= 1 if English official language                      0.18       0.39
Immigrants in US/total population                     0.01       0.01
= 1 if Islam dominant religion                        0.22       0.41
= 1 if Catholicism dominant religion                  0.40       0.49
= 1 if Orthodox dominant religion                     0.07       0.25
= 1 if Judaism dominant religion                      0.01       0.11
= 1 if Buddhism, Hinduism dominant religion           0.07       0.25
regulation of religion index (Grim & Finke)           2.68       2.65
= 1 if country had state religion in 1970             0.42       0.50
rule of law index (Freedom House)                     0.00       0.98
ethnic fractionalization index (Alesina et al.)       0.39       0.25
annual incidence of landslides (>1000 affected)       0.02       0.04
annual incidence of eruptions (>1000 affected)        0.03       0.09
annual incidence of wind storms (5+ days)             0.01       0.02
annual incidence of earthquakes (>7 Richter)          0.03       0.09
annual incidence of military conflict                 0.20       0.29
annual incidence of cholera (>1000 affected)          0.02       0.74
annual incidence of dengue fever (>1000 affected)     0.01       0.33
annual incidence of flu/SARS (>1000 affected)        0.003       0.18
annual incidence of meningococcal (>1000 affected)    0.01       0.32
log hospital beds                                     0.98       0.98
medical personnel per 1,000                           3.81       3.86
public health expenditure/GDP x 100                   3.87       2.10
dentists per 1,000                                    0.37       0.35
fixed mainlines per 1,000                            16.59      19.52
cellular subscriptions per 1,000                     15.70      15.87
passenger cars per 100                               13.44      16.22
roads paved (%)                                      49.72      32.69
log road network per square km                       -1.30       1.44
log annual air carrier departures                    10.14       1.82
log annual air passengers carried                    14.10       2.15

                                      50
                                           Table 5: Baseline results

                                                          Dependent variable
                                         Log adherents                         Log congregations
   Regressors                      (1)       (2)          (3)              (4)       (5)         (6)
 Strict*Natural disasters       0.218***               0.228***         0.126**               0.132***
  (1st principal component)     (0.056)                (0.056)          (0.050)               (0.050)

 Strict*Disease outbreaks       0.215***                0.217***        0.187**                0.188**
  (1st principal component)     (0.073)                 (0.077)         (0.079)                (0.081)

 Strict*Health services         -0.400***               -0.367***       -0.313**               -0.282**
  (1st principal component)     (0.143)                 (0.138)         (0.135)                (0.130)

 Decentralized*Infrastructure                0.531***   0.531***                   0.531***    0.420***
  (1st principal component)                  (0.120)    (0.192)                    (0.120)     (0.151)

 Adjusted R squared             0.615        0.606      0.633           0.593      0.606       0.612
 Observations                   1,613        1,980      1,602           1,613      1,980       1,602

The dependent variable is either the log number of adherents (columns 1-3) or the log number of congregations
(columns 4-6). Regressions include country dummies, denomination dummies, and interactions between
Decentralized and Strict and other country characteristics (see appendix). Standard errors clustered by country.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.
                                      Table 6: Heckman and nonparametric estimation

        Estimation procedure               Heckman              Nonparametric                 Nonparametric
        1st stage estimation        Probit     Probit  Linear Pr    Probit      Logit Linear Pr    Probit     Logit
                                       (1)        (2)     (3)       (4)         (5)      (6)       (7)        (8)
      Strict*Natural disasters      0.197*** 0.227*** 0.185*** 0.196*** 0.191*** 0.239*** 0.216*** 0.219***
       (1st principal component)    (0.076)    (0.084) (0.050)   (0.054)     (0.052)  (0.062)   (0.063)    (0.064)

      Strict*Disease outbreaks      0.189**    0.251**     0.204**      0.158*     0.164**    0.268*** 0.227**       0.231**
       (1st principal component)    (0.093)    (0.098)     (0.083)      (0.084)    (0.082)    (0.092)  (0.088)       (0.089)

      Strict*Health services        -0.341**   -0.376**    -0.336**     -0.340*** -0.325**    -0.353**    -0.341**   -0.342**
       (1st principal component)    (0.167)    (0.177)     (0.129)      (0.126)   (0.124)     (0.155)     (0.151)    (0.151)

      Decentralized*Infrastructure 0.586**     0.621**     0.450**      0.373*     0.386**    0.466**     0.382**    0.394**
       (1st principal component)   (0.233)     (0.251)     (0.185)      (0.192)    (0.188)    (0.190)     (0.185)    (0.181)

      Instrument set                  A          B           A            A          A          B           B          B
      Adjusted R squared              --         --        0.664        0.661      0.661      0.675       0.671      0.672
      Observations                  11,960     9,660       1,602        1,602      1,602      1,415       1,415      1,415

The dependent variable is the log number of adherents. Regressions include country dummies, denomination dummies, and
interactions between Decentralized and Strict and other country characteristics (see appendix). Columns 1-2 use a Heckman
estimator, with a probit model used to estimate the first stage probability of a denomination being present in a country; columns 3-8
use a nonparametric estimator, with a linear probability, probit, or logit model used to estimate the first stage probability of a
denomination being present. The instrument set refers to the additional variables used in the first stage estimation, with set A
including lagged denomination presence in 1970 and set B including set A plus the average of lagged presence in 1970 for
denominations with a similar size in the US. Standard errors are clustered by country. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                                   52
                        Table 7: Placebo tests for health services and transportation infrastructure

Estimation method               OLS      Nonparam.                                              OLS                 Nonparametric
Regressors                         (1)      (2)    Regressors                            (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)
Strict*Natural disasters        0.236*** 0.214*** Strict*Natural disasters            0.206***     0.179**     0.179***    0.204***
 (1st principal comp.)          (0.063)  (0.070)    (1st principal comp.)             (0.056)      (0.068)     (0.067)     (0.057)

Strict*Disease outbreaks        0.280*** 0.299*** Strict*Disease outbreaks            0.226***     0.237*** 0.241***        0.224***
 (1st principal comp.)          (0.083)  (0.093)   (1st principal comp.)              (0.075)      (0.087)  (0.086)         (0.075)

Strict*Dentists per capita      0.122      -0.037      Strict*Health services         -0.410***    -0.342**    -0.374**     -0.404***
                                (0.344)    (0.384)      (1st principal comp.)         (0.138)      (0.161)     (0.157)      (0.140)

Decentralized*Infrastructure 0.659*** 0.472**          Decentralized*Log              -0.145       -0.069      -0.125       -0.171
 (1st principal comp.)       (0.201)  (0.197)           Air transport                 (0.110)      (0.123)     (0.125)      (0.106)

Air transport measure            --         --                                        Passengers Carriers      Passengers Carriers
Adjusted R squared              0.629      0.669                                      0.626      0.664         0.665      0.625
Observations                    1,606      1,418                                      1,579      1,420         1,395      1,607

The dependent variable is the log number of adherents. Regressions include country dummies, denomination dummies, and
interactions between Decentralized and Strict and other country characteristics. In columns 1 and 2, dentists per capita serve as a
placebo for health services; in columns 3-6, air transport serves as a placebo for land transportation and communication infrastructure.
Except for the boldfaced regressors above, the specifications in columns 1, 3, and 4 correspond to that in column 3 of Table 5 and the
specifications in columns 2, 5 and 6 correspond to that in column 7 of Table 6. Standard errors are clustered by country. *** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                                  53
           Table 8 Placebo tests for doctrinal strictness of denominations

 Estimation method                           OLS            Nonparametric
 1st stage estimation                  --           --     Probit   Probit
                                      (1)          (2)      (3)      (4)
 Communion*Natural
 disasters                          -0.044     -0.094      -0.046     -0.085
  (1st principal component)        (0.091)     (0.094)     (0.086)    (0.088)

 Communion*Disease
 outbreaks                          0.006       0.008       0.029      0.043
  (1st principal component)        (0.120)     (0.114)     (0.111)    (0.109)

 Communion*Health services         -0.022       0.029       0.040      0.105
  (1st principal component)        (0.137)     (0.143)     (0.131)    (0.142)

 Decentralized*Infrastructure                 0.635***                0.423*
  (1st principal component)                    (0.206)                (0.216)

 Instrument set                                              B           B
 Adjusted R squared                 0.612      0.633       0.656       0.674
 Observations                       1,531      1,520       1,367       1,357


The dependent variable is the log number of adherents. Regressions include country dummies,
denomination dummies, and interactions between Decentralized and Strict and other country
characteristics. The frequency of communion serves as a placebo for the strictness of religious
doctrine. Except for the boldfaced regressors above, the specifications in columns 1 and 2
correspond to those in column 3 of Table 5 and the specifications in columns 3 and 4
correspond to those in column 7 of Table 6. See notes to Table 6 on the definition of the
instrument set. Standard errors are clustered by country. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.
     Table 9: Extended results for strictness interactions with natural disasters
                                                          log adherents
                                                     Volcanic       Wind
           (a) OLS                 Landslides        Eruptions    Storms    Earthquakes
Strict*Disaster incidence          6.915***          2.509***      -0.317     1.782*
                                    (2.401)           (0.517)     (4.016)     (0.921)

Strict*Disease outbreaks            0.228***         0.211***    0.183**    0.199***
 (1st principal component)           (0.079)          (0.076)     (0.085)     (0.075)
Strict*Health services              -0.361***        -0.396***   -0.375**   -0.379***
 (1st principal component)           (0.136)          (0.137)     (0.152)     (0.142)
Decentralized*Infrastructure        0.536***         0.556***    0.549***   0.525***
 (1st principal component)           (0.195)          (0.195)     (0.202)     (0.198)

Adjusted R squared                    0.633            0.633      0.631       0.632
Observations                          1,602            1,602      1,602       1,602

       (b) Nonparametric
          (Instr. Set B)
Strict*Disaster incidence           7.200***         2.615***      -3.864    1.901**
                                     (2.310)          (0.602)     (4.162)    (0.935)

Strict*Disease outbreaks            0.283***         0.261***    0.238**     0.260***
 (1st principal component)           (0.090)          (0.093)     (0.091)     (0.087)
Strict*Health services              -0.358**         -0.380**    -0.390**    -0.372**
 (1st principal component)           (0.151)          (0.155)     (0.154)     (0.157)
Decentralized*Infrastructure         0.481**          0.498**    0.454**      0.440**
 (1st principal component)           (0.191)          (0.194)     (0.204)     (0.194)

Adjusted R squared                    0.675            0.674      0.673       0.673
Observations                          1,415            1,415      1,415       1,415

Regressions include country dummies, denomination dummies, and interactions between
Decentralized and Strict and other country characteristics. Except for the boldfaced regressors
above, the specifications in panel (a) correspond to those in column 3 of Table 5 and the
specifications in panel (b) correspond to those in column 7 of Table 6. See notes to Table 6 on
the instrument set. Standard errors are clustered by country. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                55
    Table 10: Extended results for strictness interactions with disease outbreaks

                                                          log adherents
                                                      Dengue                 Meningo-
            (a) OLS                   Cholera          Fever     Flu/SARS      coccal
Strict*Disease incidence              0.224*           0.036      0.860***    -0.096
                                      (0.117)         (0.189)      (0.299)    (0.420)

Strict*Natural disasters             0.207***        0.200***    0.204***    0.205***
 (1st principal component)            (0.053)         (0.057)     (0.053)      (0.053)
Strict*Health services               -0.445***       -0.410***   -0.323**    -0.413***
 (1st principal component)            (0.144)         (0.144)     (0.143)      (0.144)
Decentralized*Infrastructure         0.539***        0.539***    0.525***    0.540***
 (1st principal component)            (0.187)         (0.185)     (0.192)      (0.185)

Adjusted R squared                     0.632           0.632      0.632        0.632
Observations                           1,602           1,602      1,602        1,602

       (b) Nonparametric
          (Instr. Set B)
Strict*Disease incidence               0.193          -0.086     1.085***       0.021
                                      (0.138)         (0.208)     (0.318)      (0.610)

Strict*Natural disasters             0.217***        0.228***    0.206***     0.225***
 (1st principal component)            (0.060)         (0.067)     (0.060)      (0.060)
Strict*Health services               -0.422***       -0.392**     -0.288*     -0.395**
 (1st principal component)            (0.154)         (0.152)     (0.156)      (0.152)
Decentralized*Infrastructure          0.479**         0.467**     0.471**      0.450**
 (1st principal component)            (0.190)         (0.186)     (0.185)      (0.193)

Adjusted R squared                     0.672           0.672      0.675        0.673
Observations                           1,415           1,415      1,415        1,415


Regressions include country dummies, denomination dummies, and interactions between
Decentralized and Strict and other country characteristics. Except for the boldfaced regressors
above, the specifications in panel (a) correspond to those in column 3 of Table 5 and the
specifications in panel (b) correspond to those in column 7 of Table 6. See notes to Table 6 on
the instrument set. Standard errors are clustered by country. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                56
Table 11: Extended results for strictness interactions with health expenditures

                                                  log adherents
                                Hospital  Nurses,     Health    Physicia      Financial
         (a) OLS                  beds   Midwives Expend.          ns         Develop.
Strict*Health services         -0.475*** -0.089**     -0.050     0.010         -0.737**
                                (0.181)   (0.039)    (0.054)    (0.151)         (0.333)

Strict*Natural disasters       0.191***     0.247***   0.228*** 0.226***       0.251***
 (1st principal component)      (0.059)      (0.055)    (0.057)  (0.060)        (0.056)
Strict*Disease outbreaks       0.192**       0.176**   0.252*** 0.237***       0.286***
 (1st principal component)      (0.077)      (0.085)    (0.077)  (0.078)        (0.077)
Decentralized*Infrastructure   0.618***     0.548***   0.629*** 0.658***       0.611***
 (1st principal component)      (0.200)      (0.180)    (0.197)  (0.195)        (0.196)

Adjusted R squared               0.627       0.633       0.626       0.626       0.625
Observations                     1,635       1,602       1,635       1,635       1,631

     (b) Nonparametric
        (Instr. Set B)
Strict*Health services          -0.456**    -0.087**     -0.048      0.089    -1.052***
                                 (0.197)     (0.041)    (0.056)     (0.159)     (0.342)

Strict*Natural disasters       0.191***     0.262***   0.224*** 0.224***       0.249***
 (1st principal component)      (0.066)      (0.059)    (0.062)  (0.067)        (0.062)
Strict*Disease outbreaks       0.246***     0.218**    0.294*** 0.280***       0.303***
 (1st principal component)      (0.088)      (0.105)    (0.088)  (0.094)        (0.089)
Decentralized*Infrastructure   0.585***     0.477**    0.601*** 0.638***       0.452**
 (1st principal component)      (0.198)      (0.185)    (0.198)  (0.194)        (0.196)

Adjusted R squared               0.671       0.675       0.670       0.670       0.667
Observations                     1,444       1,415       1,444       1,444       1,441


Regressions include country dummies, denomination dummies, and interactions between
Decentralized and Strict and other country characteristics. Except for the boldfaced regressors
above, the specifications in panel (a) correspond to those in column 3 of Table 5 and the
specifications in panel (b) correspond to those in column 7 of Table 6. See notes to Table 6 on
the instrument set. Standard errors are clustered by country. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                              57
Table 12: Extended results for decentralization interactions with infrastructure

                                                       log adherents
                                    Mainline          Cell    Passenger    Road
           (a) OLS                  Phones          Phones       Cars     Network
Decentralized*Infrastructure        0.021*          0.031**    0.026**    0.279**
                                    (0.012)         (0.014)     (0.011)   (0.137)

Strict*Natural disasters            0.217*** 0.216***         0.232***    0.212***
 (1st principal component)           (0.057)  (0.056)          (0.055)      (0.056)
Strict*Disease outbreaks            0.220*** 0.223***         0.218***    0.221***
 (1st principal component)          (0.076)  (0.075)           (0.077)      (0.073)
Strict*Health services             -0.357** -0.381***         -0.347**    -0.396***
 (1st principal component)          (0.146)  (0.142)           (0.139)      (0.138)

Adjusted R squared                   0.625          0.625       0.633      0.625
Observations                         1,613          1,613       1,602      1,613

      (b) Nonparametric
         (Instr. Set B)
Decentralized*Infrastructure         0.016           0.018    0.029**       0.214
                                    (0.012)         (0.016)   (0.011)      (0.145)

Strict*Natural disasters           0.214***     0.198***      0.233***    0.201***
 (1st principal component)          (0.067)      (0.066)       (0.061)     (0.067)
Strict*Disease outbreaks           0.292***     0.302***      0.237***    0.268***
 (1st principal component)          (0.092)      (0.091)       (0.088)     (0.084)
Strict*Health services              -0.314*     -0.340**      -0.325**    -0.329**
 (1st principal component)          (0.167)      (0.164)       (0.155)     (0.159)

Adjusted R squared                   0.668          0.669       0.675      0.666
Observations                         1,425          1,425       1,415      1,425


Regressions include country dummies, denomination dummies, and interactions between
Decentralized and Strict and other country characteristics. Except for the boldfaced regressors
above, the specifications in panel (a) correspond to those in column 3 of Table 5 and the
specifications in panel (b) correspond to those in column 7 of Table 6. Standard errors are
clustered by country. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                               58
                                                                                                                                           U
                   0   .1   .2   .3   .4                                                                                                    S-                                  0   .2   .4   .6
                                                                                                                                              ba
                                                                                                                                                se
      M                                                                                                                                           d
       ar                                                                                                                                                     Pr
         gi                                                                                                                                                     ot
           na
             l                                                                                                                                                    es
                                                                                                                                                                    ta
                                                                                                                                                                       nt

      H
       ol
         in                                                                                                                                      An
           es
             s                                                                                                                                     gl
SD                                                                                                                                                   ic
                                                                                                                                                       an
  A/                                                                                                                                                            Af
    JW                                                                                                                                                            fil
      /M                                                                                                                                                                ia
                                                                                                                                                                          te
        or
          m                                                                                                                                                                 d
           on                                                                                                                         N
                                                                                                                                       on
                                                                                                                                         -U




                                           1970
                                                                                                                                           S-
                                                                                                                                                                                                   1970




                                                                                                                                             ba
       M                                                                                                                                       se
                                                                                                                                                 d
        ai                                                                                                                                                    Pr
           nl
             in                                                                                                                                                 ot
               e                                                                                                                                                  es
                                                                                                                                                                    ta
                                                                                                                                                                       nt
                                                                                                                                    U
    Pe                                                                                                                               nc
      nt                                                                                                                               la
        ec                                                                                                                               ss




                                           2005
                                                                                                                                                                                                   2005




          os                                                                                                                               ifi
            ta                                                                                                                                   ed
              l                                                                                                                                       or
                                                                                                                                                         I   nd
                                                                                                                                                               ep
    Ev                                                                                                                                                           en
      an                                                                                                                                                           de
        ge                                                                                                                                                            nt
          lic
             al
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Figure 1: Market share of denominations by headquarter country




                                                  Figure 2: Share of foreign adherents of US denominations by religious tradition
                          Figure 3a: Global membership and U.S. membership, 2005



                          18
                          16
 log adherents globally
                          14
                          12
                          10
                          8




                               6       8        10          12        14     16
                                                log adherents in US


Figure 3b: Numbers of countries entered and U.S. membership, 2005
                          5
 log countries entered
                          4
                          3
                          2
                          1




                               6       8        10          12        14     16
                                                log adherents in US




                                                    60
     Figure 4: Distribution of doctrinal strictness across US denominations

               4
               3
     Density
      2        1
               0




                           0   .2           .4              .6                 .8        1
                                    Row mean of nine doctrine variables



Figure 5: Global no. of adherents and congregations for US denominations, 2005
                      18
                      16
      log adherents
                      14
                      12
                      10
                      8




                           2   4              6            8              10        12
                                        log number of congregations




                                                 61
