                                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




COME, BUT NO FURTHER: REPLY TO "THE COLONIAL ORIGINS OF COMPARATIVE DEVELOPMENT: AN EMPIR
                                        COMMENT"

                                                     Daron Acemoglu
                                                      Simon Johnson
                                                    James A. Robinson

                                                   Working Paper 16966
                                           http://www.nber.org/papers/w16966


                                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                           Cambridge, MA 02138
                                                April 2011




          We thank Robert Moffitt, the editor, for guidance. We thank Melissa Dell and Karti Subramanian
          for all their help and suggestions. We are also most grateful to the staff at the library at the Institute
          of Actuaries in London for help with the archival material. The views expressed herein are those of
          the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

          NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
          reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
          NBER publications.

          © 2011 by Daron Acemoglu, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. All rights reserved. Short sections
          of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
          credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Hither Thou Shalt Come, But No Further Reply to "The Colonial Origins of Comparative
Development An Empirical Investigation: Comment"
Daron Acemoglu, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson
NBER Working Paper No. 16966
April 2011
JEL No. E02,N20,O11

                                              ABSTRACT

David Albouy expresses three main concerns about the results in Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson
(2001) on the relationship between potential settler mortality and institutions. First, there is a general
concern that there are high mortality outliers, potentially affecting this relationship, with which we
agree. However, limiting the effect of outliers has no impact on our substantive results and if anything
significantly strengthens them, in fact making them robust to even extreme versions of his other critiques.
His second argument that all the data from Latin America and much of the data from Africa, making
up almost 60% of our sample, should be dropped is arbitrary - there is a great deal of well-documented
comparable information on the mortality of Europeans in those places during the relevant period. His
third argument that a "campaign" dummy should be included in the first stage is at odds with the historical
record and is implemented inconsistently; even modest corrections undermine his claims.


Daron Acemoglu                                       James A. Robinson
Department of Economics                              Harvard University
MIT, E52-380B                                        Department of Government
50 Memorial Drive                                    N309, 1737 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347                             Cambridge, MA 02138
and CIFAR                                            and NBER
and also NBER                                        jrobinson@gov.harvard.edu
daron@mit.edu

Simon Johnson
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E52-562
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
sjohnson@mit.edu
      Military returns [reports of disease and death] serve to indicate to the restless
      wanderers of our race the boundaries which neither the pursuit of wealth nor the
      dreams of ambition should induce them to pass, and to proclaim in forcible language
      that man, like the elements, is controlled by a Power which hath said, “Hither thou
      shalt come, but no further.” (Tulloch, 1847, p. 259, emphasis added).

      It was known in any case that West Africa was much more dangerous than the West
      Indies. The best medical opinion was, indeed, opposed to the kind of establishments
      that already existed there. Lind [in Diseases in Hot Countries in 1768] argued that
      European garrisons for the West African posts should be reduced to the smallest
      possible numbers and moved to hulks anchored oﬀ shore. (Curtin, 1964, p.86).


1     Introduction

In Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson, henceforth AJR, (2001), we advanced the hypothesis
that the mortality rates faced by Europeans in diﬀerent parts the world after 1500 aﬀected
their settlements and choice of colonization strategy. Places that were relatively healthy (for
Europeans) were - when they fell under European control - more likely to receive better eco-
nomic and political institutions. In contrast, places where European settlers were less likely to
go were more likely to receive “extractive” institutions. We also posited that this early pattern
of institutions has persisted over time and influences the extent and nature of institutions
around the world today. On this basis, we proposed using estimates of potential European
settler mortality as an instrument for institutional variation around the world today.
    Data on settlers themselves are unfortunately patchy - particularly because not many went
to places they believed, with good reason, to be most unhealthy. We therefore followed the lead
of Philip Curtin (1989 and 1998) who compiled data on the death rates faced by European
soldiers in various overseas postings.1 Curtin’s data were based on pathbreaking statistical
work that was initiated by the British military in the mid-19th century. These data became
part of the foundation of both the contemporary thinking about public health (for soldiers
and for civilians) and the life insurance industry (as it considered the risks inherent in overseas
travel), and shaped the perceptions of Europeans - including potential settlers and their medical
   1
     The data are also appealing because - at the same point in time - soldiers tend to live under fairly similar
conditions in diﬀerent countries, i.e., in a military cantonment or camp of some kind. Also, while conditions
changed as medical knowledge advanced, Curtin and other sources provide a great deal of detail regarding what
military doctors knew, when they knew it, and when they were able to get commanding oﬃcers to implement
health-improving reforms. Curtin (1998) is particularly good on such details.




                                                       1
advisers.2
    In his comment on AJR (2001), David Albouy (2011) focuses on one part of our argument.3
Specifically, he raises three main concerns regarding our underlying data on early potential
European mortality rates: (1) the highest measured rates are too high relative to the actual or
perceived potential mortality for Europeans (e.g., p.2, p.4, pp.7-8 and in his Appendix); (2) our
Latin American and some of our African data are unreliable (e.g., pp.4-5); and (3) the data are
not consistent because some are taken from military “campaigns” (pp.6-9). Albouy proposes
strategies for dealing with the latter two concerns. In particular, he discards completely almost
60% of our sample, and codes a “campaign” dummy. His comment argues that each of these
strategies separately weakens our results and together they undermine our first stage results
suﬃciently that our instrument (potential European settler mortality) becomes unhelpful for
determining whether institutions aﬀect income today.
    Albouy’s first concern is an important one with which we wholeheartedly agree - and had
emphasized in our original working paper version, AJR (2000).4 It is reasonable to worry
that some of our highest mortality estimates may be too high because of epidemics, unusual
conditions, or small sample variation, and may thus not be representative of mortality rates
that would ordinarily have been expected by soldiers or settlers. This concern was our main
rationale for using the logarithm of mortality rates (to reduce the impact of outliers; see
AJR, 2000, 2001).5 In AJR (2001), we argued that such variation could be viewed as a
form of measurement error, and provided that it did not significantly deviate from classical
measurement error, would not create an asymptotic bias for our IV procedure. In AJR (2005),
we instead used the alternative and, we now believe, superior strategy of capping mortality
estimates at 250 per 1000 (with replacement),6 which was suggested by A.M. Tulloch, the
    2
      We augmented the data from Curtin with estimates of bishops’ mortality from Gutierrez (1986) benchmarked
to overlapping mortality rates from Curtin. Using these approaches, we were able to compute estimates of
potential settler mortality for 72 countries. 64 of these modern countries, which also had other key data used
in our analysis, made up the base sample in AJR (2001).
    3
      While his current comment diﬀers considerably from the 2006 version (which in turn was diﬀerent from the
2005 variant, which itself was quite diﬀerent from both the 2004 vintages), the conclusions remain the same
(Albouy 2004a, 2004b, 2005, 2006). As we have rebutted his various points (see AJR 2004, 2005, 2006, and
2008), Albouy has shifted his logic, his data, and his regressions while continuing to assert the same findings.
We will not repeat our responses to issues on which Albouy has already retreated and instead here focus on his
published critique.
    4
      AJR (2000) contained a long list of robustness checks motivated by this and related issues, including on
how to best benchmark Latin American data to Curtin’s data (see in particular Table 5 there). These were not
ultimately published in AJR (2001) due to space constraints. Albouy’s initial comment on our paper did not
cite AJR (2000) and the robustness checks therein (Albouy 2004a). Though he now cites AJR (2000), there is
less than full acknowledgment that that our original robustness checks dealt with many of the issues he raises.
    5
      Other strategies we employed to deal with this issue in AJR (2000) included constructing alternative African
series, using information from “long” data series from Curtin. See Table 5 in AJR (2000).
    6
      We follow Curtin and the 19th century literature by reporting mortality per 1000 mean strength or with


                                                        2
leading authority of the day, as the maximum mortality in the most unhealthy part of the
world for Europeans (see Curtin, 1990, p.67, Tulloch, 1840, p.7).7 This modification has no
substantive eﬀect on the findings in AJR (2001); in fact, it strengthens them, so that even
extreme versions of Albouy’s other modifications leave the results largely robust. This we
believe is the most important bottom line: Results from AJR (2001) are highly robust and they
become more robust once one takes steps to limit the eﬀect of high mortality outliers.8
    Albouy’s other concerns are greatly exaggerated and his suggested approaches are arbitrary
and inconsistent. Once one limits the eﬀect of very high mortality rates, these other strategies
used by Albouy are largely inconsequential, but it is important to set the record straight. To
deal with the second concern, Albouy simply labels a large part of our original data, mostly
from Latin America and Africa, as “unreliable” and discards them - reducing the sample size
to 28 from our original 64. This is despite the fact that we have a great deal of information
about mortality - and how it was perceived by Europeans - in those countries, and much of
this was documented in our earlier work.
    Ordinary Europeans, European military establishments, the medical profession and the ex-
tensive life insurance industry were not only interested in mortality rates around the world but
published considerable relevant information.9 Our original coding and the additional robust-
ness checks reported in AJR (2005) are based on and consistent with this information. Simply
discarding data is certainly not the optimal way of dealing with this wealth of information,
especially in view of the paucity of data on early European settler and soldier mortality rates.
We repeat below robustness checks from AJR (2000) and also show that the main results from
AJR (2001) are robust to incorporating existing information on mortality rates in diﬀerent
ways.
replacement, meaning that the mortality rate refers to the number of soldiers who would have died in a year if
a force of 1,000 had been maintained in place for the entire year. Throughout all mortality rates are per 1000
mean strength or with replacement.
    7
      Two important points are worth noting. First, 250 per 1000 is still an exceptionally high mortality rate.
Potential settlers were definitely deterred by the prospect that about 20% of their number would die within the
first year. After early attempts ended in tragedy for would-be settlers, Europeans viewed much of Africa as
the “White Man’s Grave” and did not seriously attempt to build settlements there. Second, capping potential
settler mortality or its logarithm should not create any inconsistency. Our assumption is that potential settler
mortality is orthogonal to the second stage error term. If so, any monotone transformation thereof would also
be orthogonal to this error term and thus a valid instrument.
    8
      The results are very similar if, instead of the 250 per 1,000 per annum mortality, we use alternative caps
such as 100, 350, or 400.
    9
      The information was available in medical and public health discussions (see AJR 2005, 2006, and 2008). It
was also manifest in the life insurance literature. Europeans were understandably interested in the mortality
rates for themselves in all other parts of the world - and there was a well-informed debate around this issue
throughout the 19th century. The information involved was imperfect and evolved over time, but Europeans
definitely had expectations regarding mortality rates almost everywhere.



                                                       3
    One needs to throw out almost 60% of our sample, as Albouy does, in order to obtain
diﬀerent results. And even those regressions turn out to be largely driven by one outlier,
Gambia, which has an unusually favorable coding of its institutions standing in contrast with
its recent history and becomes much more consequential in the smaller sample. Limiting
the eﬀect of high mortality outliers by capping mortality at 250 per 1000 per annum or also
excluding the outlier Gambia makes our results robust even when one does not use any of the
observations that Albouy objects to (i.e., with just respectively 28 and 27 observations).
    Albouy’s third concern is that some of our data are taken from military campaigns while
others are not. To deal with this, he proposes to introduce a coding for whether or not our data
are drawn from a “campaign” and to use that dummy in the first stage regression. However,
there is little diﬀerence in practice between what soldiers were doing during most colonial
“campaigns” and other times, and it does not in general make sense - and is not possible -
to distinguish campaigns and non-campaigns. The more important problem here, however, is
the manner in which this is done. Albouy is highly inconsistent in his coding, and even minor
corrections to the way in which he codes this dummy restores the robustness of our results.
In addition, once again, limiting the eﬀect of very high mortality rates largely restores the
robustness of our results even without correcting the inconsistencies in his coding.
    Albouy proposes a number of other adjustments to our data, including adjusting how we
use mortality rates from Mali and proposing alternative ways to use new data we introduced
in AJR (2005). Both these issues are inconsequential as we have already shown in detail (AJR
2005, 2006, and 2008); consequently these points will be discussed only briefly below.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews our hypothesis and data
we used to test it; we also briefly present our original results across a range of specifications.
Section 3 considers each of Albouy’s three concerns in turn. Section 4 concludes. Appendixes
A, B and C, which are available online, provide further details on econometrics, data for
contested observations, and historical background.


2     Background
2.1   Theory and Data

The main focus of AJR (2001) was to estimate the causal eﬀect of a broad cluster of institutions
on long-run development. Briefly, we argued that there were various types of colonization
policies which created diﬀerent sets of institutions. At one extreme, European powers set up
“extractive states”, which introduced neither any significant protection for private property nor


                                                4
any checks against expropriation. In these cases, the main purpose of the extractive state was
to transfer resources of the colony to the colonizer. At the other extreme, Europeans settled in
a number of colonies and settlers tried to replicate or extend European institutions, with great
emphasis on private property and checks against government and elite power. These colonial
institutions have tended to persist. This choice of colonization strategy was in turn naturally
influenced by the feasibility of settlements - in places where the mortality rate from disease
for Europeans was relatively high, the odds were against the creation of settler colonies with
better institutions, and the formation of an extractive state was more likely. Based on this
reasoning, we suggested that the potential mortality rates expected by early European settlers
in the colonies could be an instrument for current institutions in these countries.
       Of course, by its nature, potential settler mortality is often not observed.10 In places
where the potential settler mortality was high, large numbers of settlers did not go, and it
is diﬃcult to obtain comparable measures of their mortality. Moreover, in the critical early
periods for settlements and institutional development, data on mortality rates of European
settlers are sometimes hard to find - and we should worry about whether these groups were
demographically similiar (e.g., in terms of age structure or social background). Our strategy
was therefore to use a homogeneous group of Europeans in these colonies to form an estimate
of settler mortality rates. This strategy was made possible by the fact that Philip Curtin
in a series of works, most notably Curtin (1989) and Curtin (1998), but also Curtin (1961,
1964), reported comparable data on the disease mortality rates of European soldiers stationed
in various colonies. Curtin also took a view on how Europeans perceived mortality in various
parts of the world - and discussed how this view was shaped by the available data over time.
       As a practical matter our approach was straightforward. We began with Table 1.1 of
Curtin (1989), which is entitled, “Mortality of European Troops Overseas, 1817-38.” This
is a summary of Curtin’s base data from around the world. Curtin’s book is focussed on
the relocation costs for Europeans, i.e., exactly the issue we are interested in, and he has a
reputation for being very careful with data, so it made sense to take these estimates without any
editing or selectivity. Note that while these data are for soldiers, for whom there is always likely
to be some military activity (marching, engaging in exercises, travelling on ships, etc.), these
data are peacetime rates - they are definitely not from major wars involving massed armies and
large-scale casualties. Curtin (1989, 1998) emphasized that mortality rates declined through
the 19th century as European militaries became better at managing health issues. In particular,
  10
     Albouy still complains that data do not come from actual settlers (p.2). But AJR (2000, 2001) were very
clear that these were potential settler mortality rates, and of course, Europeans did not and should not have
settled in places where the annual mortality rates run in the range of 20% or higher.


                                                     5
after 1850 there were dramatic declines in military mortality from disease in the tropics (see,
e.g., the contrast between Tables 1.1 and 1.2 in Curtin, 1989). Curtin’s work therefore focussed
our attention on taking the earliest possible peacetime data (preferably before 1850), and we
tried to stick to this throughout.11
       While Curtin’s Table 1.1 spanned most of the world, it did not report specific estimates
for all countries. We therefore adopted the following coding rule. In each case we took the
estimate from Table 1.1 if available. We then took the earliest peacetime number from Curtin
when such data were available. In the absence of such a number, we used the earliest expedition
mortality.12 The expedition mortality estimates came from Curtin (1989) or, if nothing relevant
was in that source, from Curtin (1998). In addition, if it was likely on the basis of other
information that Europeans faced similar mortality rates in two countries but only one of
them had an estimate, we assigned the mortality rate from one country to the other.13
       Appendix B discusses the various sources we can use to evaluate whether the disease ecolo-
gies are suﬃciently similar to reasonably assign a mortality rate from one country to its modern
neighbor. We use the historical and contemporary literature on historical geography, both in
the form of text and maps. We also include the relevant medical literature - because this speaks
to the issue of conditions under which some diseases, such as malaria, become prevalent. The
19th century literature on life insurance is also helpful on some key points.
       In AJR (2000), we provided a detailed analysis of an alternative series without this type
of assignment and also some other robustness checks (see, e.g., Table 5, columns 1-4). Since
we followed this coding rule rather than make arbitrary judgment calls, some of the mortality
rates in West Africa were extremely high, especially when the soldiers encountered a yellow
fever epidemic (though other mortality estimates, such as for Ethiopia, were very low). Our
use of logarithm of mortality rates was in part motivated by these very high mortality rates.
       The most important gap in Curtin’s data is for Latin America. Curtin reported estimates
for the Caribbean, but for Central and South America, his work contained estimates only for
  11
      From the perspective of our theoretical framework, we really needed potential settler mortality before 1800
- during the formative period of colonization for most of these places. But such data are not generally available,
and in his estimates before 1850 Curtin oﬀered data from before the improvement in European public health
management (both in general and for the tropics in particular).
   12
      An expedition is a group of men, often soldiers, travelling together for a particular purpose. This could
be exploration, to open trade routes, to demonstrate force against a local ruler, or some combination of these
activities. Curtin (1998) reviews data from a number of these experiences in Africa, including against the Ashanti
and in Ethiopia.
   13
      In constructing our dataset we prefered simplicity and transparency. Albouy contends that we do not have
any information about countries to which mortality is “assigned” from neighbors. This is incorrect, as we showed
in our earlier replies (AJR 2005, 2006, 2008). We summarize this additional information in Section 3.




                                                        6
Mexico.14 To supplement the numbers from Curtin, we used an article by Hector Gutierrez
(1986) on the mortality rates of bishops in Latin America (i.e., Central and South America,
including some data on the Caribbean).15 Naturally, the mortality rates of bishops and soldiers
were unlikely to be the same: bishops presumably resided in more comfortable and sanitary
conditions than soldiers in barracks; they could escape epidemics more easily; and overall
they must have had a much higher standard of living. When the series overlap, the Gutierrez
mortality estimates are lower than the Curtin estimates. To create a comparable series, we
therefore benchmarked the mortality rates of bishops to those of soldiers.16 Gutierrez provides
an estimate for Mexico (for which we had a Curtin estimate) and also for the Dominican
Republic, which we assumed had a similar mortality rates to Jamaica (again, for which there
is a Curtin estimate). Since we had two points of overlap, we could benchmark using either
number, or some combination of the numbers. We decided to use the Mexican number, which
was lower and therefore reduced the mortality rates in Latin America - which made for estimates
that were more plausible, given the available qualitative evidence.17 In AJR (2000), these issues
were extensively discussed and we reported that our results were robust using either type of
benchmarking (see again below).

2.2      Baseline Results

The first stage relationship in AJR (2001) is the link between settler mortality, in logs, and a
measure of institutions. Here we focus on our main measure of institutions, which is protection
against the risk of expropriation. This is an OLS regression, with one observation per country.
       For the sake of brevity, Table 1A is structured to show results only for the log mortality
variable. Each set of rows shows a diﬀerent specification, with covariates and alternative
samples that were presented in AJR (2001). The first set of rows has no additional covariates
in the regression, the second set of rows includes latitude, the third set drops the neo-Europes
(the USA, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand), the fourth set drops all of Africa, the fifth set
  14
     There was a reference on p.2 of Curtin (1989) to an English attack on Cartegena in 1742. But the Gutierrez
data for Colombia are for Bogota, and there is good reason to think this was not as unhealthy for Europeans
as the Caribbean coast, so Curtin’s information on Cartegena did not help us merge the Gutierrez and Curtin
series.
  15
     Specifically, we used data on bishops aged 40-49. Many of these bishops were born in Europe, so they would
not have an acquired or inherited immunity to local diseases.
  16
     Namely, we combined the two series by using Gutierrez’s relative mortality rates for bishops to impute
mortality levels that are consistent with Curtin’s data. This lets us calculate levels for Latin America.
  17
     This choice seemed less favorable to our hypothesis and thus preferable on these grounds. Our checks
using the Dominican Republic/Jamaica number indicated slightly stronger results for us. Also using rates from
Mexico in benchmarking the Gutierrez/Curtin series does not involve any assignment of mortality to neighbors.
See Section 3 below for the alternative results, using the Dominican Republic/Jamaica for the benchmarking,
in Tables 1A and 1B (columns 3 and 4).


                                                      7
includes continent dummies, the sixth set includes continent dummies and latitude, the seventh
set includes the percent of the population in 1975 that was of European descent, and the eighth
set of rows includes malaria (see AJR for the reasons to focus on these specifications). These
are the specifications which Albouy also discusses - our rows match the columns in his Tables
2 and 3, with the exception that we also report results without any African data.18
    We should note that as discussed in AJR (2000, 2001), the last row specification that
includes current prevalence of malaria is highly problematic and is likely to bias results against
finding both a significant first stage and second stage relationship because current prevalence
of malaria is endogenous, generally driven by institutional and income per capita diﬀerences.
We included this specification in AJR (2000, 2001) for completeness but noted the potential
bias that the specification would create against us was a serious concern.19 As a matter of
fact, this was the least robust specification in AJR (2001) as the results in Table 1A,B here
also show. In what follows, unsurprisingly, this will be the main specification where Albouy’s
strategies sometimes lead to less robust results.
    For each set of rows we show five numbers: the coeﬃcient on log settler mortality, the
homoscedastic standard error, the clustered standard error, the number of clusters, and the
number of observations. The number of clusters is less than the number of observations because
about half the potential settler mortality estimates in the AJR (2001) sample are inferred from
mortality rates in neighboring countries.20
    Table 1A begins with first stage results using the original AJR data (column 1), corre-
sponding to columns 1 of Table 4 of AJR (2001).21 The coeﬃcient is -0.61 and the standard
error is 0.13; when we cluster the standard error, it rises to 0.17 and the coeﬃcient remains
highly significant.22
   18
      We drop the African data because in an earlier comment Albouy did the same (although now he has retreated
from this critique).
   19
      In particular, we wrote: “Since malaria was one of the main causes of settler mortality, our estimate may be
capturing the direct eﬀect of malaria on economic performance. We are skeptical of this argument since malaria
prevalence is highly endogenous; it is the poorer countries with worse institutions that have been unable to
eradicate malaria.” (p. 1391). We also provided examples of richer countries with better institutions success-
fully eradicating malaria, including the U.S. eliminating it from the Panama Canal zone and Australians from
Queensland. Acemoglu and Johnson (2007) provide additional evidence that diﬀerences in malaria prevalence
today are unlikely to account for significant diﬀerences in income per capita across countries.
   In addition, Albouy uses a malaria variable which is diﬀerent from the one in AJR (2000, 2001) and the
provenance of which is unclear. In what follows, we consistently use the original data from AJR (2000, 2001).
   20
      Such clustering may be viewed as somewhat conservative since we have quantitative and qualitative cor-
roborating evidence from other sources on mortality rates on all the countries in our sample (for example, from
the literature on life insurance, part of which was discussed in AJR, 2005).
   21
      This matches column 9 in Table 3 of AJR (2001).
   22
      In the original AJR series, we used the relative rates of 1, 1.1, and 2.3 between the Gutierrez regions. This
was based on an approximate formula that converted Gutierrez’s mortality rates into mortality rates “with
replacement” comparable with the base data from Curtin. In Appendix 2 of AJR (2005) we showed that the


                                                        8
    Across the broad range of other specifications in Table 1A our first stage results are sim-
ilar. The parameter point estimate does not move much across rows. When we drop the
neo-Europes, the estimated coeﬃcient is smaller but the standard error is also reduced. With-
out Africa, the results become significantly stronger. Table 1B shows the equivalent second
stage results, in which we regress log GDP per capita in 1995 on institutions, which log settler
mortality as the instrument. In AJR (2001), we followed the prevailing practice at the time
and reported standard errors. Here, we instead report the Anderson-Rubin (AR) 95 percent
confidence set (allowing for non-spherical error structure due to clustering and heteroscedas-
ticity), which is consistent when the first stage may be weak (see, for example, Chernozhukov
and Hansen, 2005).23 For the baseline estimate, this confidence set has a lower bound of 0.66
and an upper bound of 1.72, around a point estimate of 0.93.24
    The two exceptions are the specification with continent dummies and latitude and the one
with malaria. In the former case, with clustered standard errors, the coeﬃcient on settler
mortality is -0.35 and the standard error is 0.19 in the first stage. In the second stage, the
Anderson-Rubin confidence interval is the union of two disjoint and unbounded intervals:
[−∞ −472] and [044+ ∞] (or in fact [−∞ −2723] and [057 +∞] without clustering). As
also argued by Chernozhukov and Hansen (2005), the lower interval is irrelevant: not only does
it not even include the point estimate, 1.07, but such large negative estimates make neither
economic nor econometric sense. Therefore, we interpret this as evidence that the 95 percent
confidence set excludes zero and reasonable negative estimates, allowing us to statistically
reject the hypothesis that institutions have no eﬀect on GDP per capita. To be sure, such
a confidence interval is still a sign of relatively imprecise estimates, since it is much wider
than the confidence sets in our other specifications - though it still enables us to reject the
hypothesis that the second stage coeﬃcient is zero. The pattern is similar with malaria - the
confidence set consists of two disjoint intervals, but still rejects a zero coeﬃcient.
    Throughout the rest of the paper, whenever the AR confidence interval consists of two
disjoint intervals, one of them a subset of negative reals, we only report the upper interval to
save space in the tables (in each case, whenever the reported confidence interval extends to
positive infinity on the right, it should be clear that there is a negative disjoint interval in the
exact ratios should be 1, 1.1, and 2.2. This does not make any diﬀerence, within 2 significant figures, to our
results in column 1.
  23
     We do this mostly because Albouy has emphasized the importance of using Anderson-Rubin confidence sets
and reports only these in his comment. In fact, since there is only one endogenous regressor and one instrument,
these make little diﬀerence relative to the more standard Wald confidence intervals that also allow non-spherical
errors.
  24
     Our AR confidence intervals do not always match those reported by Albouy. This seems to be a consequence
of his use of an insuﬃciently fine grid. Our procedure is described in Appendix A.


                                                       9
negative reals).
         In summary, the diﬀerent specifications in column 1 of Table 1B confirm the results in
AJR (2001) that institutions have a significant positive eﬀect on income per capita, though in
specifications that include continent dummies and latitude together and malaria, confidence
sets are quite wide.


3         Response to Albouy’s Concerns
3.1        Concerns About Very High Mortality Rates

As we noted in AJR (2000), some of the data, particularly from Africa, may have had exces-
sively high mortality rates. In the Appendix to AJR (2000) we reviewed the origin of these
data - and flagged clearly when they were due to epidemics. If epidemics occured with some
regularity - or if they were rare and yet still aﬀected European perceptions of mortality for
settlers - such mortality data should be included for our purposes. But if these epidemics
were one-oﬀ or seen as rare, then including them introduces additional, perhaps significant
measurement error.
         In column 2 of Table 1A we show the eﬀects of capping mortality at 250 per 1,000 per
annum. This is the rate that Tulloch, the pioneer in this area, estimated to be average European
soldier mortality rate “for West Africa in general” from 1792 through 1840 (Curtin, 1990, p.67;
see Tulloch, 1840, p7).25 Tulloch and his colleagues also regarded that region as the most
unhealthy part of the world for Europeans in the early 19th century. And of course, 250 per
1000 per annum is still a very high mortality rate, suﬃcient to discourage anybody but the
most reckless from permanent settlement (see footnote 7 in the Introduction).
         In column 2, for the base specification in the first set of rows, the coeﬃcient on log settler
mortality in the first stage increases in absolute value to -0.94 (compared with -0.61 in column
1), while the clustered standard error increases from 0.17 (in column 1) to 0.18. There is a
similar pattern in all other rows, except the row without Africa (as the capping only aﬀects
African rates).26 Now in all cases, the AR confidence sets for the second stage are much more
precisely estimated, and never extend to infinity and always exclude zero. We should also note
that these results are not specific to capping the potential settler mortality rate at 250. Using
caps of 100, 350 and 400 leads to very similar results (see column 6 of Table 1B in AJR, 2005).
    25
     This rate of 250 per 1,000 is also close to the rate of 209 per 1,000 per annum for oﬃcers stationed in Sierra
Leone and Cape Coast Command, 1819-36, on p.37 in Balfour (1849); ordinary soldiers had a higher death rate.
  26
     Note that a few of the highest mortality rates in the original AJR were used in the raw form reported
in Curtin and are not “with replacement” rates. Capping mortality rates means that this definitely does not
matter — with or without replacement, these rates would be above the level of the cap.


                                                        10
       In summary, we agree that some of the mortality estimates from Curtin are too high,
partly driven by unusual conditions, the impact of epidemics, or small samples. In AJR (2000,
2001), we discussed this issue at length and used logarithms to reduce the impact of these very
high mortality rates. In AJR (2005), we went one step further and following the information
consistent original sources (in particular Tulloch’s original research), we capped mortality
rates in 250 (per 1000 per annum). In the analysis below, for all relevant specifications we also
show results including the mortality cap at 250. As we discuss, this mortality cap typically
strengthens our results. In fact, it typically makes our approach impervious to Albouy’s other
critiques. That is, even if we were to accept these other critiques, which we definitely do not,
with this mortality cap they do not undermine - or even much impact - our main findings.

3.2      Does Discarding Data Make Sense? Latin America

Albouy claims that we lack any reliable data for 36 countries in our base AJR sample. He
drops those countries completely in Panels B and D in his Table 2 (first stage) and Table 3
(second stage), running regressions with just 28 countries. Of the 36 countries which Albouy
drops, 16 are in Central and South America. These were coded using the Gutierrez procedure
discussed above. In this subsection, we discuss these 16 countries, returning to the remaining
20 countries in the next subsection.
       Albouy is concerned that our Latin American data are not reliable because he does not like
the particular way we benchmark Gutierrez data with Curtin data.27 We agree that results
using this procedure should be subject to robustness checks. This was the approach in AJR
(2000) and in all subsequent work.
       Column 3 reports results using an alternative series. This was discussed but not explicitly
shown in AJR (2001). It was later shown in detail in AJR (2005). In this series, we oﬀer an
alternative way of linking the Curtin and Gutierrez datasets. Specifically, instead of bench-
marking using Mexico, we use Jamaica/Dominican Republic.28 We continue to assign countries
  27
     He also argues, e.g., around Appendix Table A2, that we simply have no idea about relative mortality
in South and Central America. But as we now discuss, in addition to the evidence from Gutierrez, there is
quantitative evidence on relative mortality in South and Central America from British South American naval
stations and from life insurance rates for sailors in South America from Institute of Actuaries (1851-52). In
addition, Institute of Actuaries (1851-52) and Hunter (1907) indicate that the life insurance industry took a clear
view on mortality in this region relative to other regions and also on how mortality varied between countries.
This view is entirely consistent with our benchmarked data.
  28
     In the original AJR (2001) series, we assumed that the mortality rate in the Dominican Republic was
the same as in Jamaica, and Albouy does not take issue with this point. Using the Mexico estimates as the
benchmark implies mortality (per 1,000 per annum) of 71 (low), 78.1 (medium), and 163.3 (high) in Gutierrez’s
three Latin American mortality regions (these numbers are used in the data series of column 1). If we use the
Jamaica/Dominican Republic estimates, this gives rates for the three regions of 56.5 (low), 62.2 (medium), and
130 (high); these numbers are used in the data series of columns 3 and 4. As in AJR (2001), we use the relative


                                                        11
to mortality regions as in AJR (2001).29 With this alternative benchmarking, the results are
almost identical in all specifications to those in column 1.30 The second stage results in column
3 of Table 1B are also very similar to those in column 1. The AR clustered confidence sets in
the specifications that control for continent dummies and latitude and for malaria are again
fairly wide (extending to infinity on the right, and thus also containing another interval in the
negative reals), but exclude zero.
    Column 4 of Table 1A shows first stage results with the same measure of mortality but
now capped at 250 per 1,000 as in column 2. The results are now stronger, more precisely
estimated and more robust. The AR confidence sets in all cases comfortably exclude zero (and
never extend to infinity).
    As an alternative to using the Gutierrez data, we can also use information on mortality
directly from British “South American” naval stations in modern Argentina, Brazil, Chile,
Peru, and Panama; Bryson (1847) gives this as 7.7 per 1,000.31 These data can be used
without any benchmarking to Gutierrez’s data, though naturally they do need to be converted
into what they imply for soldier mortality - as the death rate for soldiers was typically higher
than for sailors when the two types of forces were stationed in the same area. From Tulloch
(1841), we know the mortality of the British naval force (in the Mediterranean) from disease
was 9.2 per 1,000 and the mortality of the military force (on the ground in that region) from
disease was 18. We use this ratio (1.96) for the South American station to convert naval
mortality of 7.7 per 1,000 to military mortality of 15.07.32 This is a conservative - i.e., low -
mortality coding for Latin America.33 In addition, again erring on the conservative side, we
assume in this approach that settler mortality is missing for the remaining countries of South
mortality ratios of 1, 1.1, and 2.3 between Gutierrez’s three regions (see footnote 22).
  29
     Albouy (2004) suggested we made a mistake in assigning bishops’ mortality from Gutierrez to various
countries in Latin America. In Appendix 1 of AJR (2005), we showed that our assignment was correct and
Albouy’s (2004) proposed alternative assignment was wrong. He subsequently dropped that assignment.
  30
     The number of clusters falls by 2. In the original AJR series, Argentina and Chile’s estimates were based on
naval stations. In the revised series they are derived just from bishops’ mortality zones. Also, the high mortality
bishops’ zone mortality rate is now the same as Jamaica/Dominican Republic, by assumption.
  31
     These naval stations were in Rio de Janeiro, Buenes Aires, Bahia, Pernambuco, Para, Valparaiso, Callao,
Coquimbo, and San Blas (Statistical Reports on the Health of the Navy, 1841, p.39). There is also a San Blas
in Mexico but our assessment is that the station was in San Blas, Panama. Curtin (1964) cites Bryson (footnote
16 on p.486); we have also checked Bryson (1847, pp.177-78) directly.
  32
     This would put the low end of Latin American mortality almost exactly at the same level as for the United
States, which is 15 per 1,000 per annum (directly from Curtin 1989, Table 1.1, p.7, for “Northern United
States”). Note that the ratio of military to civilian mortality may have changed in the second half of the
nineteenth century; this point is examined further in Acemoglu, Johnson, and Subramanian.
  33
     Institute of Actuaries (1851-52, pp.169-170) suggests that mortality rates for civilians within 15 degrees of
the equator in South America were close to those of military personnel in “East Indies and China”. In the
healthier Southern Cone, mortality rates were deemed close to those of Mauritius (which is 30.5 in Curtin 1989,
Table 1.1, p.7).



                                                        12
America and for those parts of Central America for which we previously used the Gutierrez
data. This drops 11 countries from our sample, leaving us with only 53 observations.34
    Column 5 in Table 1A reports results using this series, which is labeled as “Naval Stations,
Method 1.” Compared with our baseline results in column 1, the coeﬃcient is now smaller in
absolute value (-0.54). Settler mortality is robustly significant in the basic regressions (the
first four sets of rows), but in the last four specifications confidence sets become wider (e.g.,
when we introduce continent dummies) and this is reflected in Table 1B where the clustered
AR confidence sets are quite wide now and extend to infinity on the right. Nevertheless, in all
of these cases these confidence sets exclude zero.
    Column 6 in Table 1A and Table 1B shows parallel results using the same series as in column
5, but now with mortality capped at 250 per 1,000. This mortality cap again strengthens our
results and now confidence sets extend to infinity only in the specification with malaria, but
continue to comfortably exclude a zero eﬀect in the second stage.
    In column 7 we use data from naval stations in a diﬀerent way. We compare life insurance
rates for sailors on the “South American Station” from Institute of Actuaries (1851-52, p.170),
with the rates for places that are also covered by the earliest Curtin mortality estimates (1989,
Table 1.1). According to the same life insurance source, the healthiest parts of Latin America
were determined to have the same mortality rates as Mauritius while the least healthy parts
were slightly below the West Indies.35 In Curtin’s data (1989, Table 1.1), Mauritius has a
mortality rate of 30.5 per 1,000, while the West Indies average is 93.25.36 We use these rates
for Latin America.
    With this alternative series, our first stage results are robust and very similar to what we
find with the original AJR data. Table 1B shows that in the specifications with continent
dummies and latitude and with malaria (but not in the other specifications), the AR clustered
confidence sets are again wide and extend to infinity on the right. Nevertheless, as is the case
   34
      To be clear, we also not using any information from Gutierrez in this series. In our baseline series, we use
Gutierrez for 16 countries. We are dropping these 11 countries in this case not because we believe that the data
for them are not reliable (as we have explained this is definitely not the case). Instead, we are doing this as a
highly conservative robustness check.
   35
      Specifically, in the language of life insurance, the “extra premium” for mortality above the British death
rate recommended for the South American Station was 40 shillings (so we apply this to Argentina, Brazil, Chile,
Peru, and Panama as these were part of the Station). For the rest of Latin America we use the extra premium
for the North American and West Indian Station, which was 80 shillings. In the same data, the extra premium
for Mauritius was 40 shillings. This approach gives a plausible estimate for parts of the continent closer to
the West Indies but it is probably on the higher side for Uruguay. See Institute of Actuaries (1851-52), which
provides the earliest comprehensive assessment of comparative mortality rates. The life insurance literature
from this period developed rapidly and views were revised and refined subsequently; this is discussed further in
Acemoglu, Johnson, and Subramanian (2011).
   36
      These West Indies data points (mortality rates per 1,000 per annum) are: 130 (Jamaica), 85 (Windwards
and Leewards), 106.87 (Guadeloupe), 112.18 (Martinique) and 32.18 (French Guiana).


                                                       13
in all of these specifications, they do comfortably exclude zero.
       Column 8 reports results for the same series if we cap maximum mortality at 250 per
1,000. Now the results are again more precise and all AR confidence intervals are more tightly
estimated and never extend to infinity. In fact, the results are very consistent with and confirm
those in AJR (2001) as a comparison with columns 1 and 2 show.
       In summary, there is no basis whatsoever to discard all Latin American data as Albouy does.
Contrary to Albouy’s claims, there are several alternative sources of information on mortality
in Latin America. Using our original source, Gutierrez (1986), with diﬀerent benchmarking
procedures or these alternative data sources produce similar mortality rates, which are also
consistent with available qualitative evidence. Diﬀerent sources of data for Latin America and
diﬀerent benchmarking procedures lead to very similar and robust results.

3.3      Does Discarding Data Make Sense? Remaining Countries

The previous subsection discussed Latin American data. Here we only discuss the remaining
20 countries Albouy drops, which include 12 in Africa, 4 in the Caribbean, 3 in Asia, and
Australia.37 Albouy’s proposition is that either the Europeans during the colonial period had
no view of mortality in the area in question, or we have no knowledge of their view, or both.
Our contention is that for each of the countries under discussion, both Europeans at the time
and we now have information on potential settler mortality - although undoubtedly there is
measurement error in both.
       In this subsection, we summarize the state of knowledge about disease and mortality,
and briefly document that for each observation Albouy wishes to drop, there is considerable
evidence supporting the mortality estimates used in AJR (2001). More details for each of these
observations are provided in Appendix B. The discussion here is short both because of space
constraints and because, as the next subsection shows, even dropping so many observations
has little eﬀect on the robustness of the results in AJR (2001).
       Our main procedure was to assign mortality rates from one country to its neighbors, based
on our reading of the relevant disease ecologies, i.e., taking a position that the climatic and
other environmental conditions for disease were similar in the country for which we had direct
data and the country to which we were making the assignment. Curtin (1964, 1989, 1998)
shows that diﬀerential rates of mortality for Europeans in the early 19th century were due
  37
    In sub-Saharan Africa, Albouy drops 11 countries: Angola, Burkina Faso, Cote d’Ivoire, Cameroon, Gabon,
Guinea, Niger, Tanzania, Togo, Uganda, Zaire; and in North Africa he drops Morocco. In the Caribbean,
Albouy drops the Bahamas, Dominican Republic, Guyana, and Haiti. In Asia he drops Hong Kong, Singapore,
and Pakistan.



                                                    14
primarily to local conditions for malaria, yellow fever, typhoid, dysentery, cholera, and other
so-called “tropical” diseases - though there was also a great deal of variation even within the
tropics. In assessing disease environments and the knowledge about disease in the 19th century,
we use the definitive work by Hirsch (1888) and its modern-day equivalent, Kiple (1993).38
    A brief summary is as follows. On Australia, to which the New Zealand rate was assigned
in AJR (2001), as reported in AJR (2005) Tulloch (1847, p.253) provides an almost identical
and independent mortality estimate. On Singapore, AJR (2001) used the Straits Settlements
information. Our numbers are confirmed by Statistical Society of London (1841), as reported
in AJR (2005), and by Kiat (1978). On Guyana, AJR (2001) used the mortality rate from
French Guyana. This is consistent with the public health literature (Roberts, 1948, Mandle,
1970), and in addition, there is independent information from Tulloch (1838a), and the life
insurance literature (Meikle, 1876, Hunter 1907). On the Dominican Republic and Haiti,
AJR (2001) used mortality information from Jamaica, and there is independent confirmation
from Institute of Actuaries (1851-52) and Hunter (1907). On the Bahamas, AJR (2001) used
information from the Windward and Leeward Command; there is independent confirmation
from Tulloch (1838b) and Miekle (1876). On Hong Kong, AJR (2001) used the China Field
Force rate from the British Army; this is backed-up by Army Medical Department (1862)
and Tulloch (1847). On Pakistan, AJR (2001) used the information from Bombay; there
is independent confirmation from Institute of Actuaries (1851-52) and Hunter (1907). On
Morocco, AJR (2001) used the mortality rate from Algeria. The mortality rates from Tunisia
and Egypt were also similar and the Institute of Actuaries (1851-52, p.169) confirms that these
countries had roughly the same mortality level.39
    In summary, for all of the non-African observations dropped by Albouy, there is independent
information supporting the rates used in AJR (2001). We documented this in a detailed manner
in AJR (2005). There is no reasonable argument for dropping these data.
    On West Africa, AJR (2001) used data primarily from Curtin (1989), specifically, mortality
rates of soldiers from Sierra Leone, Senegal, Gambia, Gold Coast, Mali, and Nigeria. The
general approach is supported qualitatively and quantitatively by Curtin (1964), and Bruce-
  38
     Kiple’s team has the benefit of hindsight and contains today’s leading medical historians but might be
considered somewhat distant from events and perceptions of the nineteenth century. Between Hirsch (1888) and
Kiple (1993), there is Clenow (1903), whose volume benefits from the medical advances at the end of the 19th
century but who is still close to the major mortality events of that century. There is no indication in Clenow
(1903) that our assessments based on Kiple (1993) are oﬀ the mark on anything that matters for our analysis.
We also checked the assessments in Kiple (2003) against Kuczynski (1948), Lancaster (1990) and for malaria,
Bruce-Chwatt (1993).
  39
     Morocco has an extra premium for mortality over British levels of 40 shillings. The category “Mediter-
ranean, Barbary and Tripoli” has an extra charge of 20 shillings which, in this system reckoning, implies a
mortality rate within 5-10 per 1,000 of the Morocco level.


                                                     15
Chwatt and Bruce-Chwatt (1977). There is additional confirmation from Institute of Actuaries
(1851-52) and Kuczynski (1948).
    For Central Africa, we used data from Curtin (1998) and Curtin et al (1995). Our use
of these data is consistent with evidence in Kiple (1984) and our estimates are supported by
assessments in the life insurance literature - e.g., Institute of Actuaries (1851-52), Sprague
(1895), and Hunter (1907). On the basic similarity of disease ecology between West and
Central Africa there is general support in Patterson (1995) and infectious disease-by-disease
confirmation in Hirsch (1881) and American Geographical Society (1951a,b,c,d,e).
    In summary, the overall patterns of European mortality in West and Central Africa re-
flected in AJR (2000, 2001) data are well supported by contemporary and modern sources
and literatures, some of this validation is more qualitative than for the non-African observa-
tions. Below we report regressions that drop West and Central African data as an additional
robustness check.

3.4    Albouy’s Preferred Sample

Albouy proposes to use a sample of just 28 countries (Panel B in his Tables 2 and 3). First
stage results with this variable are shown in column 1 of Table 2A, which has the same set of
rows as Table 1B. Second stage results are shown in Table 2B.
    In Albouy’s preferred sample, our first stage is weakened as soon as covariates are added. In
particular, the confidence sets in specifications without neo-Europes, with continent dummies,
with continent dummies and latitude, with percent of European descent in 1975 and with
malaria are very wide and extend to positive infinity on the right (and thus also include a
disjoint interval lying entirely in the negative reals, which is not reported). Though in most
cases a zero coeﬃcient of institutions in the second stage regression can be rejected, such wide
confidence sets are cause for concern.
    Figures 1A and 1B, however, show that the first stage in Albouy’s preferred sample is at
least partly weakened by a significant outlier.40 Gambia has a very high institutions score
(8.77, compared to an average of 6.51 in the whole sample and 5.88 in Africa) and was always
an outlier in this sense. But in the 64 country sample of AJR (2001), it did not have as
consequential an impact on the results. It becomes much more of an outlier when Albouy drops
36 other observations (Gambia’s potential settler mortality is 1470 per 1,000). In addition,
there is reason to suspect that this institutions score is not a true reflection of institutional
  40
     Figure 1A is for the specification without covariates and Figure 1B is for the specification with continent
dummies and latitude. Gambia is similarly an outlier in the other specifications.



                                                      16
quality in Gambia. For example, there have been military coups in Gambia in 1981 and 1994,
and other political turmoil in the late 1980s. There has not been a return to free and fair
elections since 1994.41
       Column 2 shows that dropping Gambia also from the sample (thus reducing it to 27 coun-
tries) restores the results back to a pattern very similar with those in AJR (2001). The impact
of institutions in the second stage is estimated more precisely and none of the clustered AR
confidence sets now extend to infinity. Confidence intervals in all specifications except the one
with malaria comfortably exclude a zero eﬀect in the second stage.
       Column 3 shows that capping mortality rates at 250 also has a major impact on Albouy’s
results. Column 4 shows the results without Gambia and with the 250 mortality cap, which
are again very similar and confirm the robustness of the AJR (2001) estimates.
       Columns 5 and 6 follow up on the discussion in the previous two subsections and add
back the Latin American, Caribbean, Asian and Australian data that Albouy dropped - thus
excluding only the West and Central African data that Albouy would like to drop. This gives
us a sample of 51. Column 5 reports results without capping and column 6 with the 250 cap.
In both cases, the results are very similar to those in AJR (2000, 2001), and in all cases the
second stage estimates are fairly precise, the clustered AR confidence intervals never extend
to infinity, and a zero eﬀect can be rejected at 5%.

3.5      Albouy’s “Campaign Dummy”

Albouy’s third concern is that some of our data are taken from military campaigns while others
are not. To deal with this, he proposes to introduce a coding for whether or not our data are
drawn from a “campaign” and to include that dummy in the first stage regression. Despite
Albouy’s claims, except during times of major wars (which are excluded from the data), there
is little diﬀerence in practice between what soldiers were engaged during “campaigns” and
other times. As a result, it does not in general make sense, and in fact it is not possible, to
systematically distinguish campaigns and non-campaigns, and Curtin does not do so (though
he mentions some campaigns as part of his historical discussion, quite contrary to what Albouy
claims, Curtin does not make a systematic non-campaigns vs. campaign distinction; this is
  41
     The military leader of the 1994 coup, Yahya Jammeh has reinvented himself as a civilian president but
remains in power through elections that are judged as corrupt. Even before 1994, Gambia had serious political
problems. In 1981, there was a military coup against the independence leader Sir Dawda Jawara, who asked help
from the Senegalese, and the next year they formed the Senegambia Confederation between the two countries
which lasted until 1989 (see, e.g., Hughes and Perfect, 2008). Throughout this period Senegal has a low
institutions score, so Gambia’s high score is truly puzzling.




                                                     17
presumably because he does not view this distinction as so important).42
       Equally important, Albouy’s procedure for coding this dummy seems inconsistent and
extremely selective. For example, Albouy decides, very consequentially for his results, that
New Zealand is a non-campaign rate even though Curtin discusses (1989, p. 13) losses from
battles in New Zealand - British troops were “campaigning” in New Zealand against Maori
tribes. Curtin (1989, p. 13) states:

         “The most unusual feature of military death in New Zealand over these five years
         was the fact that deaths from accident and battle exceeded deaths from disease . . .
         The high number of deaths in battle is evidence of heavy campaigning.”

       As another example of inconsistency, consider Hong Kong (data from the China Field
Force). As the name suggests, the China Field Force was a field force engaged in fighting
(and in this instance, Curtin actually says so explicitly - see Table A8.2, p.239, in 1998). But
Albouy chooses to code this as a “non-campaign” rate.
       These and other inconsistencies in Albouy’s coding (and the general point that such a
distinction has little meaning) are discussed in greater detail in Appendix C. The rest of
this subsection reviews Albouy’s results with his “campaign” dummy and how they change
significantly once either the impact of high mortality outliers is limited by capping mortality
estimates at 250 per 1000, or minimal corrections for inconsistency are made to his dummy
       Column 1 of Table 3B shows Albouy’s results for the full sample but including his campaign
and slave labor dummy (the first stages are in Table 3A). This leads to wide confidence sets
in several specifications. Column 2 shows that simply capping potential European settler
mortality at 250 again restores the results essentially back to those obtained in AJR (2001).
Once again, the second stage is estimated more precisely and the clustered AR confidence sets
do not extend to infinity and always exclude zero except in the specification with malaria.
       Column 3 implements the minimal corrections to Albouy’s “campaign” dummy (just for
Hong Kong and New Zealand). This too leads to more precisely estimated second stage results.
Column 4 shows that if in addition we also introduce the mortality capping at 250 per 1,000
per annum, the results are fairly precisely estimated and very similar to those in AJR (2000,
  42
    Albouy quotes selectively from Curtin (1989). But a major point made by Curtin (1998) is that some
19th century military expeditions could have low mortality - when they were designed to be fast-moving and
limited duration and particularly when they avoided the worst malaria season. For example, explaining the
low mortality for British soldiers on the Magdala campaign (chapter 2 in his book) and the Asante campaign
(chapter 3) in the 1870s, Curtin (1998, p.30) writes: “In fact, the Magdala campaign was the engineer’s war.
It was commanded by an engineering oﬃcer and hailed by observers as a triumph of logistical planning. The
Asante campaign was the doctors’ war, perceived as the first evidence that modern medicine made it possible
for European troops to act safely in the tropical world.” (italics in original).


                                                    18
2001), as can be seen by comparing the estimates and the standard errors to those in column 1
of Table 1B. In both the situations, clustered AR confidence sets never extend to infinity and
exclude insignificant eﬀects in the second stage (except that they exclude zero only marginally
in the specification with malaria).
   Column 5 considers the more extensively corrected campaign dummy (see Appendix C for
details). Column 6 reports results from this extensively corrected campaign dummy together
with the 250 per 1000 mortality cap. The results are once again very much consistent with
those in AJR (2000, 2001); the clustered AR confidence sets never extend to infinity and always
comfortably exclude insignificant eﬀects.
   Finally, column 7 presents Albouy’s results when all his strategies are combined (only 28
observations and his coding of the campaign dummy). These results, of course, are highly
imprecise with very wide confidence sets, often not excluding zero. Column 8 shows that
dropping Gambia, correcting the inconsistencies in Albouy’s campaign dummy, and capping
mortality at 250 leads the results broadly similar to those in the AJR (2001) baseline - even
with almost 60% of the sample discarded.
   We therefore conclude that none of Albouy’s strategies have a major impact on the results
in AJR (2001) once one limits the impact of very high, outlier mortality rates. Most of the
results are remarkably robust. The only specification in which the second stage estimates
are sometimes insignificant is the one that includes current prevalence of malaria, which is a
specification that biases results against finding significant eﬀects as discussed in AJR (2001).
Moreover, even modest corrections to Albouy’s strategies also lead to similar results.

3.6   Minor Points

Albouy also presents results using a small modification of the series from AJR (2001), partly
based on AJR (2005). Use of this slightly modified series makes little diﬀerence (see AJR,
2005) - unless of course the sample is reduced to 28 observations and the miscoded campaign
dummy is included (Panel E of Albouy’s Table 3).
   Albouy also complains about how we use data from Mali, but this issue has only trivial
eﬀects on the first stage results; compare Panel E of Albouy’s Appendix Table A5 and Panel
B of his Table 2. Moreover, his criticism of what we did is based on misreading our work, as
we explained in AJR (2005). Since his recoding makes no diﬀerence whatsoever to our results,
again as shown in AJR (2005), we do not recap these responses here to save space.




                                              19
4    Concluding Comments

Albouy’s comment expresses three main concerns about the results in AJR (2001) on the
relationship between potential settler mortality and institutions. First, there is a general
concern that there are high mortality outliers, potentially aﬀecting this relationship. We agree
with this concern and this was the rationale for using the logarithm of mortality, as well as
many robustness checks reported in AJR (2000). Notably, limiting the eﬀect of high mortality
outliers has no impact on the main results in AJR (2001). Capping mortality rates at 250 per
1000 per annum, as in AJR (2005), not only leaves our results unchanged but - as should be
expected - by reducing the eﬀect of outliers, it increases their robustness. In fact, using this
strategy, the results in AJR (2001) are largely robust to even extreme versions of his other
critiques.
    Albouy’s second argument is that all the data from Latin America and much of the data
from Africa, dropping almost 60% of our sample. This is arbitrary. We have summarized here
- and shown at greater length in AJR (2000, 2001, 2005, 2006, 2009) - that there is a great
deal of well-documented comparable information on the mortality of Europeans in those places
during the relevant period. This information is consistent with the mortality rate estimates
used in AJR (2001). There is no basis for discarding most of our data.
    When Albouy discards all these data and reduces the sample to only 28 countries, his
results are largely driven by observations with excessively high mortality rates, especially an
outlier, Gambia. Gambia has a very high institutional index, which stands in stark contrast to
its recent history. Either using our procedure of capping mortality estimates at 250 to reduce
the impact of high mortality outliers or dropping Gambia (thus reducing the sample to just 27
countries) again shows that the results are robust.
    Albouy’s third argument is that a “campaign” dummy should be included in the first
stage. His arguments here are at odds with the historical record and his coding procedure is
implemented inconsistently. Even modest corrections to these inconsistencies or again capping
mortality estimates at 250 to reduce the impact of outliers overturn his results and show that
the main findings in AJR (2001) are robust.
    Albouy’s other concerns about Mali are minor, are based on a misreading of our work - as
explained in AJR (2005) - and in any case have no meaningful eﬀect on our results. Similarly,
his slight modification of the data in AJR (2001) based on AJR (2005) is also not consequential.




                                              20
References

   Acemoglu, Daron and Simon Johnson (2007) “Disease and Development: The Eﬀect
of Life Expectancy on Growth,” Journal of Political Economy, December, 115, pp. 925-985.
   Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James Robinson (2000) “The Colonial
Origins of Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation,” NBER Working Paper
7771, June.
   Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James Robinson (2001) “The Colonial
Origins of Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American Economic Re-
view, Vol 91, No. 5, December, 1369-1401.
   Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James Robinson (2005) “A Response to
Albouy’s ‘A Reexamination Based on Improved Settler Mortality Data,” unpublished, March
21, MIT and Harvard.
   Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James Robinson (2006) “Reply to the
Revised (May 2006) version of David Albouy’s ‘The Colonial Origins of Comparative Devel-
opment: An Investigation of the Settler Mortality Data’,” unpublished, September, MIT and
Harvard.
   Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James Robinson (2008) “Reply to the
Revised (2008) version of David Albouy’s ‘The Colonial Origins of Comparative Development:
An Investigation of the Settler Mortality Data’,” unpublished, October, MIT and Harvard.
   Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and Karti Subramanaian (2001) “Life insur-
ance data," work in progress, April.
   Albouy, David (2004a) “The Colonial Origins of Comparative Development: A Rein-
vestigation of the Data,” University of California — Berkeley, July.
   Albouy, David (2004b) “The Colonial Origins of Comparative Development: A Reex-
amination Based on Improved Settler Mortality Data,” University of California — Berkeley,
December.
   Albouy, David (2006) “The Colonial Origins of Comparative Development: An Investi-
gation of the Settler Mortality Data,” unpublished paper, University of California — Berkeley.
   Albouy, David (2008) “The Colonial Origins of Comparative Development: An Investi-
gation of the Settler Mortality Data,” unpublished paper, University of Michigan.
   American Geographical Society (1951a) World Distribution of Malaria Vectors. New
York.
   American Geographical Society (1951b) Distribution of Cholera, 1816-1950. New



                                              21
York.
   American Geographical Society (1951c) World Distribution of Plague. New York.
   American Geographical Society (1951d) World Distribution of Rickettial Diseases:
Louse-Borne and Flea-Borne Typhus. New York.
   American Geographical Society. (1951e) Distribution of Dengue and Yellow Fever,
New York.
   Anderson, T.W. and H. Rubin (1949) “Estimation of the Parameters of a Single
Equation in a Complete System of Stochastic Equations,” Annals of Mathematical Statistics,
20, 46-63.
   Army Medical Department (1838) Statistical Report on the Sickness, Mortality, and
Invaliding among the Troops in the West Indies, London.
   Army Medical Department (1839) Statistical Report on the Sickness, Mortality, and
Invaliding among the Troops in the United Kingdom, the Mediterranean, and British America,
London.
   Army Medical Department (1840) Statistical Report on the Sickness, Mortality, and
Invaliding among the Troops in Western Africa, St. Helena, the Cape of Good Hope, and the
Mauritius, London.
   Army Medical Department (1841) Statistical Report on the Sickness, Mortality, and
Invaliding among Her Majesty’s Troops serving in Ceylon, the Tenasserim Provinces, and the
Burmese Empire, London.
   Army Medical Department (1853) Statistical Report on the Sickness, Mortality, and
Invaliding among the Troops in the United Kingdom, the Mediterranean, and British America,
London.
   Army Medical Department (1862) Statistical Report on the Health of the Army in
1860, London.
   Balfour, Edward (1849) “Additional Observations on the Means of Maintaining Troops
in Health” Journal of the Statistical Society of London, Vol. 12, No. 1, February, 33-42.
   Balfour, T. Graham (1845) “Statistical Data for Forming Troops and Maintaining them
in Health in Diﬀerent Climates and Localities” Journal of the Statistical Society of London,
Vol. 8, No. 3, September, 193-209.
   Balfour, T. Graham (1861) Statistical Report on the Health of the Army in 1859, Army
Medical Department, London.
   Bhardwaj, Surinder M. (1993) “Disease Ecologies of South Asia,” chapter VII.3 in
Kiple (1993).


                                              22
   Bradley, D.J. (1992) “Malaria: Old Infections, Changing Epidemiology.” Health Tran-
sition Rev. 2 (supplementary issue): 137-152.
   Bryson, A. (1847) Report on the Climate and Principal Diseases of the African Station,
London.
   Bruce-Chwatt, L.J. and Joan Bruce-Chwatt (1977) “Malaria and Yellow Fever,”
chapter 6 in Health in Tropical Africa During the Colonial Period, edited by E.E.Sabben-Clare,
D.J.Bradley, and K.Kirkwood, Clarendon Press, Oxford.
   Bulletin of the World Health Organization (1954) “Malaria Control; Lutte Contre
Le Paludisme.” 11 (4-5): entire issue.
   Caldwell, J. C. (1986) “Routes to Low Mortality in Poor Countries.” Population and
Development Rev. 12 (June):171—220.
   Cantlie, Sir Neil (1974) A History of the Army Medical Department, Volume I, Churchill
Livingstone, Edinburgh and London.
   Chernozhukov, Victor and Christian Hansen (2005) “A Simple and Practical Ap-
proach to Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Inference with Weak Instru-
ments,” Working paper, University of Chicago, January 20.
   Clemow, Frank G (1903) The Geography of Disease, Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge.
   Cliﬀ, Andrew, Peter Haggett, and Matthew Smallman-Raynor (2004) World
Atlas of Epidemic Diseases. Oxford: Arnold Publishers/Oxford University Press.
   Conybeare, John (1948) “ The Eﬀects on Mortality of Recent Advances in Treatment.”
J. Institute of Actuaries 74: 57-81.
   Curtin, Philip D. (1961) ““The White Man’s Grave:” Image and Reality, 1780-1850,”
The Journal of British Studies, Vol. 1, no, 1, November, 94-110.
   Curtin, Philip D. (1964) The Image of Africa, University of Wisconsin Press, Madison.
   Curtin, Philip D. (1989) Death by Migration: Europe’s Encounter with the Tropical
World in the 19th Century, Cambridge University Press, New York NY.
   Curtin, Philip D. (1990) “The End of the “White Man’s Grave”? Nineteenth-Century
Mortality in West Africa,” Journal of Interdisciplinary History, Vol. 21, No. 1, Summer,
63-88.
   Curtin, Philip D. (1998) Disease and Empire: The Health of European Troops in the
Conquest of Africa, Cambridge University Press, New York NY.
   Curtin, Philip D., Steven Feierman, Leonard Thompson, and Jan Vansina
(1995) African History: From Earliest Times to Independence, Longman, London and New


                                                23
York, Second Edition.
   Davis, Kingsley. (1956) “ The Amazing Decline of Mortality in Underdeveloped Areas.”
A.E.R. 46 (May): 305-318.
   Desowitz, Robert S (1991) The Malaria Capers: More Tales of Parasites and People,
Research and Reality. New York: W.W. Norton & Company.
   Expert Committee on Malaria (1947) “ Extract from the Report on the First Session,”
Bulletin World Health Organization 1 (1) 1947/48.
   Feinberg, H.M. (1974) “New Data on European Mortality in West Africa: The Dutch
on the Gold Coast, 1719-1760,” The Journal of African History, Vol. 15, No. 3, 357-371.
   Gilles, H.M. and D.A. Warrell (1993) Bruce-Chwatt’s Essential Malariology, Third
Edition, Arnold, London.
   Graham, Gerald S. (1978) The China Station: War and Diplomacy 1830-1860, Claren-
don Press, Oxford.
   Gutierrez, Hector (1986) “La Mortalite des Eveques Latino-Americains aux XVIIe et
XVIII Siecles,” Annales de Demographie Historique, 29-39.
   Hirsch, August (1888) Handbook of Geographical and Historical Pathology, New Syden-
ham Society, London.
   Hoﬀ, Brent and Carter Smith III (2000) Mapping Epidemics: A Historical Atlas of
Disease. New York: Franklin Watts.
   Hughes, Arnold and David Perfect (2008) A Political History of the Gambia, 1816-
1994, University of Rochester Press, Rochester.
   Hunter, Arthur (1907) “Mortality in Semi-Tropical and Tropical Countries: Rates of
Premium Charged, and Valuation Basis for These Countries,” Transactions of the American
Society of Actuaries.
   Institute of Actuaries (1851-52) “On the Extra Premium Charged for Assurance of the
Lives of Persons Going Abroad,” Journal of the Institute of Actuaries, volume 2, pp.166-170.
   Jannetta, Ann Bowman (1993) “Disease Ecologies of East Asia,” chapter VII.3 in
Kiple (1993).
   Kiat, Lee Yong (1978) Medical History of Early Singapore, South East Asia Medical
Centre, Tokyo.
   Kiple, Kenneth F. (1984) The Caribbean Slave: A Biological History, Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, Cambridge.
   Kiple, Kenneth F. (1993), editor The Cambridge World History of Disease, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.


                                             24
   Kuhnke, LaVerne (1993) “Disease Ecologies of the Middle East and North Africa,”
chapter VII.2 in Kiple (1993), pp.453-463.
   Kuczynski, R.R. (1948) Demographic Survey of the British Empire: Volume I,
Volume II, and Volume III, The Harvester Press, London.
   Lancaster, H.O (1990) Expectations of Life: A Study in the Demography, Statistics, and
History of World Mortality, Springer-Verlag, New York.
   Leung, Angela Ki Che (1993) “ Diseases of the Premodern Period in China,” chapter
VI.2 in Kiple (1993).
   Lever, J.W.C. (1839) “On the Sickness and Mortality Among the Troops in the United
Kingdom. Abstract of the Statistical Report of Major Tulloch.” Journal of the Statistical
Society of London, Vol. 2, No. 4, July, 250-260.
   Lind, James (1768) An Essay on Diseases Incidental to Europeans in Hot Climates With
the Method of Preventing Their Fatal Consequences, Becket and Hondt, London.
   Mandle, Jay R. (1970) “The Decline in Mortality in British Guiana, 1911-1960,” De-
mography, Volume 7, Issue 3, August, pp.301-315.
   Marshall, Leslie B. (1993) “Disease Ecologies of Australia and Oceania,” chapter VII.5
in Kiple (1993), pp.482-496.
   Meikle, James (1876) “On the Additional Premium required for Residence in Foreign
Climates,” Journal of the Institute of Actuaries, January, pp.268-298.
   Medical Department of the Navy (1840) Statistical Reports on the Health of the Navy
[part I], Parliamentary paper No. 159, Great Britain, London.
   Medical Department of the Navy (1841) Statistical Reports on the Health of the Navy
for the years 1830, 1831, 1832, 183, 1834, 1835, and 1836, William Clowes and Sons, London.
   Oldstone, Michael B.A. (1998) Viruses, Plagues, and History, Oxford University Press,
Oxford.
   Patterson, K. David (1993) “Disease Ecologies of Sub-Saharan Africa,” Chapter VII.1
in Kiple (1993), pp.447-452.
   Preston, Samuel H (1980) “Causes and Consequences of Mortality Declines in Less
Developed Countries during the Twentieth Century.” In Population and Economic Change in
Developing Countries, edited by Richard A. Easterlin. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press.
   Stolnitz, George J. (1955) “A Century of International Mortality Trends: I.” Population
Studies 9 (July): 24-55.
   Reynaud, Gustave A (1898) Considerations sanitaires sure l’expedition de Madagas-
car et quelques autres expeditions coloniales, francaises et anglais, Paris, Societe Francaise


                                              25
d’Edition d’Art.
   Ricklefs, M.C. (2001) A History of Modern Indonesia since c.1200, Third Edition, Stan-
ford University Press, Stanford.
   Roberts, G.W. (1948) “Some Observations on the Population of British Guiana," Pop-
ulation Studies, Volume 2, Issue 2, September, 185-218.
   Select Committee (1866) Report from the Select Committee on Mortality of Troops
(China), 24 July, House of Commons, Parliament, Great Britain.
   Showers, Victor (1979) World Facts and Figures, John Wiley and Sons, New York.
   Sprague, A.E. (1895) “Distribution of Diseases in Africa,” Journal of the Institute of
Actuaries, April, pp.65-70.
   Statistical Reports on the Health of the Navy for the Years 1830-1836, William
Clowes and Sons, London, 1841.
   Statistical Society of London (1840) “Report of a Committee of the Statistical Society
of London, Appointed to Collect and Enquire into Vital Statistics, Upon the Sickness and
Mortality Among the European and Native Troops Serving in the Madras Presidency, from
the Year 1793 to 1838,” Journal of the Statistical Society of London, Vol. 3, No. 2, July,
113-143.
   Statistical Society of London (1841) “Second Report of a Committee of the Statistical
Society of London, appointed to collect and enquire into Vital Statistics, upon the Sickness
and Mortality among the European and Native Troops serving in the Madras Presidency,”
Journal of the Statistical Society of London, Vol. 4, No. 2, July, 137-155.
   Tulloch, A.M. (1838a) “On the Sickness and Mortality Among the Troops in the West
Indies [part I],” Journal of the Statistical Society of London, Vol. 1, No. 3, July, 129-142.
   Tulloch, A.M. (1838b) “On the Sickness and Mortality Among the Troops in the West
Indies [part II],” Journal of the Statistical Society of London, Vol. 1, No. 4, August, 216-230.
   Tulloch, A.M. (1838c) “On the Sickness and Mortality Among the Troops in the West
Indies [part III],” Journal of the Statistical Society of London, Vol. 1, No. 7, November,
428-444.
   Tulloch, A.M (1840) Statistical Reports on the Sickness, Mortality and Invaliding,
Among the Troops in Western Africa, St. Helena, The Cape of Good Hope, and Mauritius,
London.
   Tulloch, A.M. (1841) “Comparison of the Sickness, Mortality, and Prevailing Disease
among Seamen and Soldiers, as Shewn by the Naval and Military Statistical Reports,” Journal
of the Statistical Society of London, Vol. 4, No. 1, April, 1-16.


                                               26
   Tulloch, A.M. (1847) “On the Mortality Among Her Majesty’s Troops Serving in the
Colonies during the years 1844 and 1845,” Journal of the Statistical Society of London, Vol.
10, No. 3, September, 252-259.




                                            27
Not-for-Publication Appendixes

Appendix A: Anderson-Rubin Confidence Intervals

To construct Anderson-Rubin (AR) confidence sets without clustering (with spherical errors),
we first calculate the Anderson-Rubin test statistic and then invert it by solving a series of
quadratic polynomial inequalities. The solution to these inequalities will correspond to a finite
interval, the union of two infinite intervals, the whole real line, or an empty set. A fast, accurate
algorithm for solving these inequalities has been developed and programmed for Stata by Anna
Mikusheva and Brian Poi, in the form of the condivreg module. This approach is faster and
more accurate than inverting the AR test statistic using a grid test, which performs a series of
hypotheses tests 0 :  =  0 where  0 belongs to a grid (Mikusheva 2010). More details about
the algorithm and its STATAS implementation can be found in Mikusheva and Poi (2006).
   Mikusheva and Poi’s algorithm is applicable only to the spherical case. To calculate the
clustered AR confidence sets (with non-spherical errors), we must invert the AR test statistic
through grid testing. We do this by using the rivtest module in STATA which is documented
in detail in Finlay and Magnusson (2009). In particular, as outlined by Chernozhukov and
Hansen (2008), we first regress a transformed dependent variable,  −  0 on the instrument,
, where  is the endogenous regressor:  −  0 =  + . We then test that  = 0 (which
is implied by  0 = 0) using a conventional robust covariance matrix estimator. Finally, the
AR test statistic is inverted using a grid test. For the results reported here, we searched an
evenly spaced grid containing 1600 points (the maximum allowed by the Stata program) on an
interval 25 times the width of the Wald confidence interval. We checked robustness to using
wider and narrower intervals, as well as to searching on an evenly spaced grid ranging from
-20 to 20, and in all cases the estimates changed very little from those reported here.


Appendix B: Information on Disease Ecology

The relevant literature is large, beginning with Lind’s Diseases in Hot Countries, the first
edition of which was published in 1768 and which helped form early perceptions. Hirsch (1888)
provided the comprehensive 19th century compilation and assessment of knowledge; Volume
1 of his Handbook of Geographical and Historical Pathology covers “Acute Infective Diseases”.
As this was written before the transmission of disease by mosquito was properly understood
- first published in German in 1881, its three volumes are the result of 25 years of work - it
is particularly valuable as a window on contemporary understanding of Medical Geography.


                                                 28
Our core assessments below are based primarily on the modern equivalent to and update of
Hirsch, which is The Cambridge World History of Human Disease, edited by Kenneth F. Kiple
(1993).43 This volume contains more than 1,000 pages on almost all known human diseases,
including sets of chapters on “The Geography of Human Disease” (by region), “The History
of Human Disease in the World Outside Asia,” and “The History of Human Disease in Asia.”
We checked the assessments there with H.O. Lancaster’s Expectations of Life: A Study in the
Demography, Statistics, and History of World Mortality, which contains chapters by region.
       As a way to check that these general assessments fit with the detailed geographes in ques-
tion (including with modern borders), we also checked a series of large world maps published
in 1951 by the American Geographical Society, from The Geographical Review, Vol.41, 1951.
This provide information on the incidence of infectious disease in every country of the world.
Of particular value for our purpose is the “Distribution of Malaria Vectors” (American Ge-
ographical Society, 1951a; also useful are American Geographical Society 1951b, 1951c, and
1951d), which shows the type of mosquito “Species of Anopholes”) present in every country -
this has an important eﬀect on the potential prevalence of the more serious forms of malaria -
as well as the distribution of malaria parasites. This map provides references, by country, with
most of its sources dating from the 1920s, 1930s and early 1940s. This graphic was obviously
drawn after the early colonial period that is our focus here, but in most of Africa, Asia, and
Latin America infectious disease was not conquered until the 1940s.                  Specifically, relatively
little progress was made towards eradicating malaria, yellow fever or other mosquito borne
disease before the 1940s, although there were advances in lowering infection rates for Euro-
peans even in places that had previously been unhealthy for them (see Acemoglu and Johnson,
2007). As Curtin (1989) discusses the importance of yellow fever epidemics in accounting for
relatively high mortality during the 19th century, we also make use of the American Geograph-
ical Society’s map showing the “Distribution of Dengue and Yellow Fever.”44 We check these
maps against the latest available information in the medical geography literature, focused on
epidemics, in the form of Hoﬀ and Smith (2000) and Cliﬀ, Haggett, and Smallman-Raynor
(2004).
       R.R. Kuczynski’s three volume Demographic Survey of the British Colonial Empire also
  43
      Kiple’s team has the benefit of hindsight and contains today’s leading medical historians but might be
considered somewhat distant from events and perceptions of the nineteenth century. Between Hirsch (1888)
and Kiple (1993) there is Clenow (1903) - whose volume benefits from the medical advances at the end of the
nineteenth century but who is still close to the major mortality events of that century. There is no indication
in Clenow (1903) that our assessments based on Kiple (1993) are oﬀ the mark on anything that matters for our
analysis.
   44
      For more on the role of yellow fever in high European mortality before 1900, see Oldstone (1998), Chapter
5, "Yellow Fever".


                                                      29
helps as a further cross-check. Published in 1948, this contains a great deal of the available
historical demographic and public health information by country - particularly for African
colonies. His three volumes cover West Africa (Volume I), South Africa, East Africa, Mauritius
and Seychelles (Volume II), and West Indian and American Territories (Volume III). The lack
of serious progress through the 1940s against infectious disease in many places were still colonies
also makes twentieth century conditions in some places quite relevant for assessing the pattern
of disease ecologies in the 19th century.
   In terms of specific diseases, Curtin emphasizes the importance of diﬀerential incidence
of malaria - and variation in the types of malaria across regions (also see Bruce-Chwatt and
Bruce-Chwatt 1977). We use the updated version of Curtin’s recommended text on this issue,
which is Bruce-Chwatt’s Essential Malariology, Third Edition (Gilles and Warrell 1993). We
supplemented this information with Desowitz (1991) and Bradley (1992). The most useful
sources in the historical record of malaria eradication eﬀorts are League of Nations Health
Organization (1932), Expert Committee on Malaria (1947) and Bulletin of the World Health
Organization (1954). Conybeare (1948), Stolnitz (1955), Davis (1956), Caldwell (1986), and
Preston (1980) are also helpful - on the point that malaria rates declined only from the 1940s
so our sources from the early 1900s and later (up to and including Kuczynski 1948 and the
American Geographical Society 1951a) are relevant for assessing 19th century disease ecologies.
   We also looked carefully through the demographic and public health literature for specific
articles on health conditions before 1940 that would shed light on local disease ecology -
particularly anything that would suggest neighboring countries did not share the same disease
ecology. This includes searching journals such as Demography, Population Studies, Population
and Development Review.
   This literature allows us to look carefully for any neighbor “anomalies”, i.e., conditions
under which neighboring countries would not share the same disease ecology. Perhaps the
leading example is the disease barrier provided by the Sahara desert. In this regard, Albouy
makes an important and elementary mistake when he argues that just because some West
African countries border some North African countries, these two sets of countries might have
a similar disease ecology - and therefore similar mortality rates for Europeans in the 19th
century. Patterson (1993) and Kuhnke (1993) - adjoining chapters in Kiple (1993) - make it
very clear that this is not the case: West Africa and North Africa have fundamentally diﬀerent
disease ecologies, particularly with regard to the conditions for mosquitos, the vectors for key
diseases that killed a high percentage of exposed Europeans before 1850.
   The actuarial literature, which developed rapidly after about 1850, provides a useful cross-


                                                30
check - typically based on decades of experience for particular life insurance companies. Insti-
tute of Actuaries (1851-52) reports insurance rates used by “London Oﬃces” in mid-century.
Meikle (1876) assesses life insurance experience for Europeans outside of Europe. Hunter
(1907) provides a review of life insurance experience in the last decades of the 19th century
around the world - and suggests a classification of countries by mortality category.45
       The remainder of this sub-section reviews each instance when Albouy drops our data.46

Australia

In AJR (2001) we assigned the New Zealand rate (8.55 per 1,000) to Australia, based on Mar-
shall (1993) and the broader disease ecology literature. Curtin (1989) has a lengthy discussion
of health conditions in New Zealand, including why exactly it has always been malaria free.
In our assessment, Australia shared those characterisitics. Albouy finds this unconvincing and
drops Australia from his core dataset.
       However, in writing AJR (2005), we found that Tulloch (1847, p.253) reports mortality
prior to 1836 in New South Wales and Van Diemans Land (Australia) as 14 per 1,000, with
about the same rates in 1844-45. Albouy now accepts this rate for his extended mortality
dataset.
       But we also pointed out that on the first page of his introduction to part I of Army Medical
Department (1840), Tulloch argues that “more than a fifth part arose from violent or accidental
deaths” and “Thus the mortality from disease alone could have amounted to little more than
one per cent annually, being lower than in any other Colony, except the Eastern Provinces of
the Cape of Good Hope, to which the climate of Australia is in many respects similar.” In
other words, Tulloch puts deaths from disease in Australia at 10 per 1,000.
       To err on the conservative side, we used the rate of 14 per 1,000 in our “Tulloch” revised
dataset, with results shown in Tables 3A and 3B of AJR (2005), so that we could examine
whether our initial assumption of 8.55 per 1,000 makes any diﬀerence - and it does not. But in
any case there is no defensible rationale for dropping Australia - our data about 19th century
mortality in this country are almost as good as our data for Europe.
  45
     The life insurance data has a lower upper bound than the original data we used in AJR (2001). The supports
the idea of a cap on maximum mortality rates, as discussed above. Acemoglu, Johnson, and Subramanian (2011)
examine this issue further.
  46
     We do not deal here with points that he raised before but that he has now withdrawn from his regression
analysis. See AJR (2005, 2006, and 2008) for those details.




                                                      31
Singapore

AJR (2001) used the Straits Settlements estimate in Table 1.1 (Curtin, 1989) for both Malaysia
and Singapore.47 Albouy accepts our estimate of the mortality rate for Malaysia but discards
the data from Singapore. But, as we reported in AJR (2005), there is strong qualitative
confirmation of our coding.48 A committee of the Statistical Society of London (1841) (a
source for Curtin 1989, Table 1.1), wrote “On the whole, the town is distinguished by its
salubrity; and it is a remarkable fact, that notwithstanding that the settlement is surrounded
by marshes, and is exposed to many of the causes which are usually supposed to create malaria,
malignant remittant fever has not been known there since its formation” (p.139)49 There is no
mention of malaria or yellow fever in the early medical history of Singapore; see Kiat (1978).
       Furthermore, Albouy allows Singapore in his “revised mortality” series, but with the same
rate it has in the AJR base sample. Dropping Singapore from his core dataset is therefore
contradictory as well as making no sense.

Guyana

Tulloch (1838a) reports a mortality from disease rate in British Guiana of 84 per 1,000 over
1817-36 (pp. 131 and 133).50 Previously we used the rate from French Guyana (32.18 per
1,000; Table 1.1 in Curtin 1989), so this direct estimate is presumably preferable and we use it
in our robustness series. The public health literature on British Guyana itself does not indicate
any anomaly that would suggest its disease ecology is diﬀerent from that of French Guyana
(Roberts, 1948; Mandle, 1970). Albouy drops Guyana from his base sample.
       Hunter (1907, p.401) puts “British, Dutch, and French Guiana” in the same mortality
category (“tropical”).

Dominican Republic and Haiti

For the Dominican Republic and Haiti we used the Jamaica mortality rate of 130 per 1,000.
Albouy drops these datapoints. The extensive disease ecology and historical literature for the
Caribbean distinctly indicates that the Dominican Republic and Haiti were on the high side
of typical mortality.
  47
    The estimate is from Penang; both Malacca and Singapore were part of the Straits Settlement.
  48
    The authors of this report co-operated with Tulloch (Statistical Society of London, 1840, p.114)
 49
    They also say, p.139, that in other parts of the island, “it is stated that fevers and dysentery are frequent."
This supports AJR’s contention that Singapore was healthier than its immediate surroundings.
 50
    The average strength of the force was 884 (Balfour, 1845, p.201).




                                                        32
    Institute of Actuaries (1851-52) reports an extra premium for life insurance in all the West
Indies of 100 shillings. Hunter (1907, p.401) explicitly puts Haiti in the same category as
other Caribbean countries, including Martinique and Guadeloupe (mortality rates of 112.18
and 106.87 respectively in Table 1.1 of Curtin 1989.)

Bahamas

For the Bahamas, we used Curtin’s estimate for the Windward and Leeward Command (85
per 1,000). Tulloch (1838b, p.229) reports that with an average strength of 27, the Bahamas
had 102 verified deaths from disease over 20 years (1817-37), which is an average annual death
rate of 189 per 1,000.51 Most of the mortality occurred during epidemics in 1819 and 1823
and Tulloch attributes this high death rate to the unfortunate location of one fort, which was
particularly vulnerable to yellow fever. We use the rate of 189 per 1,000 in our revision.
    Albouy drops the Bahamas from his core sample.
    Meikle (1876, p.277) assesses mortality in the Bahamas as very similar to that in Mauritius
(which is 30.5 per 1,000 in Table 1.1 of Curtin 1989.)

Hong Kong

For Hong Kong we used the China Field Force rate for the British army in 1860, from Table
A8.2 of Curtin (1998), which is 14.9 per 1,000. Albouy discards Hong Kong, regarding it as
completely missing data for his core sample. For AJR (2005) we looked at the historical record
and found legitimate discussion over which estimate to use for Hong Kong as various numbers
are available.
    The death rate for “White troops” in China in 1859 was put at 41.93 per 1,000 by Balfour
(1861) - 59.35 per 1,000 including invalids who died on the way home (not usually included in
early mortality estimates) - and 52.04 in Southern China in 1860, which includes invalids left
in Hong Kong (Army Medical Department 1862). Jannetta (1993) and Leung (1993) give no
indication that Hong Kong had a disease ecology that was significantly diﬀerent from nearby
parts of mainland China. And we can find no indication in American Geographical Society
(1851a) or other maps that Hong Kong was any kind of disease anomaly.
    However, there is a higher mortality estimate for European soldiers in Hong Kong from
Tulloch’s writings. On p.254, Tulloch (1847) reports an average ratio of mortality per 1000 of
  51
     Total deaths were 107, of which five were “causes not known." If we use total deaths, the mortality rate
would be 198 per 1,000.




                                                     33
strength, 1842-1845, to be 285.52 This is not a long average, as in the rest of Tulloch’s work,
but we still take this rate for our robustness series in AJR (2005). It is also not certain that
all these deaths are from disease, but it does fit with Cantlie’s negative assessment of Hong
Kong (Cantlie 1974).
       Tulloch’s very high mortality estimate does not fit the fact that the British and French
used Hong Kong as a gathering point for the China Field Force in 1860. Why would they have
done this if the place were known to be so unhealthy? As Graham (1978, p.386) says, Kowloon
was “an apparently healthy site for a barracks or camping ground...”. Was there perhaps a big
mortality diﬀerence between Hong Kong island (presumably covered by these statistics) and
the Kowloon Peninsula (where the troops mustered)? Select Committee (1866) suggests part
of the answer — troops were sent to Hong Kong when already sick, thus raising the measured
mortality rate. However, the evidence and proceedings of this committee suggest there was
some malaria in the area at that time.
       In Institute of Actuaries (1851-52, p.169) all of China is in the same category of “extra
premium” for life insurance (60 shillings for civilians and 80 shillings for military). Hunter
(1907, p.401) puts the entire Chinese Empire, “south of 30 degrees North latitude”, in the
same mortality category (“tropical”).
       When there are varying estimates, we can average or use the alternatives or find some
other way to combine the data. But to discard the observation completely, i.e., to treat it as
“ missing”, is not appealing.

Pakistan

All our data for South Asia came directly from Curtin (1989, Table 1.1). We assigned the
available rates to modern countries as follows: Bangladesh from Bengal (71.41), Madras for
India (48.63), and Bombay for Pakistan (36.99 per 1,000). We also used the rates from Ceylon
for Sri Lanka (69.8).53 These data are all from before 1838. Albouy disputes - and drops -
only the data for Pakistan.
       But the British perception of health conditions in modern day Pakistan and nearby regions
was very close to their view of mortality around Bombay. Bhardwaj (1993) gives no indication
that the area covered by modern Pakistan is significantly diﬀerent from other parts of the
northerly-western region of what is now India.
  52
     This is in an article that is not cited by Curtin, and which we overlooked in writing AJR (2001) - we
reported the data in AJR (2005).
  53
     See Army Medical Department (1841, p. 8) for the original estimate and more detail. Mortality may have
been lower 1820-26, but the data are not strictly comparable.



                                                    34
    For Pakistan we have gone carefully through the extensive British reports on military
mortality in 19th century India. In our assessment, the British area of operations close to and
including modern Pakistan, the expected mortality rate was at or close to what we included
in our original series.
    In Institute of Actuaries (1851-52, p.169) all of India is in the same category for “extra
premium” on life insurance (60 shillings for civilians and 80 shillings for military). In Hunter
(1907, p.401), all of (then-British) India is placed in one mortality category (“tropical”)

Morocco

In AJR, the mortality rate for Algeria (78.2 per 1,000) is assigned to Morocco; while Tunisia
was 63 per 1,000 and Egypt was 67.8. Institute of Actuaries (1851-52) puts the extra premium
for Europeans traveling to Morocco at 40 shillings, which is the same as for an “Eastern Tour”
that includes Egypt and other parts of the Middle East;.

West Africa54

Our West African estimates were all from Curtin. From Curtin (1989, Table 1.1) we took data
on early soldiers in Sierra Leone and Senegal, and from Curtin (1998) we used data on soldiers
and small expeditions somewhat later in the 19th century (for Gambia,55 Gold Coast/Ghana,56
Mali/French Soudan,57 Nigeria58 ). Specifically, we took data from expeditions with a few
hundred soldiers on short West African expeditions (travelling on steamers or on mules); these
were essentially peacetime experiences, with reported deaths almost all from disease. Curtin
(e.g., 1990) emphasized an important downward bias from using data later in the 19th century,
as militaries became better at managing mortality during short expeditions during the 19th
  54
     There are 11 West African countries in AJR: Burkina, Cote d’Ivoire, Ghana, Guinea, Gambia, Mali, Niger,
Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone, and Togo.
  55
     The Gambia data are “soldiers on the Gambia in 1825" (Curtin, 1998, p.10). “In this case, between May
1825 and December 1826, fevers killed 279 British soldiers out of a force that was seldom more than 120 and
often as low as 40." For confirmation this was a peacetime experience, see the original source, Army Medical
Department (1840, p.13).
  56
     The Ghana (partly the Cape Coast Command) estimate of 668 was for troops 1823-26 and oﬃcers 1819-36.
The original number is in Army Medical Department (1840, p.19). For confirmation, see Balfour (1849, p.38).
  57
     The Mali expedition (specifically to Logo in 1878) included 434 Europeans and 225 Africans, travelling
by steamer (with a march of 10 miles at the end); 49 percent of the Europeans died in less than two months
(Curtin, 1998, pp.80-81). In campaigns in the French Soudan, under the direction of General Gallieni, soldiers
rode on mules (Reynaud, 1898, p.150).
  58
     The Nigeria expedition in 1841 had 159 Europeans on three steamers; “the longest time any of the steamers
spent on the river that year was just over two months" (Curtin, 1998, p.21). The Ghana rates were from a
longer intervention, 1824-26 (Curtin, 1998, p.18).




                                                     35
century, so we stayed away (as much as possible) from estimates after 1850.59 In the robustness
checks of our NBER working paper, however, we did check our results using longer averages
of African data; our main results were unchanged.
       For Africa, we assigned mortality based on the literature on disease ecologies - erring on
the side of using relatively low mortality rates and not those conspicuously from epidemics.
This assignment is supported also by the life insurance literature. We have always emphasized
that the data for some parts of Africa are less reliable than for other regions - and this has
motivated our robustness checks without Africa (see AJR 2005 and the tables in this paper;
this was also the focus of AJR 2006). But disregarding all African data completely is an
inappropriate approach given the extensive available information. There is without doubt a
great deal of measurement error in the African data but there is also much information about
early European mortality in that region - and Europeans at the time were well aware of this.
       We assigned mortality rates to countries that were part of the same colonial area or neigh-
bors in the cases of Niger (from Haut-Senegal-Niger), Burkina Faso (from French Soudan),
Guinea (from Sierra Leone), Cote d’Ivoire and Togo (from Gold Coast/Ghana).60 Albouy
drops these five countries.
       But according to Curtin’s Image of Africa (Curtin 1964, e.g., chapter 3), the Europeans
had a clear and negative view of mortality throughout West Africa. There is no hint in the
historical record that any of these places were regarded as potentially more healthy. From
Curtin 1964, p.71, the discussion is all about West Africa.
       Speaking of the late 18th century (i.e., before Tulloch’s pioneering statistical work), Curtin
(1964, p.71) articulates the perceptions of Europeans this way, “ West African mortality figures
were not widely publicized or given statistical precision, but the region’s general reputation for
having a “deadly climate” rested on a basis in fact. Somewhere between 25 and 75 percent of
any group of Europeans newly arrived on the Coast died within the first year. Thereafter, the
death rate was much less, perhaps on the order of 10 per cent per annum, but still substantial.
Any European activity demand a price in European lives that was not only intrinsically high,
but considerably higher than the cost of similar activity in the West Indies or South Asia.
Slightly later calculations of military mortality over twenty years show a loss of 483 per thou-
sand mean strength among European troops in West Africa, against only 78.5 per thousand in
  59
      “A mortality revolution had nevertheless taken place during the nineteenth century in tropical Africa as
it had in Europe" (Curtin, 1990, p.69). From Army Medical Department (1840, e.g., p.22) it is clear that the
early mortality estimates for West Africa are underestimates as they do not include deaths of soldiers once they
had been “invalided" home.
   60
      Albouy complains (p.9) that we assign a rate of 400 (Curtin, 1998, p.85) from Mali to Niger, but this is
assignment to a neighbor with the same disease ecology.



                                                      36
the West Indies. Civilian life insurance premiums charged by British firms for diﬀerent tropical
regions tell a similar story: European mortality was roughly four times as high in West Africa
as it was in India or the West Indies.” The early mortality rates reviewed in Bruce-Chwatt
and Bruce-Chwatt 1977, pp.43-50) are entirely consistent with this assessment.
    The explorer Richard Burton described Lagos Government House in 1863 as a “corrugated
iron coﬃn or a plank-lined morgue containing a dead Governor once a year” (Bruce-Chwatt
and Bruce-Chwatt 1977, p.47). Bruce-Chwatt and Bruce-Chwatt (1977, p.47) report that
“the annual death rate for these high oﬃcials [Governors of Sierra Leone] was around 200 per
1,000”. Kuczynski (1948, volume 1, pp.40-153) provides more details on the mortality rates
of Europeans in Sierra Leone and other parts of British West Africa during the 19th century;
this is completely consistent with the work of Tulloch and Curtin.
    Albouy is also concerned about our assignment of the estimate of 280 from Curtin (1998),
p.238, Table A8.1, for “French Soudan.” The term French Soudan is ambiguous, as Albouy
points out. As far as we know from Curtin and Reynaud, these were minor campaigns, with
little fighting, mostly in present day Mali. Alternative assignments to Mali and its neighbors
(e.g., assigning our original Mali estimate to neighbors, or using the estimate of 400 per 1,000
on p.85 of Curtin, 1989) make little diﬀerence to our results.61
    In Institute of Actuaries (1851-52, p.169), the extra premium for life insurance in West
Africa is 160 shillings in Senegambia and 120 shillings in the rest of the region. According to
this source, these were the highest mortality places in the world for Europeans.
    Chapter VII of Hirsch (1881, section 60, pp.198-202) identifies all of West Africa as an
intensely malarial area. His sources on more inland West Africa were more limited - but
Patterson (1993) is clear that this is the same disease ecology (unlike, for example, North
Africa, which is quite diﬀerent).

Central Africa

From Central Africa, Albouy drops Angola, Cameroon, Gabon, Tanzania, Uganda, Zaire. For
Central Africa mortality estimates were particularly hard to come by and in AJR (2001) we
proceed cautiously by relying on two relatively conservative numbers. First, we assigned a
  61
     Our original Mali estimate was very high, so we were reluctant to use this for all neighbors. But using this
would be a reasonable robustness check. Assigning the rate of 2920 to Niger, Burkina Faso, and Cameroon (the
last not a neighbor, but close and a neighbor of Nigeria, which has a similarly high rate in our base data), gives
a parameter estimate of -0.54, with a clustered standard error of 0.13, without other covariates. If we assign
400 to Mali, Burkina Faso and Cameroon (Niger is already at 400 in our base data), the coeﬃcient is -0.62 and
the standard error is 0.18. In the first case, the coeﬃcient falls slightly in absolute value, but the standard error
also declines, and in second case there is almost no change (compare with column 1, Table 1A in AJR 2005).
There is a similar pattern in other specifications.


                                                         37
mortality rate of 280 from French Soudan to Angola, Cameroon, Chad, the Central African
Republic, Gabon, and Uganda. This estimate is from Curtin (1998), p.238, Table A8.1. The
disease ecology literature suggests there was less yellow fever in Central Africa than in West
Africa (see American Geographical Society 1951e), but still significant amounts of falciporum
malaria.
       Second, from Curtin we had estimates of mortality rates for Africans working away from
their homes, for Congo and Kenya. We took the highest observed values of these rates to
represent a minimum for Europeans in those places. The Kenya rate (145) was assigned to
Tanzania, and the Congo/Zaire rate (240) was assigned to Congo-Brazzaville and Zaire; these
rates and the underlying source (Curtin et al. 1995) was stated clearly on p.33 in our NBER
working paper.
       Kiple (1984), Chapter 10, discusses the relative mortality rates of Europeans and Africans
in places with malaria and other tropical diseases. The data, from the same underlying source
as Curtin uses, suggests that before tropical medicine improved in the mid-19th century, the
death rate for Europeans would be 2-3 times the death rate for Africans (and sometimes higher
— see Tables 4 and 5 on pp.170-171, Kiple 1984).62
       Sprague (1895, p.69) writes in the life insurance literature, “The Central Congo district
has such a bad name that the mortality among Europeans resident there is said to be about
25 per-cent.” According to Institute of Actuaries (1851-52), all of Central Africa is in the same
high category of mortality for Europeans - requiring an extra premium on life insurance of
120 shillings. Hunter (1907, p.402) puts West Africa and Central Africa in the same mortality
category (”higher than tropical scale”). American Geographical Society (1951e) shows all of
West and Central Africa to be in the same endemic yellow fever zone. American Geographical
Society (1951a) shows West and Central Africa share the same prevalence of anopholes gambaie
- the primary vector for falciporum malaria.
       Hirsch (1881, p.199) indicates that the Congo Coast was somewhat more healthy - with
less malaria - than West Africa, but considerably less healthy than southern Africa. Patterson
(1993) does not mention any significant diﬀerence in disease ecology between West and Central
Africa.
       Dropping Congo/Zaire makes no sense - as this is the area covered by our data and other
available information. Albouy does not drop Kenya, for which we also had similar data directly.
  62
    Curtin (1998, Table 1.1, p. 8) reports deaths from disease in the Sierra Leone Command, 1816-37, as 26.5
for Africans and 478 for Europeans.




                                                    38
Appendix C: “Campaigns”

We have reexamined the historical record for every one of our observations. While we do not
claim to have established definitively whether there was or was not significant campaigning
in each episode covered by our settler mortality estimates, here are some blatant examples of
miscoding “campaigns” and “barracks” in Albouy.
   We also indicate whether we recode the observation as campaign in either our minimal or
extended recoding (note: all countries recoded as campaign in the minimal recoding are coded
as campaign in the extended recoding). The choice of whether a country is in the minimal or
extended recoding category is somewhat arbitrary, but doesn’t make a significant diﬀerence to
our results.
   Jamaica - 1817-1836, this period includes the largest slave uprising in Jamaica’s history
known as the Baptist War in 1831. So there is fighting and campaigning during the period
under consideration. This war is discussed in every book on Jamaican history; a much cited
academic article is Reckord (1968). In our extended recoding, Jamaica is coded as a campaign.
   Sri Lanka - Curtin has this number from 1817-1836. The Dutch had controlled the whole
of the Island except for the Kingdom of Kandy; the British fought a series of wars after 1803
to annex this. The 3rd Kandyan War, took place 1817-1818, which is inside the period covered
by Curtin. This war was big and it is discussed in every history of Sri Lanka. For instance,
Peebles (2006, p. 50) notes that 1,000 British troops died. In our extended recoding, Sri Lanka
is coded as campaign.
   Malaysia and Singapore - these data are from the Straits Settlement 1829-1838. In
1831-32 the British fought the Naning War. Mills (1966) describes this in Chapter 7 pp. 115-
128 and notes on page 115 that there was 9 months of campaigning. The war took place near
Melaka, part of the Straits Settlement, for which we have data. Mills says that Indian soldiers
were involved but he also continually talks about British forces. This is a war with British
forces campaigning, right in the middle of the period Curtin defines. In our extended recoding,
Malaysia and Singapore are coded as campaign.
   Hong Kong — 1860 China field force. This number comes from Table A8.2 in Curtin
(1998, p. 239) and in this table this is described as a “campaign.” Albouy must have misread
this table, and in our minimal recoding Hong Kong is coded as campaign.
   New Zealand — This is discussed in greater detail in the main text above. The quote
here from Curtin (1989, p. 13) tells all, “The most unusual feature of military death in New
Zealand over these five years was the fact that deaths from accident and battle exceeded deaths



                                              39
from disease . . . The high number of deaths in battle is evidence of heavy campaigning.” In
our minimal recoding, New Zealand is coded as campaign. In our extended recoding, Australia
(for which data are derived from New Zealand) is also coded as campaign.
   Senegal — Curtin’s period is 1819-1838. During this period the French colony was basically
just Gorée and St Louis islands in the mouth of the Senegal River. However, the French were
very interested in expanding their commercial interests and started to build forts up the Senegal
River at Dagna (1821) and Merinaghen (1822) (Oloruntimehin, 1974, p. 356). They also sent
many missions into the interior. The French attempt to control trade started conflict.
   “Thus, for instance, in 1832 the French in Senegal fought the Trarza Moors to establish
their control over the gum trade. The same situation applied in the relation between the
French, the Moors and the Jolof state of Walo in 1835. Military involvement of this nature
was often protracted,” (Oloruntimehin, 1974, pp. 356-367).
   So once more it is incorrect that they were sitting in barracks. In our extended recoding,
Senegal is recoded as campaign.
   Trinidad and Tobago - this gets a mortality rate of 85 from the Windwards and Leewards
1817-1836. Curtin notes p. 25, “the central station was Barbados, but at times troops from
the command served as far to the north as St Kitts and as far to the southeast as British
Guiana”.
   This is significant. In 1823 was the massive Demerara Slave rebellion in Guyana. The
beginning of this period also almost includes Bussa’s Rebellion, a huge slave revolt in Barbados
in 1816. A standard reference to this is Beckles (2006); see chapter 5 on Bussa’s rebellion and
aftermath. In 1817 they were still hanging people so there certainly was a large military force
in operation and keeping the peace. The seminal book on the Demerara slave revolt is Da
Costa (1994).
   Blackburn notes (1988, p. 430) in the context of the repression of the Demerara rebellion,
“The Governor called out well-armed troops and militia, including a detachment of one of
the West India Regiment.” Da Costa refers to this on page 217, so it appears likely that the
troops stationed in Barbados saw action in both the Bussa and Demerara rebellions during
this period.
   In our extended recoding, we code Trinidad and Tobago as campaign.
   South Africa. This rate comes from the Cape Colony 1818-1836. As far as we can find,
Curtin says nothing specific about the presence or absence of military activity in Cape Colony.
However, this period includes both the 5th and the 6th Xhosa Wars on the Eastern Frontier of
the Cape. These involved British troops, etc. so we do not know exactly where the numbers


                                               40
in Curtin come from in terms of these campaigns — but the period clearly includes major
campaigns.
   The Xhosa Wars are discussed in all standard histories of South Africa, for example Thomp-
son (2001, chapter 3).
   In our extended recoding, South Africa is coded as campaign.
   USA - this is for American troops 1829-1838. But US soldiers were obviously fighting
Indian wars in this period. Again, Curtin does not discuss this number, but this period
includes a number of Indian wars: the Second Seminole War in Florida, 1835-1842; The Black
Hawk War 1832; and the Creek War of 1836.
   Material on these wars appears in all standard histories of the US. For example, in the
shorter Oxford History, Jones (1995, p. 118) writes, “The Seminole War of 1835-42 involved
large-scale operations in the Florida swamps and cost the United States 1,500 men and $50
million.”
   This period also saw the forced removal of many Indians tribes following the passage of the
1830 Removal Act; see Banner (2005) — these removals were organized by the army.
   In our extended recoding, the USA is recoded as campaign.

Summary

Our minimal recoding covers just Hong Kong and New Zealand. Our extended recoding covers
those two countries, plus Jamaica, Malaysia, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Australia, Senegal, South
Africa, Trinidad and Tobago, and the USA.

Additional References for the Appendices

   Banner, Stuart (2005) How the Indians Lost Their Land, Cambridge: Belknap Press.
Chapter 6.
   Beckles, Hilary McD. (2006) A History of Barbados, New York Cambridge University
Press.
   Blackburn, Robin (1988) The Overthrow of Colonial Slavery, 1776-1848, London: Verso.
   Chernozhukov, Victor and Christian Hansen. (2008) “The reduced form: A simple
approach to inference with weak instruments.” Economics Letters, 100(1): 68-71.
   Da Costa, Emilia (1994) Crowns of Glory, Tears of Blood: the Demerara Slave Rebellion
of 1823, New York: Oxford University Press.
   Finlay, Keith and Leandro Magnusson (2009) “Implementing weak-instrument ro-
bust tests for a general class of instrumental-variables models.” Stata Journal, 9(3): 398-421.


                                              41
   Jones, Maldwyn A. (1995) The Limits of Liberty: American History 1607-1992, 2nd
edition, New York: Oxford University Press.
   Mikusheva, Anna. (2010) “Robust confidence sets in the presence of weak instruments.”
Journal of Econometrics, 157(2): 236-247.
   Mikusheva, Anna and Brian Poi (2006) “Tests and confidence sets with correct size
in the simultaneous equations model with potentially weak instruments.” Stata Journal, 6(3):
1-11.
   Mills, L.A. (1966) British Malaya 1824-1867, New York: Oxford University Press.
   Oloruntimehin, B.Olatunji (1974) “The Western Sudan and the Coming of the French,
1800-1893,” in J.F.A. Ajayi and Michael Crowder eds. The History of West Africa, Volume 2,
New York: Columbia University Press.
   Peebles, Patrick (2006) The History of Sri Lanka, Westport Conn: Greenwood Press.
   Reckord, Mary (1968) “The Jamaica Slave Rebellion of 1831,” Past and Present, 39,
108-125.
   Thompson, Leonard (2001) A History of South Africa, 3rd Ed. New Haven: Yale
University Press.




                                              42
                                                                                     Table 1A
                                                       First Stage Regressions, Alternative Mortality Series
                                                                                       Alternative series for settler mortality


                                                Original AJR                             Benchmarking        Using Naval   Using Naval    Using Naval    Using Naval
                                  Original AJR series, capped Benchmarking               to Caribbean,        Stations,  Stations, Method  Stations,  Stations, Method
                                     series        at 250      to Caribbean              capped at 250        Method 1 1, capped at 250    Method 2   2, capped at 250
                                       (1)           (2)            (3)                       (4)                (5)            (6)           (7)            (8)
                                                                         Dependent variable is protection against risk of expropriation
No covariates                         -0.61            -0.94               -0.59               -0.91              -0.54              -0.77              -0.58              -0.88
(standard error)                      (0.15)           (0.16)             (0.15)              (0.17)             (0.14)             (0.16)             (0.15)              (0.16)
(clustered standard error)            (0.17)           (0.18)             (0.17)              (0.18)             (0.16)             (0.18)             (0.17)              (0.17)
Number of clusters                      36               36                 36                  36                 35                 35                 36                  36
Number of observations                  64               64                 64                  64                 53                 53                 64                  64


With latitude                         -0.52            -0.86               -0.5                -0.83              -0.43              -0.66              -0.49              -0.79
(standard error)                      (0.17)           (0.18)             (0.16)              (0.19)             (0.15)             (0.19)             (0.16)              (0.18)
(clustered standard error)            (0.19)           (0.20)             (0.19)              (0.20)             (0.17)             (0.20)             (0.18)              (0.20)
Number of clusters                      36               36                 36                  36                 35                 35                 36                  36
Number of observations                  64               64                 64                  64                 53                 53                 64                  64


Without neo-Europes                    -0.4            -0.66               -0.38               -0.64              -0.35              -0.52              -0.38              -0.61
(standard error)                      (0.15)           (0.18)             (0.15)              (0.18)             (0.13)             (0.16)             (0.14)              (0.18)
(clustered standard error)            (0.17)           (0.20)             (0.16)              (0.19)             (0.14)             (0.16)             (0.16)              (0.18)
Number of clusters                      33               33                 33                  33                 32                 32                 33                  33
Number of observations                  60               60                 60                  60                 49                 49                 60                  60


Without Africa                        -1.21            -1.21               -1.23               -1.23              -0.82              -0.82              -1.11              -1.11
(standard error)                      (0.20)           (0.20)             (0.23)              (0.23)             (0.28)             (0.28)             (0.22)              (0.22)
(clustered standard error)            (0.18)           (0.18)             (0.21)              (0.21)             (0.29)             (0.29)             (0.20)              (0.20)
Number of clusters                      19               19                 19                  19                 18                 18                 19                  19
Number of observations                  37               37                 37                  37                 26                 26                 37                  37


With continent dummies                -0.44            -0.81               -0.42               -0.78              -0.32              -0.56              -0.41              -0.73
(standard error)                      (0.19)           (0.25)             (0.19)              (0.25)             (0.17)             (0.21)             (0.18)              (0.23)
(clustered standard error)            (0.20)           (0.25)             (0.20)              (0.25)             (0.18)             (0.21)             (0.19)              (0.22)
Number of clusters                      36               36                 36                  36                 35                 35                 36                  36
Number of observations                  64               64                 64                  64                 53                 53                 64                  64

With continent dummies
and latitude                          -0.35            -0.72               -0.33               -0.68              -0.25              -0.46              -0.33              -0.63
(standard error)                      (0.20)           (0.26)             (0.20)              (0.25)             (0.18)             (0.23)             (0.19)              (0.24)
(clustered standard error)            (0.21)           (0.26)             (0.21)              (0.25)             (0.20)             (0.22)             (0.20)              (0.23)
Number of clusters                      36               36                 36                  36                 35                 35                 36                  36
Number of observations                  64               64                 64                  64                 53                 53                 64                  64

With percent of European
descent in 1975                       -0.42            -0.73               -0.39                -0.7              -0.31              -0.5               -0.39              -0.67
(standard error)                      (0.17)           (0.19)             (0.17)              (0.20)             (0.17)             (0.21)             (0.16)              (0.19)
(clustered standard error)            (0.19)           (0.20)             (0.19)              (0.21)             (0.19)             (0.24)             (0.19)              (0.21)
Number of clusters                      36               36                 36                  36                 35                 35                 36                  36
Number of observations                  64               64                 64                  64                 53                 53                 64                  64


With malaria                          -0.43            -0.81               -0.4                 -0.8              -0.13              -0.39              -0.39              -0.74
(standard error)                      (0.21)           (0.22)             (0.22)              (0.24)             (0.20)             (0.22)             (0.21)              (0.22)
(clustered standard error)            (0.24)           (0.24)             (0.25)              (0.26)             (0.21)             (0.24)             (0.23)              (0.23)
Number of clusters                      35               35                 35                  35                 34                 34                 35                  35
Number of observations                  62               62                 62                  62                 51                 51                 62                  62
OLS regressions, with one observation per country. Coefficients and standard errors for covariates, where included, are not reported to save space. All variables are from AJR (2001).
Dependent variable is protection against risk of expropriation; independent variable is log settler mortality. Column 1 uses original settler mortality series from AJR (2001) as
independent variable. Column 2 uses original settler mortality series, capped at 250 per 1,000 per annum. Column 3 uses alternative settler mortality series, benchmarking Latin
American data to Jamaica/Dominican Republic. Column 4 uses same series as column 3, but capped at 250 per 1,000. Column 5 uses mortality data directly from naval stations,
without benchmarking. Column 6 uses same series as column 5, but capped at 250 per 1,000. Column 7 uses mortality data from naval stations, with life insurance data, without
benchmarking. Column 8 uses same series as column 7, but capped at 250 per 1,000.
                                                                                            Table 1B
                                                                       Second Stage Regressions, Alternative Mortality Series
                                                                                                                    Alternative series for settler mortality
                                                                                                                       Benchmarking to                                                                                   Using Naval Stations,
                                                                       Original AJR series,     Benchmarking to      Caribbean, capped at Using Naval Stations,        Using Naval Stations, Using Naval Stations,       Method 2, capped at
                                                Original AJR series       capped at 250           Caribbean                   250                  Method 1          Method 1, capped at 250       Method 2                      250
                                                         (1)                    (2)                  (3)                       (4)                    (5)                        (6)                   (7)                       (8)
                                                                                                                      Dependent variable is log GDP per capita in 1995
No covariates                                           0.93                   0.82                   0.96                    0.85                   1.01                       0.94                  0.98                        0.86
AR confidence interval                               [0.68,1.40]            [0.62,1.14]            [0.71,1.47]            [0.64, 1.20]            [0.74,1.63]               [0.70, 1.40]          [0.72, 1.50]                [0.65, 1.23]
AR confidence interval, clustered                    [0.66,1.72]            [0.60,1.19]            [0.69,1.85]            [0.63, 1.29]            [0.72,1.90]               [0.69, 1.50]          [0.70, 1.85]                [0.64, 1.31]
F-stat, first stage                                     23.34                  35.55                  22.06                  33.53                   18.26                     24.52                 21.95                       32.36
F-stat, first stage, clustered                          12.45                  28.09                  11.72                  25.31                   11.96                     19.00                 12.05                       25.11

With latitude                                           0.96                    0.79                  1.01                    0.85                     1.07                      0.96                     1.03                    0.87
AR confidence interval                               [0.65,1.78]            [0.55,1.24]            [0.68,1.94]            [0.59, 1.36]             [0.70, 2.44]              [0.65, 1.79]             [0.70, 1.99]            [0.61, 1.41]
AR confidence interval, clustered                    [0.64,2.49]            [0.55,1.20]            [0.68,2.86]            [0.59, 1.35]             [0.71, 3.44]              [0.67, 1.82]             [0.69, 2.90]            [0.62, 1.40]
F-stat, first stage                                     13.48                  21.82                  12.67                  20.37                     9.66                     13.44                    12.52                   19.46
F-stat, first stage, clustered                          7.30                   19.26                  6.89                   17.14                     6.10                     10.37                     6.93                   16.32

Without neo-Europes                                     1.24                    1.04                  1.30                    1.11                     1.32                      1.20                     1.31                    1.13
AR confidence interval                               [0.78,3.09]            [0.67,1.99]            [0.82,3.35]            [0.73, 2.18]             [0.82, 3.81]              [0.77, 2.74]             [0.83, 3.37]            [0.74 2.25]
AR confidence interval, clustered                    [0.76,5.43]            [0.65,2.10]            [0.78,5.97]            [0.70, 2.35]             [0.83, 4.72]              [0.78, 2.61]             [0.80, 5.60]            [0.72, 2.36]
F-stat, first stage                                     8.89                   13.22                  8.61                   12.74                     7.77                     10.16                     8.70                   12.46
F-stat, first stage, clustered                          5.54                   11.27                  5.43                   10.77                     6.19                     10.38                     5.64                   11.09

Without Africa                                          0.61                   0.61                   0.65                    0.64                     0.93                      0.93                     0.68                    0.67
AR confidence interval                               [0.41,0.87]            [0.41,0.87]            [0.45,0.94]            [0.44, 0.94]             [0.59, 2.26]              [0.59, 2.26]             [0.47, 1.01]            [0.47, 1.01]
AR confidence interval, clustered                    [0.44,0.85]            [0.45,0.85]            [0.46,0.94]            [0.47, 0.94]             [0.57, 2.32]              [0.57, 2.32]             [0.48, 0.99]            [0.48, 0.99]
F-stat, first stage                                     30.62                  30.62                  27.62                  27.62                     8.64                     8.64                     24.26                   24.26
F-stat, first stage, clustered                          45.98                  45.98                  36.16                  36.16                     8.16                      8.16                    32.41                   32.41

With continent dummies                                   0.97                   0.78                   1.00                   0.81                     1.21                      0.96                     1.04                    0.84
AR confidence interval                               [0.59,3.20]            [0.52,1.42]            [0.60,3.95]            [0.52, 1.53]               [0.64,∞]                [0.56, 3.51]             [0.63, 4.02]            [0.55, 1.64]
AR confidence interval, clustered                    [0.52, 4.87]           [0.45, 1.43]           [0.55, 6.14]           [0.46, 1.51]               [0.63,∞]                [0.53, 2.14]             [0.58, 4.97]            [0.49, 1.52]
F-stat, first stage                                      6.49                  13.32                   5.89                  12.10                     3.34                     6.22                      5.96                   11.59
F-stat, first stage, clustered                           4.68                  10.61                   4.42                  10.03                     3.20                      7.35                     4.79                   10.90

With continent dummies and latitude                      1.07                   0.80                  1.12                    0.84                     1.39                      1.04                     1.17                    0.88
AR confidence interval                                 [0.57,∞]             [0.48, 1.93]            [0.59,∞]              [0.49, 2.22]               [0.63,∞]                  [0.53,∞]                 [0.61,∞]              [0.52, 2.54]
AR confidence interval, clustered                      [0.44,∞]             [0.30, 1.53]            [0.47,∞]              [0.32, 1.64]               [0.58,∞]                [0.47, 4.79]               [0.49,∞]              [0.39, 1.72]
F-stat, first stage                                      3.71                   8.52                  3.36                   7.67                      1.87                     3.80                      3.37                   7.25
F-stat, first stage, clustered                           2.72                   7.74                  2.52                    7.38                     1.57                      4.25                     2.66                    7.83

With percent of European descent in 1975                 0.92                   0.71                   0.99                   0.77                      1.23                     1.03                     1.02                    0.79
AR confidence interval                               [0.55,2.31]            [0.44,1.27]            [0.59,2.92]            [0.48, 1.47]             [0.66, 30.44]             [0.58, 4.05]             [0.61, 3.13]            [0.49, 1.56]
AR confidence interval, clustered                    [0.54, 4.32]           [0.37,1.21]            [0.57, 9.08]           [0.42, 1.42]                [0.66,∞]               [0.56, 6.22]             [0.58, 9.67]            [0.44, 1.45]
F-stat, first stage                                      8.67                  15.32                   7.45                  13.27                      4.17                    6.12                      7.19                   12.38
F-stat, first stage, clustered                           4.92                  12.92                   4.20                  10.60                      2.61                     4.44                     4.17                   10.30

With malaria                                             0.67                  0.52                    0.74                    0.56                    2.03                      1.08                     0.79                     0.61
AR confidence interval                               [0.29,2.93]            [0.27,0.95]           [0.32,10.24]             [0.29,1.09]               [0.54,∞]                  [0.45,∞]               [0.37,8.59]              [0.33,1.21]
AR confidence interval, clustered                      [0.25,∞]             [0.23,0.89]              [0.28,∞]              [0.25,1.06]               [0.62,∞]                  [0.48,∞]                 [0.34,∞]               [0.30,1.12]
F-stat, first stage                                      5.38                 13.95                   4.27                   11.90                     0.46                      2.45                     4.41                   11.43
F-stat, first stage, clustered                           3.11                 11.45                   2.50                    9.18                     0.41                      2.68                     2.77                    10.00


2SLS regressions, with one observation per country, corresponding to first-stage regressions in Table 1A. Coefficients and standard errors for covariates, where included, are not reported to save space. All variables are from AJR (2001).
Dependent variable is log GDP per capita in 1995. Right-hand side variable is protection against expropriation, instrumented by log settler mortality. Column 1 uses original settler mortality series from AJR (2001) as the instrument.
Column 2 uses original settler mortality series, capped at 250 per 1,000 per annum. Column 3 uses alternative settler mortality series, benchmarking Latin American data to Jamaica/Dominican Republic. Column 4 uses same series as
column 3, but capped at 250 per 1,000. Column 5 uses mortality data directly from naval stations, without benchmarking. Column 6 uses same series as column 5, but capped at 250 per 1,000. Column 7 uses mortality data from naval
stations, with life insurance data, without benchmarking. Column 8 uses same series as column 7, but capped at 250 per 1,000.
                                    Table 2A
             First Stage Regressions, Using Albouy Preferred Sample
                                          Alternative samples for settler mortality, using original AJR mortality series

                                                                                                              Original AJR
                                                                                             Original AJR    series, without
                                                                Albouy      Albouy Sample series, without      contested
                                                 Albouy        Sample of     of 28, without   contested      observations in
                                               Sample of      28, mortality     Gambia,     observations in West and Central
                                Albouy         28, without     capped at        mortality     West and      Africa, mortality
                              Sample of 28      Gambia            250       capped at 250 Central Africa     capped at 250

                                  (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)               (5)                   (6)
                                                 Dependent variable is protection against risk of expropriation
No covariates                     -0.59            -0.74        -0.95            -1.06              -0.66              -1.02
(standard error)                 (0.19)           (0.15)       (0.24)           (0.22)             (0.18)             (0.18)
(clustered standard error)       (0.19)           (0.15)       (0.24)           (0.22)             (0.19)             (0.19)
Number of clusters                 28               27           28               27                 34                 34
Number of observations             28               27           28               27                 53                 53

With latitude                     -0.42            -0.59          -0.74            -0.88            -0.57              -0.94
(standard error)                 (0.22)           (0.15)         (0.29)           (0.26)           (0.19)             (0.21)
(clustered standard error)       (0.22)           (0.15)         (0.29)           (0.26)           (0.20)             (0.21)
Number of clusters                 28               27             28               27               34                 34
Number of observations             28               27             28               27               53                 53

Without neo-Europes              -0.32            -0.48          -0.52            -0.66            -0.43                -0.7
(standard error)                 (0.19)           (0.12)         (0.23)           (0.20)           (0.18)              (0.21)
(clustered standard error)       (0.19)           (0.12)         (0.23)           (0.20)           (0.18)              (0.22)
Number of clusters                 25               24             25               24               31                  31
Number of observations             25               24             25               24               49                  49

Without Africa                    -1.00            -1.00          -1.00            -1.00            -1.21               -1.21
(standard error)                 (0.28)           (0.28)         (0.28)           (0.28)           (0.20)              (0.20)
(clustered standard error)       (0.28)           (0.28)         (0.28)           (0.28)           (0.18)              (0.18)
Number of clusters                 13               13             13               13               19                  19
Number of observations             13               13             13               13               37                  37

With continent dummies            -0.31            -0.48          -0.63            -0.75            -0.5               -0.89
(standard error)                 (0.20)           (0.13)         (0.22)           (0.18)           (0.21)             (0.26)
(clustered standard error)       (0.20)           (0.13)         (0.22)           (0.18)           (0.21)             (0.26)
Number of clusters                 28               27             28               27               34                 34
Number of observations             28               27             28               27               53                 53

With continent dummies and        -0.22            -0.4           -0.52            -0.66            -0.41              -0.78
(standard error)                 (0.23)           (0.15)         (0.27)           (0.22)           (0.21)             (0.27)
(clustered standard error)       (0.23)           (0.15)         (0.27)           (0.22)           (0.22)             (0.27)
Number of clusters                 28               27             28               27               34                 34
Number of observations             28               27             28               27               53                 53

With percent of European de       -0.29            -0.46          -0.49            -0.64            -0.48              -0.81
(standard error)                 (0.21)           (0.15)         (0.29)           (0.25)           (0.19)             (0.20)
(clustered standard error)       (0.21)           (0.15)         (0.29)           (0.25)           (0.20)             (0.21)
Number of clusters                 28               27             28               27               34                 34
Number of observations             28               27             28               27               53                 53

With malaria                      -0.28            -0.44          -0.65            -0.7             -0.49              -0.87
(standard error)                 (0.26)           (0.22)         (0.32)           (0.30)           (0.22)             (0.21)
(clustered standard error)       (0.26)           (0.22)         (0.32)           (0.30)           (0.24)             (0.23)
Number of clusters                 27               26             27               26               33                 33
Number of observations             27               26             27               26               51                 51

OLS regressions, with one observation per country. Coefficients and standard errors for covariates, where included, are not
reported to save space. Variables are from AJR (2001). Dependent variable is protection against risk of expropriation;
independent variable is log settler mortality. Column 1 uses original settler mortality series from AJR (2001) as independent
variable but Albouy’s preferred sample of 28 countries. Column 2 is the same as column 1, but drops Gambia. Column 3 is
the same as column 1, but caps mortality at 250 per 1,000 per annum. Column 4 is the same as column 1, but drops Gambia
and caps mortality at 250. Column 5 is the same as column 1, but drops contested observations for West and Central Africa.
Column 6 is the same as column 5, but caps mortality at 250.
                                                                                                              Table 2B
                                                                  Second Stage Regressions, Using Albouy Preferred Sample
                                                                                                        Alternative samples for settler mortality, using original AJR mortality series
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Original AJR series, without
                                                                                                                                            Albouy Sample of 28, without          Original AJR series, without    contested observations in
                                                                                Albouy Sample of 28, without    Albouy Sample of 28,         Gambia, mortality capped at           contested observations in       West and Central Africa,
                                                    Albouy Sample of 28                   Gambia               mortality capped at 250                    250                       West and Central Africa        mortality capped at 250
                                                            (1)                              (2)                           (3)                             (4)                                (5)                             (6)
                                                                                                             Dependent variable is protection against risk of expropriation
No covariates                                                0.87                           0.74                          0.83                            0.75                                0.87                           0.77
AR confidence set                                        [0.57, 1.64]                   [0.50, 1.12]                 [0.56, 1.40]                     [0.52,1.13]                         [0.63,1.32]                    [0.56,1.08]
AR confidence set, clustered                             [0.60, 1.82]                   [0.55, 1.02]                 [0.59, 1.35]                     [0.56,1.07]                         [0.62,1.62]                    [0.57,1.12]
F-stat, first stage                                         12.47                          22.31                         17.13                           24.38                               22.55                          33.34
F-stat, first stage, clustered                               9.24                          24.16                         15.63                           24.28                               12.30                          29.22

With latitude                                                0.82                            0.63                            0.73                             0.62                            0.89                           0.75
AR confidence set                                        [0.40, 5.79]                    [0.32, 1.31]                    [0.35, 2.54]                     [0.30,1.31]                     [0.59,1.56]                    [0.51,1.17]
AR confidence set, clustered                            [0.42, 19.00]                    [0.35, 0.97]                    [0.30, 1.63]                     [0.24,0.98]                     [0.60,2.09]                    [0.51,1.14]
F-stat, first stage                                          4.93                           10.85                            6.44                            10.26                           14.96                          22.56
F-stat, first stage, clustered                               3.62                           14.42                            6.50                            11.84                            8.02                          19.49

Without neo-Europes                                          1.15                            0.84                            1.13                             0.91                            1.15                           1.00
AR confidence set                                         [0.52, ∞]                      [0.41, 1.98]                     [ 0.51, ∞]                      [0.43,2.83]                     [0.71,2.87]                    [0.61,2.03]
AR confidence set, clustered                              [ 0.52, ∞]                     [0.44, 1.51]                    [0.51, 5.61]                     [0.42,1.90]                     [0.68,5.50]                    [0.60,2.14]
F-stat, first stage                                          3.82                            9.90                            3.98                             7.29                            8.78                          11.50
F-stat, first stage, clustered                               3.00                           16.18                            4.99                            10.76                            5.29                           9.90

Without Africa                                               0.90                            0.90                           0.90                              0.90                            0.61                           0.61
AR confidence set                                        [0.52, 2.09]                    [0.52, 2.09]                   [0.52, 2.09]                      [0.52,2.09]                     [0.41,0.87]                    [0.41,0.87]
AR confidence set, clustered                             [0.63, 1.61]                    [0.63, 1.61]                   [0.63, 1.61]                      [0.63,1.61]                     [0.45,0.85]                    [0.45,0.85]
F-stat, first stage                                          9.87                            9.87                           9.87                              9.87                           30.62                          30.62
F-stat, first stage, clustered                              12.30                           12.30                          12.30                             12.30                           45.98                          45.98

With continent dummies                                       1.12                            0.81                            0.90                             0.77                            0.93                           0.81
AR confidence set                                         [ 0.50, ∞]                     [0.41, 2.15]                    [0.44, 4.74]                     [0.40,1.75]                     [0.59,2.26]                    [0.55,1.40]
AR confidence set, clustered                               0.47, ∞]                      [0.37, 1.38]                    [0.39, 1.93]                     [0.34,1.27]                     [0.54,3.04]                    [0.51,1.46]
F-stat, first stage                                          2.85                            8.57                            5.65                            10.89                            8.30                          15.02
F-stat, first stage, clustered                               2.48                           12.83                            8.06                            16.83                            5.61                          11.77

With continent dummies and latitude                          1.25                            0.77                            0.87                             0.70                             0.99                          0.83
AR confidence set                                         [0.37, ∞]                      [0.27, 5.26]                     [ 0.28, ∞]                      [0.24,2.96]                      [0.56,5.99]                   [0.52,1.80]
AR confidence set, clustered                              [0.12, ∞]                      [0.09, 1.71]                   [-0.35, 4.35]                    [-0.13,1.35]                     [0.45,20.44]                   [0.42,1.56]
F-stat, first stage                                          1.24                            5.12                            2.82                             6.17                             5.02                          9.89
F-stat, first stage, clustered                               0.91                            7.06                            3.61                             9.05                             3.57                          8.61

With percent of European descent in 1975                     0.94                            0.65                            0.82                             0.65                            0.67                           0.60
AR confidence set                                         [ 0.33, ∞]                     [0.24, 2.07]                      0.22, ∞]                       [0.16,3.38]                     [0.40,1.17]                    [0.36,0.94]
AR confidence set, clustered                              [ 0.33, ∞]                     [0.25, 1.36]                    [ -0.02, ∞]                     [-0.03,1.71]                     [0.33,1.12]                    [0.30,0.90]
F-stat, first stage                                          2.53                            7.20                            2.80                             5.32                           16.42                          22.69
F-stat, first stage, clustered                               1.83                            9.78                            2.99                             6.27                           14.80                          23.30

With malaria                                                 0.71                             0.65                           0.72                             0.67                            0.56                           0.54
AR confidence set                                          [-∞, ∞]                         [-0.09, ∞]                     [0.21, ∞]                       [0.19,2.41]                     [0.32,0.97]                    [0.31,0.87]
AR confidence set, clustered                               [-∞, ∞]                       [-0.17,3.80]                    [0.04,3.56]                      [0.07,1.79]                     [0.32,0.91]                    [0.31,0.83]
F-stat, first stage                                          1.24                             3.92                           3.95                             6.12                           16.72                          22.50
F-stat, first stage, clustered                               1.09                             3.93                           4.07                             5.39                           14.62                          19.06

2SLS regressions, with one observation per country, corresponding to first-stage regressions in Table 2A. Coefficients and standard errors for covariates, where included, are not reported to save space. Variables are from AJR (2001).
Dependent variable is log GDP per capita in 1995. Right-hand side variable is protection against expropriation, instrumented by log settler mortality. Column 1 uses original settler mortality series from AJR (2001) as the instrument but
Albouy’s preferred sample of 28 countries. Column 2 is the same as column 1, but drops Gambia. Column 3 is the same as column 1, but caps mortality at 250 per 1,000 per annum. Column 4 is the same as column 1, but drops
Gambia and caps mortality at 250. Column 5 is the same as column 1, but drops contested observations for West and Central Africa. Column 6 is the same as column 5, but caps mortality at 250.
                                                                                                              Table 3A
                                                    First Stage Regressions, With Corrections to Albouy's "Campaign Dummy"
                                                                    Alternative codings for campaign dummy, using original AJR mortality series
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    AJR mortality series,
                                                                                                                         AJR mortality series,                      AJR mortality series,                          capped at 250; Albouy
                                                                                                                             capped at 250;          AJR mortality    capped at 250;             AJR mortality     sample of 28; extended
                                                                      AJR mortality series,       AJR mortality series,  minimal correction to series, extended     extended correction          series, Albouy     correction to Albouy
                                     AJR mortality series, Albouy    capped at 250; Albouy        minimal correction to     Albouy campaign correction to Albouy to Albouy campaign              sample of 28;       campaign dummy;
                                         campaign dummy                campaign dummy           Albouy campaign dummy            dummy             campaign dummy         dummy                campaign dummy        dropping Gambia
                                                 (1)                          (2)                          (3)                      (4)                    (5)               (6)                       (7)                   (8)
                                                                                                             Dependent variable is protection against expropriation
No covariates                                   -0.45                         -0.77                      -0.52                     -0.84                  -0.6             -0.91                     -0.35                  -0.96
(standard error)                                (0.17)                        (0.21)                     (0.17)                   (0.19)                 (0.15)            (0.17)                    (0.22)                 (0.26)
(clustered standard error)                      (0.18)                        (0.21)                     (0.18)                   (0.19)                 (0.18)            (0.18)                    (0.22)                 (0.26)
Number of clusters                                36                            36                         36                       36                     36                36                        28                     27
Number of observations                            64                            64                         64                       64                     64                64                        28                     27

With latitude                                   -0.39                         -0.72                       -0.45                    -0.79                 -0.53                 -0.86                 -0.21                  -0.86
(standard error)                                (0.19)                        (0.23)                      (0.18)                   (0.21)                (0.17)                (0.19)                (0.25)                 (0.27)
(clustered standard error)                      (0.20)                        (0.23)                      (0.20)                   (0.21)                (0.19)                (0.19)                (0.25)                 (0.27)
Number of clusters                                36                            36                          36                       36                    36                    36                    28                     27
Number of observations                            64                            64                          64                       64                    64                    64                    28                     27

Without neo-Europes                             -0.31                         -0.54                       -0.33                    -0.57                 -0.39                 -0.63                 -0.18                   -0.5
(standard error)                                (0.16)                        (0.22)                      (0.16)                   (0.20)                (0.16)                (0.20)                (0.22)                 (0.25)
(clustered standard error)                      (0.17)                        (0.20)                      (0.17)                   (0.19)                (0.17)                (0.20)                (0.22)                 (0.25)
Number of clusters                                33                            33                          33                       33                    33                    33                    25                     24
Number of observations                            60                            60                          60                       60                    60                    60                    25                     24

Without Africa                                  -1.11                         -1.11                       -1.16                    -1.16                 -1.22                 -1.22                 -0.88                  -0.98
(standard error)                                (0.28)                        (0.28)                      (0.22)                   (0.22)                (0.20)                (0.20)                (0.32)                 (0.29)
(clustered standard error)                      (0.23)                        (0.23)                      (0.19)                   (0.19)                (0.17)                (0.17)                (0.32)                 (0.29)
Number of clusters                                19                            19                          19                       19                    19                    19                    13                     13
Number of observations                            37                            37                          37                       37                    37                    37                    13                     13

With continent dummies                          -0.37                          -0.7                       -0.41                    -0.74                 -0.46                  -0.8                 -0.25                  -0.73
(standard error)                                (0.20)                        (0.27)                      (0.20)                   (0.26)                (0.20)                (0.26)                (0.23)                 (0.20)
(clustered standard error)                      (0.22)                        (0.27)                      (0.21)                   (0.25)                (0.21)                (0.25)                (0.23)                 (0.20)
Number of clusters                                36                            36                          36                       36                    36                    36                    28                     27
Number of observations                            64                            64                          64                       64                    64                    64                    28                     27

With continent dummies and
latitude                                         -0.3                         -0.63                       -0.34                    -0.67                 -0.38                 -0.72                 -0.14                  -0.66
(standard error)                                (0.22)                        (0.29)                      (0.21)                   (0.28)                (0.20)                (0.26)                (0.26)                 (0.23)
(clustered standard error)                      (0.23)                        (0.29)                      (0.22)                   (0.27)                (0.21)                (0.26)                (0.26)                 (0.23)
Number of clusters                                36                            36                          36                       36                    36                    36                    28                     27
Number of observations                            64                            64                          64                       64                    64                    64                    28                     27

With percent of European descent
in 1975                                         -0.27                         -0.55                       -0.34                    -0.63                 -0.42                 -0.71                  -0.2                  -0.61
(standard error)                                (0.17)                        (0.21)                      (0.17)                   (0.20)                (0.17)                (0.19)                (0.23)                 (0.27)
(clustered standard error)                      (0.19)                        (0.22)                      (0.19)                   (0.20)                (0.19)                (0.20)                (0.23)                 (0.27)
Number of clusters                                36                            36                          36                       36                    36                    36                    28                     27
Number of observations                            64                            64                          64                       64                    64                    64                    28                     27

With malaria                                    -0.23                         -0.62                       -0.35                    -0.73                 -0.47                 -0.83                  -0.1                   -0.6
(standard error)                                (0.22)                        (0.24)                      (0.23)                   (0.23)                (0.22)                (0.22)                (0.28)                 (0.33)
(clustered standard error)                      (0.24)                        (0.26)                      (0.25)                   (0.25)                (0.24)                (0.24)                (0.28)                 (0.33)
Number of clusters                                35                            35                          35                       35                    35                    35                    27                     26
Number of observations                            62                            62                          62                       62                    62                    62                    27                     26

OLS regressions, with one observation per country. Coefficients and standard errors for covariates, where included, are not reported to save space. Variables are from AJR (2001). Dependent variable is protection against risk of
expropriation; independent variable is log settler mortality; all regressions include Albouy’s “slave labor” dummy. Column 1 uses original settler mortality series from AJR (2001) as independent variable but includes Albouy’s campaign
dummy. Column 2 is the same as column 1, but caps mortality at 250 per 1,000 per annum. Column 3 is the same as column 1 but uses our minimal correction of the campaign dummy. Column 4 is the same as column 3 but caps
mortality at 250. Column 5 is the same as column 1 but uses our extended correction of the campaign dummy. Column 6 is the same as column 5, but caps mortality at 250. Column 7 is the same as column 1 but uses Albouy’s
preferred sample of 28. Column 8 is the same as column 7, but uses our extended correction of the campaign dummy, drops Gambia, and caps mortality at 250.
                                                                                 Table 3B
                                                First Stage Regressions, With Corrections to Albouy's "Campaign Dummy"
                                                           Alternative codings for campaign dummy, using original AJR mortality series

                                                                                                                                                                                                             AJR mortality series,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                capped at 250;
                                                                                                              AJR mortality                                                                                    Albouy preferred
                                                                                     AJR mortality series, series, capped at                                AJR mortality series,                             sample; extended
                                                               AJR mortality series, minimal correction to    250; minimal        AJR mortality series,   capped at 250; extended     AJR mortality series,  correction to Albouy
                                        AJR mortality series, capped at 250; Albouy Albouy campaign correction to Albouy extended correction to             correction to Albouy    Albouy preferred sample; campaign dummy;
                                      Albouy campaign dummy     campaign dummy             dummy            campaign dummy Albouy campaign dummy             campaign dummy            campaign dummy         dropping Gambia
                                                 (1)                    (2)                   (3)                   (4)                    (5)                       (6)                       (7)                    (8)
                                                                                                           Dependent variable is log GDP per capita in 1995
No covariates                                   1.09                   0.86                  1.01                  0.84                   0.93                      0.80                       1.02                  0.83
AR confidence set                           [0.69, 2.61]           [0.56, 1.54]          [0.69, 1.85]          [0.58, 1.31]           [0.67, 1.45]              [0.59, 1.16]               [ 0.42, ∞]             [0.53,1.44]
AR confidence set, clustered                [0.65, 3.96]           [0.51, 1.54]          [0.65, 2.52]          [0.56, 1.35]           [0.65, 1.78]              [0.59, 1.18]                [ 0.44, ∞]            [0.58,1.34]
F-stat, first stage                             9.21                  15.17                 13.89                 21.65                  20.91                     30.53                       3.11                  15.17
F-stat, first stage, clustered                   5.9                  13.78                  8.02                  19.2                  11.49                     26.27                       2.57                  13.17

With latitude                                    1.15                    0.85                  1.06                0.82                   0.96                     0.79                        0.9                   0.66
AR confidence set                            [0.66, 4.87]            [0.50, 1.81]          [0.66, 2.64]        [0.52, 1.48]           [0.64, 1.76]             [0.54, 1.25]                 [-∞, ∞]               [0.33,1.49]
AR confidence set, clustered                [0.60, 34.78]            [0.41, 1.69]          [0.62, 4.35]        [0.48, 1.41]           [0.64, 2.30]             [0.55, 1.18]                 [-∞, ∞]               [0.28,1.08]
F-stat, first stage                              5.91                   10.52                  8.69               14.61                  13.81                    21.09                       0.89                   8.94
F-stat, first stage, clustered                   3.67                    9.43                  5.31               13.71                   7.82                     19.7                       0.67                   9.83

Without neo-Europes                              1.45                    1.13                   1.4                1.12                   1.24                     1.03                        1.51                    1.2
AR confidence set                           [0.78, 22.39]            [0.62, 4.15]          [0.79, 7.44]        [0.65, 3.15]           [0.76, 3.42]             [0.64, 2.20]                [ 0.27, ∞]              [0.46, ∞]
AR confidence set, clustered                  [ 0.75, ∞]             [0.56, 3.07]         [0.77, 20.94]        [0.62, 2.50]           [0.74, 5.99]             [0.64, 2.10]                 [ 0.26 ∞]             [0.48,6.67]
F-stat, first stage                              4.34                    6.39                  5.44                7.83                   8.09                      11                         0.93                   3.28
F-stat, first stage, clustered                   3.17                    6.89                  3.94                8.57                   5.11                    10.28                        0.67                   4.11

Without Africa                                  0.66                     0.66                  0.64                0.64                   0.61                     0.61                        0.92                  0.96
AR confidence set                           [0.41, 1.08]             [0.41, 1.08]          [0.42, 0.96]        [0.42, 0.96]           [0.41, 0.88]             [0.41, 0.88]               [0.39, 14.18]           [0.53,2.93]
AR confidence set, clustered                [0.45, 1.02]             [0.45, 1.02]          [0.45, 0.93]        [0.45, 0.93]           [0.44, 0.84]             [0.44, 0.84]                [0.54, 2.03]           [0.61,1.78]
F-stat, first stage                            17.88                    17.88                  24.5                24.5                  30.42                    30.42                        4.65                  7.55
F-stat, first stage, clustered                 23.03                    23.03                 37.47               37.47                   51.1                     51.1                        7.52                  11.86

With continent dummies                          1.06                     0.81                  1.03                0.82                   0.96                     0.79                       1.23                   0.81
AR confidence set                           [0.58, 20.72]            [0.48, 2.00]          [0.60, 5.34]        [0.51, 1.74]           [0.59, 2.86]             [0.51, 1.47]                 [0.40, ∞]             [0.41,2.11]
AR confidence set, clustered                  [0.51, ∞]              [0.37, 1.77]          [0.51, 8.77]        [0.41, 1.61]           [0.54, 3.68]             [0.45, 1.46]                 [0.29, ∞]             [0.37,1.38]
F-stat, first stage                              4.2                     8.35                  5.29               10.09                   7.08                    12.67                       1.48                   9.06
F-stat, first stage, clustered                  2.98                     6.82                  3.96                8.63                   5.04                     9.88                       1.21                   12.96

With continent dummies and latitude             1.19                     0.83                  1.15                0.84                   1.05                     0.8                        1.44                    0.68
AR confidence set                             [0.56, ∞]              [0.44, 3.52]           [0.58, ∞]          [0.47, 2.60]          [0.57, 32.57]             [0.47, 1.96]                 [-∞, ∞]                [0.22,3.51]
AR confidence set, clustered                  [0.37, ∞]              [0.14, 2.20]            [0.42, ∞]         [0.24, 1.81]             [0.48, ∞]              [0.31, 1.48]                 [-∞, ∞]               [-0.10,1.28]
F-stat, first stage                             2.45                     5.64                  3.06                6.75                   4.09                     8.33                       0.37                    5.62
F-stat, first stage, clustered                  1.73                     4.81                  2.31                6.13                   3.19                     7.64                       0.29                     8.3

With percent of European descent in
1975                                            1.18                     0.73                  1.03                0.72                   0.91                     0.7                         1.13                   0.69
AR confidence set                            [ 0.54, ∞]              [0.31, 2.88]          [0.55, 6.82]        [0.38, 1.69]           [0.54, 2.37]             [0.41, 1.30]                [ 0.13, ∞]             [0.17,17.78]
AR confidence set, clustered                 [ 0.54, ∞]              [0.13, 1.95]            [0.50, ∞]         [0.21, 1.39]           [0.52, 3.78]             [0.32, 1.18]                  [-∞, ∞]              [-0.01,1.90]
F-stat, first stage                             2.88                     6.01                  5.02                9.35                   8.49                    13.94                        1.01                   4.22
F-stat, first stage, clustered                  2.01                     6.19                  3.38                9.85                   5.02                    12.76                        0.78                   5.05

With malaria                                    0.84                      0.48                 0.75                0.52                   0.68                      0.53                      1.17                     0.8
AR confidence set                             [-∞, ∞]                 [0.00,1.91]           [0.21, ∞]          [0.20,1.19]            [0.31,2.44]               [0.27,0.97]                 [-∞, ∞]                [0.21,9.14]
AR confidence set, clustered                  [-∞, ∞]                [-0.41,1.08]            [-∞, ∞]           [0.07,0.98]           [0.27,11.30]               [0.23,0.85]                 [-∞, ∞]               [0.09,12.90]
F-stat, first stage                             1.15                      5.48                 2.98                9.09                   5.97                     13.67                      0.14                    4.46
F-stat, first stage, clustered                  0.95                      5.75                 2.00                8.54                   3.69                     12.01                      0.13                    3.28

 2SLS regressions, with one observation per country, corresponding to first-stage regressions in Table 3A. Coefficients and standard errors for covariates, where included, are not reported to save
space. Variables are from AJR (2001). Dependent variable is log GDP per capita in 1995. Right-hand side variable is protection against expropriation, instrumented by log settler mortality.
Column 1 uses original settler mortality series from AJR (2001) as the instrument but includes Albouy’s campaign dummy. Column 2 is the same as column 1, but caps mortality at 250 per 1,000
per annum. Column 3 is the same as column 1 but uses our minimal correction of the campaign dummy. Column 4 is the same as column 3 but caps mortality at 250. Column 5 is the same as
column 1 but uses our extended correction of the campaign dummy. Column 6 is the same as column 5, but caps mortality at 250. Column 7 is the same as column 1 but uses Albouy’s
preferred sample of 28. Column 8 is the same as column 7, but uses our extended correction of the campaign dummy, drops Gambia, and caps mortality at 250.
                                                    Figure 1A: Gambia As Outlier in Albouy’s Preferred Sample of 28 (Without Controls)
                     10




                                                    USA

                                        NZL           CAN




                                                                                 IND                                                                                              GMB
                     8




                                                          MYS


                                                                                           MEX                           IDN
Expropriation Risk




                                                                                                   TTO
                                                      MLT
                                                                                                                 JAM

                                                     ZAF
                                                                                          EGY
                                                                                               DZA                VNM
                                                                                         TUN
                                                                                                                                                                GHA
                                                                                                                   KEN
                                                                                           LKA
                     6




                                                                                                                        SEN
                                                                                                                                                        SLE
                                                                ETH
                                                                                                                                                                                        NGA


                                                                                             BGD



                                                                                                                                      COG

                                                                                                                                                          MDG



                                                                                                     SDN                                                                                      MLI
                     4




                              2                                                   4                                                               6                                           8
                                                                                                       Log Settler Mortality


                                   Figure 1B: Gambia As Outlier in Albouy’s Preferred Sample of 28 (With Continent Dummies and Latitude)



                                                                                                                                                                      GMB
                     2




                                                     MYS                         USA
                                                                                                     NZL
Residual Expropriation Risk




                                                                                                           IND
                                                                                                                                IDN

                                                                      KEN                                                              GHA
                                              ZAF                                  EGY
                                                                                                                   CAN
                                                                                         DZA
                                  ETH                                                          SEN                         SLE
    0




                                                                                           TUN
                                                                                                                                                                            NGA
                                                                                                     TTO


                                                                                       COG                       MEX                        VNM
                                                                                                   LKA
                                                                                                                               JAM


                                                                                                                  MLT



                                                                                                                                                  MDG

                                                                           SDN
                                                                                                                                                                                        MLI
                     −2




                                                                                                                               BGD

                                              −2                      −1                               0                                     1                          2                     3
                                                                                                 Residual Log Settler Mortality
