                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  GLOBAL RETAIL LENDING IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE US FINANCIAL CRISIS:
         DISTINGUISHING BETWEEN SUPPLY AND DEMAND EFFECTS

                                               Manju Puri
                                              Jörg Rocholl
                                             Sascha Steffen

                                         Working Paper 16967
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16967


Forthcoming in Journal  NATIONAL
                          of Financial BUREAU
                                        Economics.OF WeECONOMIC        RESEARCH Hans Degryse, Enrica
                                                         thank Sanvi Avouyi-Dovi,
                                       1050   Massachusetts  Avenue
Detragiache, Valeriya Dinger, Andrew Ellul, Mark Flannery, Nils Friewald, Luigi Guiso, Andreas
Hackethal, Victoria Ivashina, Michael Cambridge,
                                          Kötter, HamidMA   02138 José-Luis Peydro, Harry Schmidt, Bill
                                                          Mehran,
                                                 April 2011
Schwert (the editor), Berk Sensoy, David Smith (the referee), Phil Strahan, Marcel Tyrell, Vikrant
Vig, Mark Wahrenburg, as well as seminar participants at the 2010 Western Finance Association (WFA)
meetings, 2010 Financial Intermediation Research Society (FIRS) conference, 2010 Interdisciplinary
Center (IDC) Herzliya conference, 2010 American Finance Association (AFA) meetings, 2009 UniCredit
conference in Rome, 2009 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation's Center for Financial Research
(FDIC CFR) workshop, second Centre for Economic Policy Research and the European Banking Center
and the University of Antwerp (CEPR-EBC-UA) Conference on Competition in Banking Markets,
2009 European Central Bank and the Center for Financial Studies (ECB-CFS) Research Network Conference,
2009 CEPR meetings in Gerzensee, Business Models in Banking Conference at Bocconi, FDIC Ninth
Annual Bank Research Conference, Recent Developments in Consumer Credit and Payments Conference
at Federal Reserve Bank Philadelphia, German Finance Association annual meeting, Bruegel, Deutsche
Bundesbank, Duke University, ESMT, HEC Lausanne, Tilburg University, University of Amsterdam,
University of Mannheim, and University of North Carolina. We are grateful to the FDIC for funding
and to the German Savings Bank Association for access to data. Jörg Rocholl acknowledges support
from the Peter-Curtius Foundation. Sascha Steffen acknowledges support from Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(Grant Ste 1836/1-1). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Manju Puri, Jörg Rocholl, and Sascha Steffen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Global retail lending in the aftermath of the US financial crisis: Distinguishing between supply
and demand effects
Manju Puri, Jörg Rocholl, and Sascha Steffen
NBER Working Paper No. 16967
April 2011
JEL No. F34,G01,G21

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper examines the broader effects of the US financial crisis on global lending to retail customers.
In particular we examine retail bank lending in Germany using a unique data set of German savings
banks during the period 2006 through 2008 for which we have the universe of loan applications and
loans granted. Our experimental setting allows us to distinguish between savings banks affected by
the US financial crisis through their holdings in Landesbanken with substantial subprime exposure
and unaffected savings banks. The data enable us to distinguish between demand and supply side
effects of bank lending and find that the US financial crisis induced a contraction in the supply of retail
lending in Germany. While demand for loans goes down, it is not substantially different for the affected
and nonaffected banks. More important, we find evidence of a significant supply side effect in that
the affected banks reject substantially more loan applications than nonaffected banks. This result is
particularly strong for smaller and more liquidity-constrained banks as well as for mortgage as compared
with consumer loans. We also find that bank-depositor relationships help mitigate these supply side
effects.


Manju Puri                                           Sascha Steffen
Fuqua School of Business                             University of Mannheim
Duke University                                      L5, 2
1 Towerview Drive, Box 90120                         D-68131 Mannheim
Durham, NC 27708-0120                                steffen@bank.bwl.uni-mannheim.de
and NBER
mpuri@duke.edu

Jörg Rocholl
European School of Management and Technology
Schlossplatz 1
D-10178 Berlin
rocholl@esmt.org
1. Introduction


Krugman and Obstfeld (2008) argue that “one of the most pervasive features of today’s
commercial banking industry is that banking activities have become globalized” (p.600). An
important question is whether the growing trend in globalization in banking results in events
such as the US financial crisis affecting the real economy in other countries through the bank
lending channel. 1 In particular, it is important to understand the implications for retail customers
who are a major driver of economic spending and who have been the focus of much of
regulators’ attention in dealing with the current crisis.


The goal of this paper is thus to understand if subsequent to a substantial adverse credit shock
such as the US financial crisis there is an important global supply side effect for retail customers
even in banks that are mandated to serve only local customers and countries that are affected
only indirectly by the crisis.         The paper builds on the existing literature on nonmonetary
transmissions of shocks to the lending sector (e.g., Bernanke, 1983; and Bernanke and Blinder,
1988, 1992) and financial contagion (e.g., Allen and Gale, 2000) and asks the following
questions. Does the financial crisis affect lending practices in foreign countries with stable
economic performance? Do the worst-hit banks in these countries reduce their lending? Does the
domestic retail customer, e.g., the construction worker in Germany, face credit rationing from his
local bank as a result? Or is the decreased credit driven by reduced loan applications on the
demand side by consumers? If there are supply effects, which type of credit is affected most?
Do bank-depositor relations help mitigate these effects?                   These questions are particularly
important in the context of retail lending on which there has been relatively little research.


In this paper we address these questions by taking advantage of a unique database.                              Our
experimental setting is that of German savings banks, which provide an ideal laboratory to
analyze the question of supply side effects on retail customers. Savings banks in Germany are
particularly interesting to examine as they are mandated by law to serve only their respective
local customers and thus operate in precisely and narrowly defined geographic regions,

1
 Another event along these lines is the spring 2010 sovereign debt crisis in some European countries to which
European banks in particular have a significant exposure.

                                                                                                                  2
following a version of narrow banking. Total lending and corporate lending by savings banks in
Germany kept increasing even after the beginning of the financial crisis in 2007. However, retail
lending by savings banks showed a slow and continuous decrease. This raises the question of
whether the decline in retail credit is due to savings banks rejecting more loan applications. For
the savings banks we have the universe of loan applications made, along with the credit scoring.
We also know which loan applications were granted and which were turned down. Hence we are
able to directly distinguish between supply and demand effects. This differentiation is important
from a policy perspective. We are able to assess the implications of credit rationing for retail
customers on which there has been relatively little empirical work. Further, our data set also
allows us to speak to the kinds of loans that are affected most and also assess if relations help
mitigate credit rationing in such situations.


The German economy showed reasonable growth and a record-low level of unemployment until
2008. Furthermore, the German housing market did not experience the significant increase and
rapid decline in prices that occurred in US and other European markets and thus did not affect
German banks. At the same time, some of the German regional banks (Landesbanken) had large
exposure to the US subprime market and were substantially hit in the wake of the financial crisis.
These regional banks are in turn owned by the savings banks, which had to make guarantees or
equity injections into the affected Landesbanken. We thus have a natural experiment in which
we can distinguish between affected savings banks (that own Landesbanken affected by the
financial crisis) and other savings banks.


Our empirical strategy proceeds as follows. Using a comprehensive data set of consumer loans
for the July 2006 through June 2008 period, we examine whether banks that are affected at the
onset of the financial crisis reduce consumer lending more relative to nonaffected banks. We are
able to distinguish between demand and supply effects. While we find an overall decrease in
demand for consumer loans after the beginning of the financial crisis, we do not find significant
differences in demand as measured by applications to affected versus unaffected savings banks.
More important, we do, however, find evidence for a supply side effect on credit after the onset
of the financial crisis. In particular, we find the average rejection rate of affected savings banks
is significantly higher than of nonaffected savings banks. This result holds particularly true for

                                                                                                  3
smaller and more liquidity-constrained banks. Further, we find that this effect is stronger for
mortgage as compared with consumer loans. Finally, we consider the change in rejection rates at
affected banks after the beginning of the financial crisis by rating class. We find that the
rejection rates significantly increase for each rating class and, in particular, for the worst rating
classes, but the overall distribution of accepted loans does not change.


We next analyze whether bank-depositor relations affect supply side effects in lending. We are
interested in whether borrowers at affected banks who have a prior relationship with this bank
are more likely to receive a loan after the start of the financial crisis. We show a clear benefit to
bank-depositor relations resulting in significantly higher acceptance rates of loan applications by
customers in the absence of the financial crisis. Further, while affected banks significantly
reduce their acceptance rates during the financial crisis, we find relationships help mitigate the
supply side effects on bank lending. Customers with relationships with the affected bank are less
likely to have their loans rejected as compared with new customers. Our results are robust to
multiple specifications.


Our paper adds to the growing literature on the effects of the globalization of banking. Peek and
Rosengren (1997), Rajan and Zingales (2003), Berger, Dai, Ongena, and Smith (2003), and Mian
(2006) analyze the opportunities and limits of banks entering foreign countries and the effect of
foreign banks lending to corporate firms. Relatively little research has been done on the effect of
globalization on retail lending, and on the effect of small savings banks taking on international
exposure on the bank’s local borrowers in the bank’s home country. Our paper provides evidence
on this count. We show that borrowers are affected through a direct banking channel when their
local bank experiences an adverse shock even when the local bank itself practices narrow
banking but has exposure in a foreign country through its ownership structure. Our paper also
adds to the growing work that tries to understand the real effects of financial crises. Ivashina and
Scharfstein (2010) and Chari, Christiano, and Kehoe (2008) study bank lending to corporate
firms in the US after the onset of the financial crisis. Gan (2007) and Duchin, Ozbas, and
Sensoy (2010) show a decline in corporate investments as a consequence of tightened credit
supply. Our paper presents complementary evidence on the consumer, or retail side, using an
experimental setting that enables us to directly distinguish between the demand and supply

                                                                                                   4
effects of the financial crisis. Insofar as retail customers do not have access to other financing
sources in the same way as corporate customers who can also access public debt or equity
markets, if there is a supply side effect of bank lending, it is likely to be particularly important
for retail customers. We find evidence of supply side effect on retail lending after the beginning
of the financial crisis that is stronger for certain kinds of loans and mitigated by consumer-bank
relationships. More generally, our paper adds to the broader literature on credit rationing (Stiglitz
and Weiss, 1981).      While credit rationing has been studied for corporations, limited work
examines credit rationing for retail loans, especially in times of financial crises. Finally, our
paper also speaks to the literature on relationships. While bank-firm relations are generally
considered important (see Petersen and Rajan, 1994; and Berger and Udell, 1995), the
importance of bank relations for retail customers has received far less attention. Our evidence
suggests that bank-depositor relationships are important in mitigating credit rationing effects in
times of financial crises.


The rest of the paper is as follows. Section 2 gives the institutional background. Section 3
explains the empirical strategy and proposed methodology. Section 4 describes the data. Section
5 gives the empirical results. Section 6 does robustness checks. Section 7 concludes.




2. Institutional background and data


We start by describing the institutional background and the data that we use in our paper.


2.1. Savings banks as the owners and guarantors of Landesbanken
Savings banks and Landesbanken belong to the group of public banks, which form one of the
three pillars of the German banking system.         The other two pillars are private banks and
cooperative banks. There are 11 Landesbanken in Germany, which cover different federal states.
Table 1 provides an overview of the 11 Landesbanken and their respective owners. Each
Landesbank is owned by the federal state (Bundesland) in which it is located as well as the
savings banks associations in the state, which represent all savings banks in federal states. The
ownership of a Landesbank by a specific savings bank is thus solely determined by the regional

                                                                                                   5
location of this savings bank. A savings bank cannot become the owner of a different
Landesbank in any other state. Table 1 shows that savings banks own a substantial share of their
respective     Landesbanken.        For example,         the savings        banks     association      of Bavaria
(Sparkassenverband Bayern) holds 50% of Bayern LB, which is the Landesbank in Bavaria.


                                          INSERT TABLE 1 HERE


Savings banks are required to provide financial services for customers in their municipality,
which is referred to as the regional principle. This principle implies that savings banks are
allowed to generate business only in the municipality in which they operate, but not to expand to
other regions. In fact, consumer loan applications are rejected if the consumers live in a different
municipality. Savings banks have the explicit legal mandate not to maximize profits, but to
provide financial access to the community in which they operate and to customers without access
to financial services with other financial institutions. The business model of savings banks can
thus be regarded as a form of narrow banking in which deposits are collected from local
customers and then lent only to local customers, while no out-of-area activities are pursued. 2
Their traditional customers have thus been small and medium-size enterprises as well as retail
customers, and they require low hurdles for the opening of consumer accounts among all
German banks. In several federal states, savings banks are even legally required to open a current
account for every applicant on a deposit basis.


While Landesbanken differ from each other in their exact scope and scale, they have three
common features (Moody’s, 2004b). First, Landesbanken serve as the house bank to the federal
state in which they are located, e.g., by financing infrastructure projects. Second, Landesbanken
cooperate with the savings banks in their region, serve as their clearing bank, and support them
in wholesale business such as syndicated lending or underwriting. Third, Landesbanken act as
commercial banks.
2
  Kobayakawa and Nakamura (2000) survey and examine different proposals of narrow banking. They show that the
content of these proposals varies substantially although they all use the same expression. In particular, some authors
view narrow banks as institutions that invest only in safe assets, while other authors would also allow these banks to
lend to small firms. The definition we follow refers to the latter. Savings banks are allowed to give loans to retail
and mainly small corporate customers in their local community. At the same time, they are not allowed to pursue
investment banking activities so that their exposure to the US subprime markets stems only from their ownership of
the Landesbanken.

                                                                                                                    6
Debt by the German public bank sector, i.e., by savings banks and Landesbanken, was
traditionally formally guaranteed by the respective public owners. The European Commission
and the Federal Republic of Germany finally agreed in 2001 to abolish any formal guarantee by
public owners, as it was felt that this put privately owned banks at a disadvantage. Thus, any debt
obligation issued by German public banks after July 2005 is not publicly guaranteed in a formal
way. This is explicitly ruled in the federal states’ savings banks laws. Public ownership and
political motivations still play a substantial role in the Landesbanken. For example, politicians
chair the supervisory boards of the Landesbanken and are heavily involved in the appointment of
the management of the Landesbanken.


But even without a formal guarantee by their respective public owners, additional support
mechanisms exist for savings banks and Landesbanken. Moody’s (2004b) considers these
mechanisms as “giving . . . a wider mandate than a mere deposit protection scheme, thereby
protecting all liabilities of its members and not just deposits” (p.4). For the Landesbanken, in
principle, there are two support mechanisms, apart from the implicit government guarantee that
would prevent a systemically relevant bank from becoming insolvent. First, a Landesbank can
rely on horizontal support from the other Landesbanken. However, Moody’s (2004b) is skeptical
of this first type of support mechanism and argues that “we believe that both the willingness and
capacity of Landesbanken to support each other beyond the means already available in the fund
is questionable” (p.12). Likewise, Fitch (2007) does not incorporate the horizontal support
mechanism in its ratings. 3


Second, a Landesbank can rely on vertical support from the savings banks in its region. This
support mechanism can take two forms: an informal understanding or a formalized agreement.
These formalized agreements between Landesbanken and savings bank associations have been
created in eight of the 16 German federal states: Bavaria, Hesse, Lower Saxony, Mecklenburg-
Western Pomerania, North Rhine-Westphalia, Saxony, Saxony-Anhalt, and Thuringia, (see
Fitch, 2007). But even if no formal agreement between Landesbanken and savings banks exist,


3
  Fitch (2007) says: “Hence, for Landesbanks Fitch … does not factor horizontal support into its Landesbank
ratings” (p.8).

                                                                                                         7
the general view is that savings banks would rescue their respective Landesbank. Savings banks
are not only owners of Landesbanken, but they also profit from the wide range of wholesale
business offered by the Landesbank and are likely to want to protect the brand name. Thus,
Moody’s (2004b) argues that “savings banks would, for the foreseeable future, support
Landesbanken” (p.14) and incorporates this support mechanism as a rating floor for public
banks. Overall, risks in the business models of Landesbanken are considered to be larger than
risks in the narrow banking model of local savings banks, which profit from their strong presence
in retail banking.


In conclusion, Landesbanken can credibly rely on several support mechanisms. While they lack a
formal guarantee by their public owners for recently issued debt obligations, they can still rely on
this guarantee for debt obligations issued before 2001 as well as those issued between 2001 and
2005 and maturing before 2015. In addition, they can rely on formalized vertical support
mechanisms from their savings banks as one of their major owners.


2.2. The savings banks’ support for Landesbanken in the financial crisis
Germany’s economy experienced a growth of 2.5% in 2007 and expanded even for a substantial
part of 2008. Overall gross domestic product (GDP) growth for 2008 amounted to 1.3% and
became slightly negative only in the second quarter of 2008, while unemployment reached its
16-year low in October 2008. Furthermore and in contrast to many other countries, house prices
in Germany remained constant over the decade preceding the US crisis. In fact, according to the
OECD (2008), even in nominal terms German housing prices did not increase in any single year
since 1999. As a consequence, German banks have not been affected by a bubble and subsequent
burst in the national real estate market. However, German banks invested substantially in the US
and are thus affected by the financial crisis that started in the US subprime real estate market.
The German banks with the largest exposure in this segment in 2007 were IKB Deutsche
Industriebank, which was then partially publicly owned, and Sachsen LB, which was the smallest
of the German Landesbanken with total assets of €68 billion. The exposure for each of these two
banks amounted to more than €16 billion and thus even exceeded the exposure of significantly
larger banks such as Deutsche Bank and Commerzbank, according to Moody’s (2007). These
two banks are also the first German banks that announced massive problems and had to be

                                                                                                  8
rescued in the wake of the financial crisis. IKB was rescued in July 2007 by substantial
interventions of its owners.


Sachsen LB was the first Landesbank to be directly affected by the financial crisis. It was
rescued in August 2007 and finally sold to Landesbank Baden-Württemberg so that it ceased to
exist as a separate entity after April 2008. 4 As shown in Table 1, Sachsen LB was owned by SFG
(Sachsen-Finanzgruppe or Saxony Financial Group), which also directly owns eight savings
banks in Saxony. Sachsen LB also acted as the wholesale bank for the savings banks in Saxony,
and Moody’s (2006) argues that the savings banks in Saxony and Sachsen LB were
interdependent and closely linked to each other. 5 Thus, the savings banks in Saxony were also
directly affected by Sachsen LB’s massive exposure and its subsequent risk of bankruptcy. As a
consequence, the minister president of Saxony accepted the political responsibility for the losses
at Sachsen LB and resigned, reflecting the political nature of the decision processes in
Landesbanken.


Several other and substantially larger Landesbanken were exposed to risky assets in the summer
of 2007 as well, albeit to a lower level. Moody’s (2007) thus concludes in September 2007 that
“much of our concern and analysis has focused on German Landesbanks” (p.6), as the substantial
exposure in combination with “weak profitability and only adequate levels of capitalization”
would leave “some Landesbanks potentially vulnerable.” The next two Landesbanken that had
to announce massive losses were West LB (with total assets of €285 billion) in November 2007
and Bayern LB (with total assets of €353 billion) in February 2008. Both banks state in their
quarterly and annual reports that these losses stem directly from their investments in the US
subprime market. While West LB reported increased profitability and a positive earnings outlook
in its report for the second quarter of 2007, it stated for the third quarter of 2007 that the previous
outlook was not valid anymore as the subprime crisis had already resulted in write-downs of

4
  The owners of Sachsen LB had to give a guarantee of €2.75 billion to Landesbank Baden-Württemberg (LBBW) to
convince LBBW to buy Sachsen LB. This is the first-loss guarantee, i.e., the owners of Sachsen LB would have to
bear losses of up to €2.75 billion before LBBW would step in for higher losses. Given that the Sachsen LB owners
continue to be at risk, we treat the savings banks in Saxony as affected banks for the full period between August
2007 and June 2008.
5
   Moody’s (2006) argues: “In preparation for the abolition of support mechanisms in 2005, a strong liquidity
compensation procedure was set up within the SFG group, whereby the SFG savings banks provide Sachsen LB
with a binding liquidity line of more than €5 billion on a contractual basis” (p.5).

                                                                                                               9
€355 million. Similarly, Bayern LB recorded an operating profit of €1 billion for 2007, which
was more than offset by subprime losses of €1.9 billion. Both banks were heavily criticized for
revealing this information at a very late stage. In fact, parliamentary control groups later showed
that these Landesbanken and their owners knew about their massive subprime losses in the third
quarter of 2007 once the US subprime crisis hit. This is when the owners (savings banks) are
likely to have first seen potential consequences of these losses. 6


Landesbank Baden-Württemberg (LBBW) and HSH Nordbank were the final two Landesbanken
that publicly announced losses from the US subprime market. However, the news came in
November 2008 and thus after the end of the sample period. While both banks recorded profits
for the first half of 2008 and gave a positive outlook for the remainder of the year, they publicly
acknowledged losses after the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy and officially asked for government
help in November 2008. Subsequently, we discuss how the timing of these banks’ losses affects
our analysis. 7


West LB announced the creation of a bad bank with assets worth €23 billion on February 2,
2008, along with guarantees worth €5 billion by the owners. The first losses of up to €2 billion
are to be carried by all shareholders according to their ownership stakes, including the savings
banks in North Rhine-Westphalia. In particular, as shown in Table 1, the two savings banks
associations in North Rhine-Westphalia (Rheinischer Sparkassen- und Giroverband and
Westfälisch-Lippischer Sparkassen- und Giroverband) hold more than 50% of West LB.
Similarly, Bayern LB announced on February 13, 2008 that it would have to write off about €1.9
billion due to the subprime crisis. As a consequence, the Bavarian savings banks decided on
April 24, 2008, with a value-weighted majority of 96.9%, to issue a guarantee worth €2.4 billion
for the portfolio of asset-backed securities of Bayern LB. Similar to Sachsen LB, the losses in
Bayern LB had political consequences. The former chairman of the supervisory board, who was
also the Bavarian finance minister until 2007, accepted the responsibility and even apologized to
the public and to the employees for not being able to avoid the disastrous losses. Thus, the
savings banks in North Rhine-Westphalia and Bavaria were immediately affected by the losses

6
 See http://www.gruene-fraktion-bayern.de/cms/dokumente/dokbin/237/237520.schadensliste_bayernlb.pdf.
7
 As of September 2009, no other Landesbank is known to have asked for support from the German banking rescue
package.

                                                                                                         10
resulting from the subprime exposure of their respective Landesbanken and had to provide
vertical support. The resulting key question for the subsequent analysis is whether and to what
extent the affected savings banks react in their lending policies to these losses.


To shed some light on this question, Fig. 1 presents aggregate lending data for savings banks as
well as for the other banks in Germany, which are provided by the Deutsche Bundesbank, for the
period between the beginning of 2006 and the end of the second quarter of 2008. Panel A shows
lending figures for all three pillars of the German banking system (savings banks, cooperatives,
and private banks), and it shows that total lending keeps increasing even after the beginning of
the financial crisis in 2007. The same holds for total lending and corporate lending by the
savings banks, as shown in Panel B of Fig. 1. Both lines show a clear and consistent upward
trend even after August 2007. In contrast, retail lending by savings banks decreases over the
same time period. This raises the question of whether the decline is due to retail customers
asking for a lower amount of loans or to savings banks and affected savings banks rejecting more
loan applications.


                                    INSERT FIGURE 1 HERE


We address this question by analyzing individual loan applications in the sample period between
July 2006 and June 2008. Until the end of the sample period, Sachsen LB, West LB, and Bayern
LB were the only Landesbanken that showed losses from the subprime crisis. Fig. 2 illustrates
the geographical location and reach of these three Landesbanken and shows that these banks
operate in different regions in Germany. These regions are also heterogeneous in terms of their
economic development as measured by GDP per capita, unemployment rate, and industry
structure. While Saxony, which is the home of Sachsen LB and a former part of the German
Democratic Republic, is among the least wealthy German states, Bavaria, where Bayern LB is
headquartered, is among the wealthiest German states. North Rhine-Westphalia, which is the
domicile of West LB and the most populous German state, ranges in the middle. During the rest
of this paper, we exploit the exogenous variation as to which German savings banks are affected
by the subprime mortgage crisis that started in the US and analyze whether affected banks
behave differently from nonaffected banks.

                                                                                             11
                                    INSERT FIGURE 2 HERE




3. Empirical strategy
We analyze whether credit supply and demand is affected by the financial crisis. In particular,
we employ a difference-in-differences (DID) approach to analyze the following two questions.
First, does banks’ supply of credit change when these banks are affected by the financial crisis,
i.e., do they accept fewer loan applications? Second, does customers’ demand for credit change
in banks that are affected by the financial crisis, i.e., do customers apply less for loans or do they
request lower loan amounts? We address these two questions by exploiting the specific setting in
Germany, where savings banks represent a homogenous group of banks that operate according to
a model of narrow banking throughout the country and are the owners of their respective
regional Landesbanken. The identification for the empirical test is based on the fact that some
but not all of the Landesbanken and thus some but not all of the savings banks are affected by the
financial crisis.


The Landesbanken in Saxony, North Rhine-Westphalia, and Bavaria are the only Landesbanken
that publicly announced losses from the US subprime crisis until the end of our sample period in
June 2008. The savings banks in these regions are thus affected as well due to their respective
ownership. There are two ways in which the exact event date for these savings banks can be
defined. First, it can be defined based on the first public announcement of losses by their
respective Landesbanken, which is the third quarter of 2007 for Sachsen LB, the fourth quarter
of 2007 for West LB, and the first quarter of 2008 for Bayern LB. Second, it can be defined
based on the first private announcement of losses by their respective Landesbanken, as, for
example, in supervisory board meetings, which are attended by savings banks representatives. As
the previously described results of the parliamentary control groups show, Landesbanken and
their owners knew about the losses from the US subprime crisis up to six months before the
public announcement of these losses. The event date based on this criterion is thus the third
quarter of 2007 for all three Landesbanken. For the main empirical specification in this paper, we



                                                                                                   12
follow the second event definition, based on privately available information. In Section 6 we
show the results from the first event definition, based on publicly available information.


All the remaining Landesbanken do not show losses from the US subprime crisis during the
sample period. The savings banks in these regions are thus treated as nonaffected banks in the
empirical specification. This also includes the owning savings banks of LBBW and HSH
Nordbank as they show their first losses only in November 2008. However, to check the
robustness of our results, we include these savings banks as affected banks for the latter part of
the sample period (or alternatively leave them out) and rerun our empirical specifications. The
results, which are discussed in Section 6, do not change.


We thus use two sources of identifying variation: the time before and after the financial crisis as
well as the cross section of savings banks affected and not affected by the crisis based on the
privately available information on the subprime losses that their Landesbanken have incurred.
We estimate the following regression:


Yi,b,t = Ab + Bt + δ*Xi,b,t + (β1 * Affected * Post-August2007)                                    (1)
       + (β2 * Nonaffected * Post-August2007) + εi,b,t.


Yi,b,t takes a value of one if a loan application by customer i at bank b at time t is successful and
zero otherwise. A and B are fixed effects for banks and time, respectively, and Xi,b,t are individual
controls that capture each borrower’s risk as measured by the internal scoring. Affected is a
dummy variable that takes a value of one if a savings bank is an owner of a Landesbank that is
affected by the financial crisis, and Nonaffected is a dummy variable that takes a value of one if a
savings bank is an owner of a Landesbank that is not affected by the financial crisis. Post-
August2007 is a dummy variable that takes a value of one if the loan application is made after
August 2007, i.e., after the bailout of Sachsen LB and thus the beginning of the financial crisis,
and zero otherwise. Finally, εi,b,t is an error term. The key variables of interest are the interaction
terms Affected * Post-August2007 and Nonaffected * Post-August2007. We are interested in the
difference between these two variables to see whether loan acceptance rates differ after the
beginning of the financial crisis between savings banks that are affected by the crisis relative to

                                                                                                    13
those that are not affected. Our inference is thus based on a comparison of the coefficients β1 and
β2 . 8




4. Data description and summary statistics


We describe next in detail the data sources for our analyses and provide summary statistics.


4.1. Data sources
We obtain demand and supply data for the universe of consumer and mortgage loans by savings
banks in Germany. These data are provided by S-Rating, which is the rating subsidiary of the
German Savings Banks Association (DSGV), and present a unique opportunity to explore
changes in demand and supply in consumer lending after the start of the financial crisis. These
data span the time period between July 2006 (Q3-2006) and June 2008 (Q2-2008) and thus are
equally made up of subperiods before and after the beginning of the financial crisis in August
2007.


We use only completed loan applications, so for each application we have an “accept” or “reject”
decision. The final data set has 1,296,726 consumer and mortgage loan applications made by
1,117,175 borrowers to 357 different banks. We have information about the internal rating of the
borrower for 1,244,441 observations. For the subsample of mortgage loans, which has 317,616
observations, we also have information on the loan amount requested by the borrower.


There are five major advantages of this data set for the purpose of our study. First, it contains
information on borrowers’ loan applications as well as the banks’ decisions for each individual
loan application. This is a considerable advantage over, for example, Loan Pricing Corporation’s
Dealscan Database, which reports only the terms of actual loans. The combination of loan
applications and loans granted enable us to clearly separate out the demand and supply effects in
bank lending. Second, the loan decisions for retail borrowers constitute a separate approval


8
 Alternatively, one could rewrite the interaction terms as ß1*Affected + ß2*Post-August2007 + ß3*Affected*Post-
August2007, which is the familiar difference-in-difference estimator (see, e.g., Gruber and Poterba, 1994).

                                                                                                                  14
process by the bank and are provided as a lump sum. Unlike loans to corporate borrowers, they
are thus not drawn down in fluctuating amounts over time. Third, we are able to obtain data on
the bulk of the universe of savings banks in Germany, which use S-Rating’s internal rating
system in their lending decision process and transfer loan and borrower data back to S-Rating.
This is thus a comprehensive data set, as the savings banks’ market share in retail lending
amounts to more than 40% in Germany, one of the world’s largest bank-based financial systems.
Fourth, the internal rating system meets the regulatory (Basel II) requirements ensuring the
quality of the data used in this study. Fifth and finally, the large number of loan applications in
the sample and the detailed information on each of these applications provides a unique
opportunity to examine the differential treatment of new versus relationship customers.


4.2. Loan and borrower characteristics
Table 2 presents descriptive statistics for the loans and loan applicants in our sample. Of the total
of 1,296,726 loan applications, 49.3% are made in the period after August 2007. Of the loan
applications, 36.5% are made to banks that are affected by the crisis, and the major portion of our
data is consumer loan applications (71.5%). Of all applications, 18.0% are made to the affected
banks after August 2007, while 31.3% are made to the nonaffected banks. On average, 95.6% of
all applications are accepted, and the average loan amount from the mortgage loan subsample
amounts to 86,609 euros. On average, there are 40 loan applications to each bank per week.


                                     INSERT TABLE 2 HERE


The primary measure of borrower credit risk in this study is the borrower’s internal rating. This
is based on a quantitative score, which uses a scorecard at the loan application stage to facilitate
and standardize the credit decision process across all savings banks. This credit score adds up
individual scores based on age, occupation (for example, nature of an applicant’s job and years
the applicant has been in the job), and monthly repayment capacity based on the borrower’s
available income. The score also contains information on the existence and use of the borrower’s
credit lines, as well as assets held in the bank. Based on past defaults of borrowers with similar
characteristics, this score is consolidated into an internal credit rating, which is associated with a
default probability of the borrower. Instead of using the individual borrower characteristics, we

                                                                                                   15
use the internal rating as it captures not only these characteristics but also additional private
information of the banks as to past defaults of comparable borrowers. There are consistent rating
bins for the internal ratings from April 1, 2007. Prior to this date we have the rating score, which
we map into the same bins to ensure comparability over time.


The internal rating ranges from 1 to 12, with 1 being associated with the lowest default
probability. The average rating in our sample is 6. Furthermore, 94.1% of the loan applications
are made by relationship customers. An applicant has a relationship with the bank if he has a
checking account with the bank prior to the loan application. 9


Table 3 presents aggregate acceptance rates for affected versus nonaffected banks over time.
Between the third quarter of 2006 and the second quarter of 2007, acceptance rates of both types
of banks are similar, ranging from 97.2% to 98.3%. Starting in the third quarter of 2007,
acceptance rates significantly drop within the group of affected banks. In particular, they drop
from 97.6% in the second quarter of 2007 to 84.9% in the second quarter of 2008, but they
remain unchanged among the nonaffected banks. The apparent similarity in acceptance rates
between affected and nonaffected banks before the beginning of the financial crisis and the
apparent difference between these two groups afterward provide further motivation for the
difference-in-differences approach, which forms the main empirical testing methodology in this
paper.




5. Empirical results


This section describes the main empirical analyses for loan demand and supply at affected and
nonaffected banks and the impact of bank-borrower relationships.


5.1. Loan acceptance rates after the beginning of the financial crisis
We start analyzing the question of whether demand or supply effects are important in explaining
the reduction in consumer loans after August 2007 by examining changes in acceptance rates of

9
    The regional principle excludes the possibility that a borrower has relationships with multiple sample banks.

                                                                                                                    16
loan applications at the onset of the financial crisis. We use a difference-in-differences
framework to identify a differential effect on affected versus nonaffected banks. The key
identifying assumption is that trends related to loan acceptance rates are the same among affected
and nonaffected banks in the absence of the financial crisis and are, therefore, perfectly captured
by the class of nonaffected banks. This assumption obtains casual justification based on the
parallel trend of acceptance rates as observed in Table 3.


5.1.1. Bivariate results
Table 4 presents bivariate results of the mean DID estimates of loan acceptance rates for affected
and nonaffected banks. We report the mean acceptance rates for these two groups as well as the
difference within each group before and after August 2007 and also the difference between the
groups. Panel A reports the results for the pooled sample of consumer and mortgage loans, Panel
B presents the results for consumer loans, and Panel C shows the results for mortgage loans.
Standard errors are reported in parentheses, and the number of observations is reported in
brackets. The DID estimate is in bold.


The acceptance rates of both types of banks before the start of the financial crisis in August 2007
are shown in the first row. While the difference between the two groups is 0.2 percentage points
on average and statistically significant at the 1% level, the mean acceptance rate is 97.6% and of
similar economic magnitude in the pooled sample as well as in the subsamples of mortgage and
consumer loans. These results are consistent with Table 3.


Column 1 indicates that overall acceptance rates decrease on average by 4.1% after the start of
the financial crisis. Most important for the purpose of our study, we find for the within-group
variation in lending that nonaffected banks decrease their overall acceptance rates by 0.1%,
which is statistically only weakly significant and economically almost negligible. In contrast,
affected banks substantially decrease their lending activity by 11.1% on average, which is
significant at the 1% level. As a result, the DID estimates suggest affected banks reduce lending
by 11%, relative to nonaffected banks, which can be interpreted as the effect of the financial
crisis on the supply of loans. We observe the same level of magnitude for the DID estimates of
consumer and mortgage loans.

                                                                                                17
In Panel D of Table 4, we present mean DID estimates for the pooled sample as a function of the
borrowers’ internal rating. We report the acceptance rates for each rating class and for affected
and nonaffected banks both before and after August 2007 as well as three differences. The first
difference is calculated for the comparison of acceptance rates of affected and nonaffected banks
before August 2007. The figures show that the differences in acceptance rates between both
groups and across the different rating classes are negligible. The second difference applies to the
comparison of affected and nonaffected banks after August 2007. The differences in acceptance
rates range from 8.5% to 18.9% and are highly statistically significant across all rating classes.
The differences are highest for the two worst rating classes. They amount to 18.9% for rating
class 11 and 16.0% for rating class 12. These results for the comparison of acceptance rates by
rating class are consistent with a slight migration to quality by affected banks, which tend to
concentrate less on customers with the worst credit ratings. As a consequence, the third
difference, which is presented in the last column and shows the DID estimates, is a continuous
increase for the worst rating classes. While the DID estimates range about 10% for rating classes
1 to 8, they start increasing with rating class 9 and amount to 15.7% for rating class 11 and
15.0% for rating class 12. Overall, the DID estimates indicate a robust result: Affected banks
statistically and economically significantly reduce lending relative to nonaffected banks after
August 2007 across all rating classes and tend to reduce it most for the worst rating classes. We
further analyze and interpret the underlying reasons for this consistent decline across rating
classes in our discussion of Table 6 in Subsection 5.1.2, where we more formally examine the
overall distribution of borrower risk at affected banks before and after the crisis hit.


5.1.2. Multivariate results
To further control for the possibility that the differences in acceptance rates reported in Table 3
are due to changes in the characteristics of the affected or nonaffected banks over time, we
further estimate linear probability models as shown in Eq. (1) for loan acceptance rates that
control for these characteristics. 10 Our main control variable is the applicant’s internal rating at
the time she applies for the loan. We further include bank-specific and time fixed effects. In


10
  Even if there are no relative changes in group characteristics between owners and nonowners, using covariates in
regression DID can reduce the sampling variance of the DID estimator (Gruber and Poterba, 1994).

                                                                                                                18
some specifications, we also include a consumer confidence index that captures general trends in
the economy.


Table 5 reports fixed effect linear probability models (LPM) of loan acceptance rates. 11 We
choose a linear model despite the binary nature of our dependent variable, which should favor
nonlinear (probit or logit) models. The reason is that nonlinear models suffer from an incidental
parameters problem, i.e., the fixed effects and, more important, the coefficients of the other
control variables cannot be consistently estimated in large but narrow panels (with T fixed and N,
the number of groups, growing infinitely). 12 Linear models, however, can consistently estimate
the coefficients of our main explanatory variables and therefore provide an economically
meaningful measure for the link between the financial crisis and the lending behavior of banks in
our setting. Our results are robust to probit as alternative estimation method. We provide a more
detailed discussion and comparison of the linear probability model and the probit model (with
and without fixed effects) in Section 5.


                                          INSERT TABLE 5 HERE


Panel A reports regression results for the pooled sample of consumer and mortgage loans, and
Panels B and C report separately the results for the consumer and mortgage loan subsample.
Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors are shown in parentheses. The estimation controls
for bank and year fixed effects, which, in addition to the intercept, are not shown. Models 3, 6,
and 9 further adjust the standard errors for possible autocorrelation at the bank level. The key
variable of interest is presented in the diagnostic section of Panel A of Table 5, which reports the
DID estimate as well as the p-value from the Wald test under the null hypothesis that the DID
estimate is equal to zero.



11
   The LPM is measured by ordinary least squares (OLS). We do not use weighted least squares (WLS) even though
the weights (the conditional variance function) can be easily estimated from the underlying regression function.
However, if this estimate is not very good, the WLS have worse finite sample properties than OLS and inferences
based on asymptotic theory might be misleading (Altonji and Segal, 1996).
12
   The inconsistency of the incidental parameters (fixed effects) arises because the number of incidental parameters
N increases without bounds while the amount of information about each parameter is fixed (Neyman and Scott,
1948). The coefficients of the other control variables are generally also inconsistent (Andersen, 1973 and
Wooldridge, 2002).

                                                                                                                 19
The coefficients on the control variables are as expected, i.e., higher quality applicants are more
likely to get loans. More important for the purpose of our study, our results confirm the
conclusions from Table 4. Even after controlling for other factors and each borrower’s internal
rating, we find that affected banks significantly reduce acceptance rates of loans after August
2007 while nonaffected group banks even increase consumer lending by 1.1%. The significance
of the latter result vanishes though once we allow for autocorrelation at the bank level. The DID
estimate of 8.2% is highly significant in any specification and corresponds to 73% of the effect
estimated in Table 4. The economic magnitude of this result is large. A decrease in consumer
lending by 8.2% is equivalent to saying that rejection rates almost double for affected banks.


Panel B of Table 5 reports the regression DID results for the subsample of consumer and
mortgage loans. The results are similar to the results from the full sample. The DID estimate is
7.3% for consumer loans and 12.2% for mortgages. The LPM results are in line with the
bivariate DID estimates in Table 4 and suggest that affected banks respond to the financial crisis
significantly restricting the access to loans. The diagnostic section of Panel B further reports the
p-value from the Wald test under the null hypothesis that, within the group of affected banks,
loan applicants for mortgage loans are as likely to be accepted as applicants for consumer loans
after the start of the financial crisis. We can reject this hypothesis at any confidence level. This
result is intuitively plausible, as mortgage loans represent a more significant commitment of the
bank vis-à-vis their borrowers as compared with consumer loans. In other words, if the affected
banks are concerned with being forced to inject considerable equity into their Landesbanken and
curtail lending accordingly, the likelihood of being rejected should be positively related to the
commitment the banks make by extending the loan. And the difference in the reduction in
acceptance rates is sizable between both types of loans with the reduction being almost twice as
large for mortgage loans. Taken together, our results suggest that banks constrain lending as a
result of the financial crisis.


An important question is which of the affected banks curtail lending the most. To investigate
this, we exploit the heterogeneity among the 146 affected savings banks in our sample. We
observe these banks in the time period after August 2007 and analyze in a cross-sectional
regression as to how bank-specific characteristics affect their lending decisions. As we are

                                                                                                 20
interested in the effect of bank characteristics such as size and liquidity, which are recorded only
on a yearly basis for our sample banks, we cannot use bank fixed effects in this empirical
specification as the fixed effects would absorb our variables of interest. To account for possible
autocorrelation at the bank level, we cluster standard errors accordingly. 13 Bank size is the
natural logarithm of total assets measured in millions of euros. Liquidity is the ratio of the bank’s
cash and marketable securities to its total assets.


The results for the cross-sectional regressions are reported in Table 6. We report the results for
both bank size and liquidity for the pooled sample (Models 1 and 4) as well for the subsamples
of consumer loans (Models 2 and 5) and mortgage loans (Models 3 and 6). Model 1 shows that
larger affected banks are more likely to accept loan applications after the onset of the financial
crisis compared with smaller affected banks. The coefficient for bank size is significant at the 1%
level. These results suggest that smaller banks are hit much more severely by the financial crisis
and their resulting obligation to help their respective Landesbank than larger banks. Mortgage
loans represent a more significant commitment of banks vis-à-vis their borrowers. Consequently,
we expect the effect of bank size to be more pronounced in the subsample of mortgage loans. We
repeat the regression specification used in Model 1 in subsamples of consumer and mortgage
loans and find empirical support for our hypothesis. The effect of bank size is almost twice as
high for mortgage compared with consumer loans. One possible explanation for this result is that
smaller banks do not have sufficient liquidity left after injecting additional capital into their
Landesbanken. In fact, the correlation of bank size and liquidity before the crisis amounts to 0.56
and is significant at the 1% level. In Models 4 to 6, we test this relation more formally and find
that banks with higher liquidity ratios show substantially larger acceptance rates than banks with
lower liquidity ratios. Banks with low level of liquidity substantially reduce their customer
lending. 14 We test this separately for consumer and mortgage loans and find that this effect
almost triples for mortgage loans, which is again consistent with mortgage loans constituting a
larger commitment compared with consumer loans.



13
   We also use a diff-in-diff-in-diff specification with bank size and liquidity as a third type of identifying variation
apart from the time before and after August and the difference between affected and nonaffected banks. The results
do not change.
14
   See also Jiménez, Ongena, Peydró, and Saurina (2010) for the effect of liquidity on credit supply in Spain.

                                                                                                                     21
                                     INSERT TABLE 6 HERE


Do affected banks reduce their lending to preserve liquidity or to reduce portfolio risk? Our
analysis help throw some light on this question. Panel D of Table 4 suggests that affected
savings banks reduce lending relative to nonaffected savings banks across all rating classes, with
a slight migration to quality. Even for the highest quality customers, we find an economically
sizable effect of 9 to 10 percentage points. It is worth asking if the overall risk distribution of
loans made is significantly different for affected versus nonaffected banks. Given our large
sample size and given the fact that the chi-square coefficient is sensitive to it, we use a variant of
the chi-square test that controls for the sample size effect to test for this. We employ Cramer’s V
as the most commonly used measure, which is bounded between zero and one with zero showing
no and one showing perfect association (See Cramer, 1999). We find that the risk distribution of
accepted loans before or after August 2007 is not different for affected banks or nonaffected
banks (Cramer’s V of 0.023 and 0.032, respectively). Similarly, the comparison of the risk
distribution of accepted loans between affected and nonaffected banks shows no difference
before or after August 2007 (Cramer’s V of 0.048 and 0.042, respectively). Thus, the overall
distribution does not change despite the slight migration to quality as observed in Table 4.


Our results in Table 6 further speak to the question of whether the affected banks reduce lending
to preserve liquidity or to reduce portfolio risk. Table 6 suggests that small banks and banks with
low levels of liquidity are more likely to reject loan applications among the affected savings
banks. We investigate this further by analyzing the distribution of ex ante borrower quality
among small and large affected banks using a chi-square test. If the banks’ primary concern is to
reduce risk, we expect to find a significant change in the risk distribution of loans made before
and after August 2007 for small versus large banks. We do not find evidence for an association
of ex ante borrower quality and whether or not the affected bank is small or large. Cramer’s V,
our measure of association, is 0.0287 before August 2007 and 0.0319 after August 2007. This
suggests that there is no change in ex ante borrower quality for small versus large banks.


Taken together, our results indicate that the banks hit hardest on liquidity reduced lending more
but did not change the risk distribution of loans. Our results suggest that preserving liquidity

                                                                                                   22
instead of reducing portfolio risk seems to be the primary reason that affected savings banks
reduce lending after August 2007.


5.2. The demand for loans after the beginning of the financial crisis
The main objective in this paper is to separate supply and demand effects of the financial crisis
on consumer lending. So far we have analyzed the supply effects, and we now turn to examine
whether the demand for loans from borrowers has changed as a consequence of the financial
crisis. We focus on two possible ways in which loan demand could be affected. First, there could
be a general decline in demand throughout Germany. Second, customers from affected savings
banks could reduce demand more relative to customers from nonaffected banks. This can be
tested within the same framework we use to analyze supply effects in lending. The coefficients
β1 and β2 from Eq. (1) show the general trend, and the difference between both coefficients is an
estimate as to how consumer demand is affected. The dependent variable is a proxy for loan
demand. In Subsection 5.2.1., we use the number of loan applications per week as the dependent
variable. In Subsection 5.2.2., we use the natural logarithm of the loan amount requested by the
borrower as a proxy for loan demand.


5.2.1. The number of loans requested by applicants
Table 7 reports the regression results for the number of loans requested by borrowers each week.
We report the regression results for the pooled sample of consumer and mortgage loans in
Columns 1 and 2, the results for consumer loans in Columns 3 and 4, and the results for
mortgage loans in Columns 5 and 6. The regressions are estimated using a fixed effect OLS
model and a negative binomial model (NBM) with fixed effects to account for the count data
nature of the dependent variable. We further adjust the standard errors for possible
autocorrelation at the state level. The diagnostic section of the table reports the DID estimate as
well as the p-value from the Wald test under the null hypothesis that the DID estimate is equal to
zero. The unit of our analysis is the number of weekly loan applications to each single bank and
not an individual loan application. This reduces our sample size compared with Table 4 and
Table 5. Accordingly, to control for borrower risk, we use the mean internal rating, which is the
average of the internal rating score across all loan applications per bank in a given week. When
using the negative binomial model, we further report the likelihood ratio test and in each case

                                                                                                23
reject the null hypothesis that conditional mean and median of the number of weekly loan
applications are identical. The statistically significant evidence of overdispersion indicates that
the negative binomial model is preferred to the Poisson regression model. We further do not find
an elevated number of zeros in the dependent variable and therefore do not report the regressions
using either Poisson or the zero-inflated Poisson model. Intercept, bank, and time fixed effects
are not shown. Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors are shown in parentheses.


                                     INSERT TABLE 7 HERE


The regression results indicate a decline in the number of loan applications for both affected and
nonaffected banks by 8.1 and 9.7 loans per week, respectively. To assess the economic
magnitude of the result, we evaluate this number at the average number of loan applications,
which amounts to 40. In other words, the change in the number of loan applications is
approximately 20% to 25% of the average number of weekly loan applications during our sample
period, and it is statistically significant at the 1% level in almost all specifications. The results of
the negative binomial model are consistent with this interpretation. The DID estimates, however,
are insignificant in all tests. Taken together, borrowers’ loan demand decreases after August
2007, but it does not decrease significantly more at banks that are affected by the financial crisis.
The overall decrease in borrower demand despite the stable economic environment in Germany
during the sample period suggests that customers anticipate a deterioration of the economic
climate and adjust their borrowing behavior accordingly.


5.2.2. The amount of loans requested by applicants
We next examine whether customers, given that they apply for a loan, request lower loan
amounts. We therefore use the natural logarithm of the loan amount requested by the borrower as
proxy for loan demand. Loan amounts are available for the subset of 317,583 mortgage loans in
our sample. Our main control variable is the applicant’s internal rating at the time she applies for
the loan. We further include bank-specific and time fixed effects. In some specifications, we also
include a consumer confidence index, which captures general trends in the economy.




                                                                                                     24
Table 8 reports the results using a fixed effect OLS model. Column 3 further adjusts the standard
errors for possible autocorrelation at the state level. The diagnostic section of the table reports
the DID estimate as well as the p-value from the Wald test under the null hypothesis that the DID
estimate is equal to zero. Intercept, bank, and year fixed effects are not shown.
Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors are shown in parentheses. Among affected and
nonaffected banks, loan amounts decline by 4.9% and 4.5%, respectively, after August 2007.
This result suggests that there is an overall decline in loan demand in Germany that is significant
at the 1% level. The significance, however, dissipates if we allow for autocorrelation at the state
level. Furthermore, the DID estimate in the diagnostic section is 0.0046, which is insignificant in
all tests. Overall, the results indicate that there is not much evidence for a decrease in loan
amounts after August 2007 and thus for a causal effect of the financial crisis on the loan amount
requested by applicants at least until June 2008.


                                      INSERT TABLE 8 HERE


5.3. Bank-borrower relationships after the beginning of the financial crisis
A natural question relates to the role of relationships in credit rationing. Our results so far
suggest that customers of affected banks are more likely to have their loan applications rejected.
Do customers with bank relationships benefit from them and thus have a higher likelihood of
being approved during a financial crisis? To answer this question, we test whether applications
by existing customers of affected banks are more likely to be approved than by new customers at
the same bank after the start of the financial crisis. A possible approach is to do a difference-in-
differences test for acceptance rates of relationship versus nonrelationship customers before and
after August 2007 within the group of affected banks. However, changes in acceptance rates of
relationship versus nonrelationship applicants over time that are not caused by the financial crisis
could cause a spurious correlation. A difference in acceptance rates between both groups would
thus be falsely attributed to the crisis.


To avoid this problem, we use a difference-in-difference-in-difference framework, which is
tested in the same way as in Gruber and Poterba (1994). In addition to the time before and after
August 2007 as well as the cross section of savings banks that are affected or not affected by the

                                                                                                 25
crisis, we use the relationship status as the third source of identifying variation. In this
framework, the change in acceptance rate by relationship status of nonaffected savings banks
serves as a control for a general trend related to acceptance rates by relationship versus
nonrelationship borrowers. The difference-in-difference-in-difference nets out any relationship
effect on acceptance rates due to unobservables or quality variables (Ashenfelter and Craft,
1985).


Yi,b,t = Ab + Bt + δ*Xi,b,t + (β1 * Post-August2007) + (β2 * Relationships)
     + (β3 * Affected * Post-August2007) + (β4 * Relationships * Post-August2007)                (2)
     + (β5 * Affected * Relationships) + (β6 * Affected * Post -August2007 * Relationships)+εi,b,t,r


The variables Post-August2007 and Affected are defined in the same way as before.
Relationships is a dummy variable that takes a value of one if an existing customer applies for a
loan and zero otherwise. The key variable of interest is the triple interaction term Affected *
Post-August2007 * Relationships. This variable thus measures whether existing customers
receive better treatment than new customers after the beginning of the financial crisis when their
bank is affected by the financial crisis; or, to put it in a different way, whether existing
relationships to a bank are valuable in times of a financial crisis when this bank is affected by the
crisis. Our inference is thus based on the coefficient β6.


Table 9 reports the regression results. Similar to Table 5, we use a linear probability model with
fixed effects and fit regression Eq. (2) to the pooled sample as well as the subsample of
consumer and mortgage loans. Intercept, bank, and year fixed effects are not shown.
Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors are shown in parentheses. The results support our
earlier findings. The coefficient β3 (Affected * Post-August2007) corresponds to our earlier DID
estimate in Table 5. The estimate is of similar magnitude indicating that customers of affected
banks have an 8.1% lower probability of being approved than customers of nonaffected banks.
The secular effect of relationships is positive and significant, indicating that bank-depositor
relationships are valuable even in the absence of the financial crisis. Relationship customers are
2.8% more likely to receive a loan compared with new customers. Most important for the
purpose of this study, our results are consistent with relationship customers benefiting from

                                                                                                  26
lending relationships during the financial crisis. The coefficient of the variable Affected * Post-
August2007 * Relationships is positive and significant at the 1% level. Holding everything else
constant, applications by relationship customers are 4.9% more likely to be approved after
August 2007 relative to new customers. This result holds also in the subsamples of consumer and
mortgage loans. Relationship customers have a 4.1% higher likelihood of being approved than
new customers when they apply for a consumer loan and a 1.8% higher likelihood of being
approved when they apply for a mortgage loan.


                                     INSERT TABLE 9 HERE


The diagnostic section of Table 8 further reports the Wald test under the null hypothesis that the
treatment effect is identical in the subsample of consumer and mortgage loans. We reject the
hypothesis and confirm the earlier evidence that mortgage loans are significantly less likely to be
approved relative to consumer loans. While relationships are important and significant for both
types of loans, the diagnostic section also shows that they are most important for consumer
loans. This suggests that the information that a bank generates from a customer relationship is
most important in approvals of loans that are not secured by collateral and hence the repayment
and recovery rate probably depend on the borrower’s creditworthiness than the value of the
collateral. This result is consistent with the literature on small business lending. For example,
Berger and Udell (1995) show that relationships are less relevant for mortgage loans relative to
credit lines, which is the analogy to consumer loans in our setting.




6. Robustness
In this section, we provide several additional analyses to test the validity of the empirical
specification and the robustness of the results.




6.1. Linear probability model versus probit model
In Table 5 and Table 9 we use the LPM to fit a regression with a binary dependent variable. This
empirical testing strategy could be questioned as the LPM is heteroskedastic and it can predict

                                                                                                27
values on the interval minus to plus infinity. For these two reasons, nonlinear models as for
example probit models are commonly used to fit binary data. However, in a panel-data setting,
the LPM has an important advantage over probit models. While the incidental parameters cannot
be consistently estimated if N→∞ and T is fixed, the other explanatory variables are √ N
consistent (Wooldridge, 2002).      In probit models, the explanatory variables are generally
inconsistent. In this subsection, we fit a probit model with and without fixed effects to the data
and compare the results. In Table 10, we estimate the probability that a bank accepts a loan
application. Only the coefficients for the key explanatory variables are shown for the LPM. The
reported coefficient in the probit models is the effect of a marginal change in the corresponding
variable on the probability that a loan application is approved, computed at the sample mean of
the independent variables. Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors are shown in
parentheses. Table 10 further reports the p-value of the Wald test under the null hypothesis that
the DID estimate is zero.


                                   INSERT TABLE 10 HERE


The LPM coefficients are taken from Model 2 in Table 5. The results confirm our previous
finding. In particular, the magnitude of the coefficients in the probit model without fixed effects
is generally similar to that in the LPM. Even though the DID estimate is about 2% smaller in the
mortgage loan sample using the probit model, the difference in the DID estimate between
consumer and mortgage loans is still significant at the 1% level. The magnitude of the
coefficients in the probit model with fixed effects is 50% smaller compared with both alternative
models. For example, the DID estimate in the pooled sample is 4% vis-à-vis 8% in the LPM.
Most important, the overall result of this paper, i.e., banks reduce the supply of loans as a
consequence of the financial crisis, is confirmed in all tests and the effect is still economically
significant.




6.2. Geographic proximity and access to credit
We argue in Subsection 2.2 that the three affected Landesbanken operate in different geographic
regions in Germany, which are also heterogeneous in their economic development. The results

                                                                                                28
in this paper are thus unlikely to be determined by a common economic shock that only affects
these regions but not any other region in Germany.          Nonetheless, we conduct additional
robustness checks. In particular, we follow the methodology in Huang (2008) and compare the
lending behavior of geographically contiguous savings banks, which belong to different
Landesbanken. We compare the lending behavior of a savings bank in a federal state with an
affected Landesbank with that of a neighboring savings bank in a federal state without an
affected Landesbank. As geographically contiguous savings banks face very similar economic
conditions and only differ in their respective Landesbank ownership, this is a clean test to
observe whether the change in lending behavior is due to the Landesbanken losses.


We thus repeat the empirical analysis from Table 5 for only those contiguous savings banks in
which one is affected through its Landesbank and the other one is not. We have 31 groups of
affected and not affected savings banks. The results are presented in Table 11 and are very
similar to, and perhaps even stronger than, those in Table 5. The coefficient for the affected
banks after August 2007 amounts to less than -0.14 and is highly significant in Model 1. We
repeat the analysis in subsamples of consumer and mortgage loans and, again, the results are
very similar. Model 4 confirms the results using a probit model as robustness check.


                                    INSERT TABLE 11 HERE


6.3. Definition of events and affected banks
As argued in the description of the definition of the empirical strategy in Section 3, the reported
results in the main tables are based on the event date August 2007 when the losses of the
Landesbanken became privately observable to their owners and thus the savings banks, for
example, in supervisory board meetings. The event date can be alternatively chosen by defining
the day on which the losses become publicly observable. This is the case in the third quarter of
2007 for Sachsen LB, in the fourth quarter of 2007 for West LB, and in the first quarter of 2008
for Bayern LB. We thus rerun our empirical analyses with this alternative choice of event dates
and report the results in Table 12. The results are very similar to those reported in Table 5 and
show the same patterns as before.



                                                                                                29
                                        INSERT TABLE 12 HERE


As also argued in Section 3, the Landesbanken other than Sachsen LB, West LB, and Bayern LB
do not show subprime losses during the sample period. The savings banks in these regions are
thus treated as nonaffected banks in the main empirical analysis. While this definition is clear
even at hindsight for most Landesbanken, it might be questioned for LBBW and HSH Nordbank.
Both banks did not show losses during the sample period and publicly announced losses only in
November 2008. Nonetheless, it could be argued that their earnings in the second quarter of 2008
were somewhat lower than those in the first quarter of 2008 so that insiders might have already
foreseen their upcoming problems. We thus rerun our analyses by including LBBW and HSH
Nordbank as affected banks for the second quarter of 2008. The results in Models 5 to 8 of Table
12 are again very similar to those of Table 5. An alternative robustness test would be to drop
these two Landesbanken from the sample altogether. We do not report these tables to conserve
space, but again we find the results are very similar.


6.4. Parallel-trend assumption
We further want to test whether the difference-in-differences tests are not driven by
inappropriate identification assumptions. The key identifying assumption in our empirical
strategy is that trends related to loan acceptance rates are the same among affected and
nonaffected banks in the absence of the financial crisis. In Table 2, we observe a parallel trend in
average loan acceptance rates between affected and nonaffected banks before August 2007,
which is an indicator that this assumption is reasonable. In this subsection, we formally test the
parallel-trend assumption using out-of-sample data. We implement a control experiment using a
loan sample for the period January 2006 through December 2006 and define July 1, 2006 as the
fictitious event. 15 If the parallel-trend assumption holds, we should see no difference in
acceptance rates before and after the event between the affected and nonaffected banks.


We obtain data for the out-of-sample period from S-Rating for the same loan types from the
same banks with the same internal scoring mechanism. We then implement the difference-in-


15
  Control experiments or placebo events are commonly used in the literature to test the parallel-trend assumption
(Duflo, 2001) or correct biases in the DID estimate (Huang, 2008).

                                                                                                              30
differences test around the fictitious event described in Section 3. We have information about
504,179 consumer and mortgage loans in this sample. The coefficients in Eq. (1) describe the
trend in loan acceptance rates after July 2006 for affected versus nonaffected banks, and the
difference is the DID estimate. Holding everything else constant, loan acceptance rates increase
by 0.03% for the affected banks after the event (p = 0.919) and by 0.18% for nonaffected banks
(p = 0.379). The DID estimate is insignificant (p = 0.735), indicating no change in acceptance
rates for the affected banks relative to the nonaffected banks, which further supports the
identifying assumption of our empirical strategy.


6.5. Borrower quality and loan acceptance rates
Finally, we want to make sure that our results are not driven by a change in ex ante borrower
quality. If the distribution of borrower quality changes over time and for affected versus
nonaffected banks, can this explain why affected banks reduce consumer lending more than
nonaffected banks? This question has two aspects: a declining trend in borrower quality and a
change in the risk distribution of the applicants of affected versus nonaffected banks. Our
difference-in-differences approach controls for the first aspect. If there is a common trend in
borrower quality, it is captured by the difference-in-differences approach and thus the control
group of nonaffected banks. For the second aspect, we use a chi-square test to analyze whether
the risk distribution is independent of consumers applying before or after August 2007 and with
affected and nonaffected banks. We find evidence that no association exists between the risk
distribution and whether the application is made before or after August 2007 for either affected
banks (Cramer’s V amounts to 0.029) or nonaffected banks (Cramer’s V amounts to 0.026).
There is thus no statistically significant trend in borrower quality over time. We further test
whether there is a change in the risk distribution for affected versus nonaffected banks using the
same test. We find that Cramer’s V is 0.041 before August 2007 and 0.044 after August 2007.
Thus, the risk distribution of applicants is independent of whether or not a bank is affected by the
financial crisis both before and after August 2007, which implies that there is no change in
borrower quality for affected versus nonaffected banks. Thus our results are not driven by a
change in ex ante borrower quality.




                                                                                                 31
7. Conclusion
In this paper we take advantage of a unique data set to study the real effects of the financial crisis
through the global supply of credit.      We have the universe of loan applications and loan
approvals for German savings banks in a time period that spans the financial crisis. We have a
unique experimental setting in that some of our local savings banks, while they engage in narrow
banking, are substantially affected by the US financial crisis through the Landesbanken that they
own, which in turn have substantial exposure to subprime assets in the United States. We can
compare their lending patterns with savings banks that do not have similar exposure. Using data
from 2006–2008 (pre- and post-crisis) we are also able to distinguish between demand and
supply effects of the financial crisis. While there is an overall decrease in demand of loan
applications once the crisis strikes, we do not find significant differences in the loan applications
for affected versus nonaffected banks.


We find evidence of a substantial supply effect in bank credit to retail customers. Using a
difference-in-differences analysis we find that the affected savings banks reject more loan
applications than the nonaffected banks. These results survive a large number of robustness
checks. We also find that savings banks curtail their lending in particular when they are small
and more liquidity-constrained. In addition, there is a bigger effect for mortgages as compared
with consumer loans and a slight migration to quality. However, the distribution of ex ante
borrower and portfolio risk for affected and nonaffected banks before and after the onset of the
financial crisis is not statistically significantly different. Our evidence thus suggests that banks
cut back on lending to preserve liquidity. Finally, we assess the effect of bank-depositor
relationships and find that relationships help mitigate the supply side effect. Our findings
illustrate the global linkages for the supply of credit and suggest a number of avenues for future
research and policy makers. A key aspect is whether and to what extent the reduced supply of
credit in some regions affects the real economy in these regions, e.g., through a reduction of
consumer spending or a reduction in construction. Related to this, it is important to understand
from a policy perspective how the supply of credit can be secured even if certain banks are
affected by a financial crisis.




                                                                                                   32
References

Allen, F., Gale, D., 2000. Financial contagion. Journal of Political Economy 108, 1-33.

Altonji, J. G., Segal, L. M., 1996. Small-sample bias in GMM estimation of covariance
structures. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 14, 353–366.

Andersen, E. M., 1973. Conditional Inference and Models for Measuring. Mentalhygiejnisk
Forsknings Institut, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Ashenfelter, O., Card, D., 1985. Using longitudinal structure of earnings to estimate the effect of
training programs. Review of Economics and Statistics 67, 648–660.

Berger, A., Dai, Q., Ongena, S., Smith, D., 2003. To what extent will the banking industry be
globalized? A study of bank nationality and reach in 20 European nations. Journal of Banking
and Finance 27, 383–415.

Berger, A., Udell, G., 1995. Relationship lending and lines of credit in small firm finance.
Journal of Business 68, 351–382.

Bernanke, B., 1983. Nonmonetary effects of the financial crisis in the propagation of the Great
Depression. American Economic Review 73, 257–276.

Bernanke, B., Blinder, A., 1988. Credit, money, and aggregate demand. American Economic
Review Papers and Proceedings 78, 435–439.

Bernanke, B., Blinder, A., 1992. The federal funds rate and the channels of monetary
transmission. American Economic Review 82, 901–921.

Chari, V., Christiano, L., Kehoe, P., 2008. Facts and myths about the financial crisis of 2008.
Unpublished working paper.

Cramer, H., 1999. Mathematical Methods of Statistics. Princeton University Press, Princeton,
NJ.

Duchin, R., Ozbas, O., Sensoy, B., 2010. Costly external finance, corporate investment, and the
subprime mortgage credit crisis. Journal of Financial Economics 97, 418-435.

Duflo, E., 2001. Schooling and labor market consequences of school construction in Indonesia:
evidence from an unusual experiment. American Economic Review 91 (4), 795–813.

Fitch, 2007. Landesbanks revisited—progress is slow. Special report.

Gan, J., 2007. The real effects of asset market bubbles: loan- and firm-level evidence of a
lending channel, Review of Financial Studies 20, 1941-1973.

                                                                                                33
Gruber, J., Poterba, J., 1994. Tax incentives and the decision to purchase insurance: evidence
from the self-employed. Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 701–733.

Huang, R. R., 2008. Evaluating the real effect of bank branching deregulation: comparing
contiguous counties across US state borders. Journal of Financial Economics 87, 678–705.

Ivashina, V., Scharfstein, D., 2010. Bank lending during the financial crisis of 2008. Journal of
Financial Economics 97, 319-338.

Jimenéz, G., Ongena, S., Peydró, J., Saurina, J., 2010. Credit supply: identifying balance-sheet
channels with loan applications and granted loans. CEPR working paper.

Kobayakawa, S., Nakamura, H., 2000. A theoretical analysis of narrow banking proposals.
Monetary and Economic Studies 18, 105–118.

Krugman, P., Obstfeld, M., 2008. International Economics: Theory and Policy, 8th ed., Pearson
International Edition.

Mian, A., 2006. Distance constraints: the limits of foreign lending in poor economies. Journal of
Finance 61, 1465–1505.

Moody’s, 2004a, Assessing Germany’s public sector banks and their cross-sector support
mechanisms. Bank credit strength assessment.

Moody’s, 2004b, German public sector banks after July 2005: focus shifts to support,
cooperation and solidarity within the sector. Special comment.

Moody’s, 2006. Analysis Landesbank Sachsen GZ. December.

Moody’s, 2007. German banking system: regional focus. Special comment.

Neyman, J., Scott, E. L., 1948. Consistent estimates based on partially consistent observations.
Econometrica 16, 1–32.

OECD, 2008. Economic Outlook 84, annex table no. 59.

Peek, J., Rosengren, E. S., 1997. The international transmission of financial shocks: the case of
Japan. American Economic Review 87, 495–505.

Petersen, M., Rajan, R., 1994. The benefits of lending relationships: evidence from small
business data. Journal of Finance 49, 1367–1400.

Rajan, R., Zingales, L., 2003. The great reversals: the politics of financial development in the
20th century. Journal of Financial Economics 69, 5–50.



                                                                                              34
Stiglitz, J., Weiss, A., 1981. Credit rationing in markets with imperfect information. American
Economic Review 71, 393–410.

Wooldridge, J. M., 2002. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.




                                                                                            35
Appendix
Main variables definitions


Variable                          Definition
Inference variables
Affected                          Dummy variable equal to one if the application is made to a savings bank
                                  that owns one of the affected Landesbanken (Bayern LB, Sachsen LB,
                                  West LB).
Post-August 2007                  Dummy variable equal to one if the loan application is made after August
                                  2007.
Affected x Post-August 2007       Interaction term: dummy variable equal to one if loan application is made
                                  to an affected savings bank after August 2007.
Nonaffected x Post-August 2007    Interaction term: dummy variable equal to one if loan application is made
                                  to a nonaffected savings bank after August 2007.
Loan type
Mortgage Loans                    Dummy variable equal to one if the loan type is a mortgage loan.

Dependent variable
Accepted (Yes/No)                 Dummy variable equal to one if the loan application was accepted.
Loan amount                       The loan amount requested by the borrower in euros. The loan amount is
                                  available only for the subset of mortgage loans.
No. of weekly loan applications   Number of loan applications per bank per week.

Control variable
Consumer Confidence               Measured by the Konsumklimaindex (consumer climate index) of the
                                  market research company GfK and is based on a monthly survey of two
                                  thousand consumers of age 14 and above. The index contains questions
                                  about how much consumers expect the economy and their income to grow
                                  and what they plan to consume. One sample question is: “Do you think it is
                                  currently advisable to spend a lot of money for consumption?” Three
                                  answers are possible: advisable, neutral, and not advisable. The answers are
                                  transferred into numbers and aggregated for all parts. The index long-term
                                  average is about zero.
Borrower characteristics
Internal Rating                   Based on a quantitative score that uses a scorecard at the loan application
                                  stage to facilitate and standardize the credit decision process across all
                                  savings banks. This credit score adds up individual scores based on age,
                                  occupation (for example, nature of an applicant’s job and years the
                                  applicant has been in the job), and monthly repayment capacity based on
                                  the borrower’s available income. The score also contains information on
                                  the existence and use of the borrower’s checking and other accounts, i.e.,
                                  credit or debit cards, the use of credit lines, and assets held in the bank.
                                  Based on past defaults of borrowers with similar characteristics, this score
                                  is consolidated into an internal credit rating, which is associated with a
                                  default probability for the borrower.

Relationships characteristics
Relationships                     Dummy variable equal to one if the loan applicant had a checking account
                                  with the same bank before the application. The regional principle excludes
                                  the possibility that a borrower has relationships with multiple sample
                                  banks.


                                                                                                            36
Fig. 1. Aggregate lending in Germany.
The figure shows the aggregate lending of German banks for the January 2006 to June 2008 period. Panel
A shows the aggregate lending (corporate and consumers) for all bank groups. Panel B shows the
aggregate consumer and corporate lending for savings banks. Loan types do not include mortgage loans.
Source is Deutsche Bundesbank.

Panel A: Total lending




Panel B: Lending by savings banks




                                                                                                   37
Fig. 2. Geographical reach of affected Landesbanken.
The figure shows the geographical reach of the three Landesbanken that are affected by the financial
crisis after August 2007 and during our sample period. They represent Westdeutsche Landesbank or West
LB (North Rhine-Westphalia), Bayerische Landesbank or Bayern LB (Bavaria), and Landesbank Sachsen
or Sachsen LB (Saxony).




                                                                                                  38
Table 1
Ownership structures of Landesbanken
This table provides an overview of the German Landesbanken and their respective owners. Ownership by
savings banks is denoted by (S). The upper part of the table shows the three Landesbanken that are
affected by the financial crisis after August 2007 and during our sample period. The lower part shows the
remaining eight Landesbanken. The information on the Landesbanken is provided by Bundesverband
Öffentlicher Banken Deutschlands VÖB and represents the status as of May 2008.

Landesbank                                                    Owner                                                       Share (percent)

Affected

Sachsen LB
(acquired by Landesbank Baden-Württemberg on March 6, 2008)   Sachsen-Finanzgruppe (S)                                                62,960
                                                              Freistaat Sachsen                                                       37,040
Bayern LB                                                     Freistaat Bayern                                                        50,000
                                                              Sparkassenverband Bayern (S)                                            50,000
West LB                                                       NRW Bank                                                                31,200
                                                              Rheinischer Sparkassen- und Giroverband (S)                             25,200
                                                              Westfälisch-Lippischer Sparkassen- und Giroverband (S)                  25,200
                                                              Land Nordrhein-Westfalen                                                17,400
                                                              Landschaftsverband Rheinland                                             0,500
                                                              Landschaftsverband Westfalen-Lippe                                       0,500

Nonaffected

Bremer Landesbank Kreditanstalt Oldenburg-Girozentrale        Nord LB                                                                 92,500
                                                              Freie Hansestadt Bremen                                                  7,500
HSH Nordbank                                                  Freie und Hansestadt Hamburg                                            35,380
                                                              Land Schleswig-Holstein                                                 19,960
                                                              Sparkassen- und Giroverband für Schleswig-Holstein (S)                  18,050
                                                              J.C. Flowers                                                            26,610
Landesbank Baden-Württemberg                                  Land Baden-Württemberg                                                  35,611
                                                              Sparkassenverband Baden-Württemberg (S)                                 35,611
                                                              Landeshauptstadt Stuttgart                                              18,932
                                                              L-Bank, Landeskreditbank Baden-Württemberg                               4,923
                                                              Sparkassen- und Giroverband Rheinland-Pfalz (S)                          4,923
Landesbank Berlin                                             Landesbank Berlin Holding AG                                           100,000
Landesbank Hessen-Thüringen                                   Sparkassen- und Giroverband Hessen-Thüringen (S)                        85,000
                                                              Land Hessen                                                             10,000
                                                              Freistaat Thüringen                                                      5,000
Landesbank Rheinland-Pfalz                                    Landesbank Baden-Württemberg                                           100,000
Norddeutsche Landesbank                                       Land Niedersachsen                                                      41,750
                                                              Land Sachsen-Anhalt                                                      8,250
                                                              Sparkassenverband Niedersachsen (S)                                     37,250
                                                              Sparkassenbeteiligungsverband Sachsen-Anhalt                             7,530
                                                              Sparkassenbeteiligungszweckverband Mecklenburg-Vorpommern                5,220
Saar LB                                                       Bayern LB                                                               75,100
                                                              Sparkassenverband Saar (S)                                              14,900
                                                              Saarland                                                                10,000




                                                                                                                                     39
Table 2
Descriptive Statistics
This table presents summary statistics for the sample of loan applications from German savings banks
from July 2006 through June 2008. The number of observations corresponds to the number of loan
applications. Loan amounts are available only for the subset of mortgage loans. The number of weekly
loan applications is presented in bank-week units.

                             Number of              Standard
                            observations   Mean     deviation   p(25)    Median    p(75)    Minimum   Maximum

 Inference variables
 Affected                    1,296,726     0.365     0.481        0        0        1          0         1
 Post-August 2007            1,296,726     0.493     0.500        0        0        1          0         1
 Affected x Post-
 August 2007                 1,296,726     0.180     0.385        0        0        0          0         1
 Nonaffected x Post-
 August 2007                 1,296,726     0.313     0.464        0        0        1          0         1

 Loan type
 Mortgage loans              1,296,726     0.285     0.452        0        0        1          0         1

 Dependent variables
 Accepted (Yes/No)           1,296,726     0.956     0.205        1        1         1         0         1
 Loan amount                  317,616      86,609    69,360     25,000   70,900   132,000    5,000    238,000
 No. of weekly loan
 applications                 33,685        40         76        11        18       40        11        927

 Borrower characteristics
 Internal Rating             1,244,441       6       2.944        4        6        8          1        12

 Relationship characteristics
 Relationships                1,296,726    0.941     0.235        1        1        1          0         1




                                                                                                             40
Table 3
Aggregate acceptance rates, affected versus nonaffected banks
This table presents aggregate acceptance rates for affected versus nonaffected banks over time.
Acceptance rates are aggregated across each quarter. The first Landesbank (Sachsen LB) was directly hit
by the financial crisis in August 2007 (Q3-2007). At the same time, the massive exposure and
vulnerability of the other Landesbanken (Bayern LB and West LB) also became obvious.

                                           Aggregate acceptance rate
                    Quarter
                                     Affected banks        Nonaffected banks

                    Q3-2006              97.34%                     98.33%
                    Q4-2006              97.58                      97.85
                    Q1-2007              97.75                      97.67
                    Q2-2007              97.61                      97.23
                    Q3-2007              93.96                      97.52
                    Q4-2007              85.64                      97.20
                    Q1-2008              84.58                      97.53
                    Q2-2008              84.93                      98.03




                                                                                                    41
Table 4
Loan acceptance rates at the onset of the financial crisis (bivariate tests)
This table presents mean difference-in-differences (DID) estimates of loan acceptance rates. Savings
banks are classified into two groups: affected, when savings banks are owner of one of the three
Landesbanken that are affected by the US subprime mortgage crisis after August 2007; nonaffected,
otherwise. Panels A through C report the results for the pooled sample (consumer and mortgage loans),
only consumer loans, and only mortgage loans, respectively. Standard errors are reported in parentheses
The number of observations is reported in brackets. The DID estimate is printed in bold. Panel D reports
mean DID estimates for the sample segregated by rating class. For brevity, we report only p-values of the
difference and DID estimates. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and10% level, respectively.


 Panel A: Pooled consumer
                                   All                 Affected          Nonaffected         Difference
 and mortgage loans

                                   0.976                 0.975              0.977             0.002***
 Before August 2007              (0.0002)               (0.0003)           (0.0002)           (0.0004)
                                [657,309]              [239,644]          [417,665]

                                   0.943                  0.864             0.976             0.113***
 After August 2007               (0.0003)               (0.0007)           (0.0002)           (0.0007)
                                [639,417]              [233,968]          [405,449]

 Difference                     -0.041***              -0.111***           -0.001*           -0.110***
                                 (0.0003)               (0.0008)           (0.0003)           (0.000)

 Panel B: Consumer loans

                                   0.978                  0.979             0.977             0.002***
 Before August 2007              (0.0002)               (0.0003)           (0.0003)           (0.0004)
                                [464,399]              [183,037]          [281,362]

                                   0.936                  0.874              0.978            0.104***
 After August 2007               (0.0004)               (0.0008)           (0.0003)           (0.0008)
                                [462,426]              [186,971]          [ 275,455]

 Difference                     -0.042***              -0.105***            0.001*           -0.105***
                                 (0.0004)               (0.0008)           (0.0004)           (0.000)

 Panel C: Mortgage loans

                                   0.976                 0.961              0.977             .0163***
 Before August 2007              (0.0002)              (0.0008)            (0.0004)           (0.0009)
                                [192,910 ]             [56,607]           [136,303]

                                   0.943                 0.824              0.974             0.150***
 After August 2007               (0.0003)              (0.0018)            (0.0004)           (0.0018)
                                [176,991]              [46,997]           [129,994]

 Difference                     -0.038***              -0.137***          -0.003***          -0.134***
                                 (0.0007)               (0.0019)           (0.0006)           (0.000)


                                                                                                          42
Panel D: Diff-in-diff by rating classes
                        Before August 2007                        After August 2007
                                          Difference                                  Difference   Diff-in-Diff
              Affected Nonaffected                     Affected    Nonaffected
                                           (p-value)                                  (p-value)     (p-value)
 Borrower risk (Internal Rating)

 1              0.986         0.993         0.007       0.876          0.993            0.117         0.110
                                           <0.0001                                     <0.0001      <0.0001
 2              0.988         0.989         0.000       0.889          0.989            0.100        0.099
                                           (0.726)                                     <0.0001      <0.0001
 3              0.989         0.987         -0.002      0.898          0.989            0.091        0.093
                                           (0.055)                                     <0.0001      <0.0001
 4              0.990         0.988         -0.003      0.903          0.988            0.085        0.088
                                           (0.001)                                     <0.0001      <0.0001
 5              0.988         0.987         0.000       0.890          0.987            0.097        0.097
                                           (0.607)                                     <0.0001      <0.0001
 6              0.986         0.985         0.000       0.890          0.986            0.095        0.096
                                           (0.629)                                     <0.0001      <0.0001
 7              0.983         0.985         0.002       0.890          0.985            0.095        0.093
                                           (0.046)                                     <0.0001      <0.0001
 8              0.978         0.981         0.003       0.870          0.980            0.110        0.107
                                           (0.005)                                     <0.0001      <0.0001
 9              0.973         0.975         0.002       0.859          0.977            0.118        0.116
                                            0.285                                      <0.0001      <0.0001
 10             0.958         0.958         0.000       0.817          0.949            0.132        0.132
                                            0.841                                      <0.0001      <0.0001
 11             0.885         0.917         0.032       0.715          0.904            0.189        0.157
                                           <0.0001                                     <0.0001      <0.0001
 12             0.793         0.804         0.010       0.650          0.811            0.160        0.150
                                           (0.107)                                     <0.0001      <0.0001




                                                                                                                  43
Table 5
Loan acceptance rates at the onset of the financial crisis (multivariate tests)
We estimate the probability that a bank accepts a loan application. All variables are defined in the
Appendix. The borrower internal rating is the bank’s internal risk assessment at the time the loan
application is made. The models are estimated using a linear probability model with bank-specific fixed
effects and year fixed effects. Panel A reports regression results for the pooled sample (consumer loans
and mortgage loans). Panel B reports the results for the consumer loan and mortgage loan subsample.
Models 3, 6, and 9 further adjust the standard errors for possible autocorrelation at the bank level. The
diagnostic section of Panel A reports the difference-in-differences (DID) estimate as well as the p-value
from the Wald test under the H0 that the DID estimate is equal to zero. The diagnostic section of Panel B
further reports the p-value from the Wald test under the H0 that, among the owners of the affected
Landesbanken, loan applicants for mortgage loans are as likely to be accepted as applicants for consumer
loans after the start of the financial crisis. Intercept, bank, and year fixed effects are not shown.
Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors are shown in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote significance at
the 1%, 5%, and10% level, respectively.

Panel A: Pooled sample (consumer and mortgage loans)
                                                                      Consumer and mortgage loans
                                                     (1)                         (2)                          (3)

 (1) Affected x Post-August 2007             -0.071***     (0.0008)      -0.072***     (0.0008)     -0.072***       (0.0227)
 (2) Unaffected x Post-August 2007            0.011***     (0.0006)       0.010***     (0.0007)       0.010*        (0.0056)

 Borrower risk (Internal rating)
 1                                           0.228***      (0.0023)       0.228***     (0.0023)     0.228***        (0.0269)
 2                                           0.216***      (0.0023)       0.216***     (0.0023)     0.216***        (0.0257)
 3                                           0.209***      (0.0022)       0.209***     (0.0022)     0.209***        (0.0248)
 4                                           0.207***      (0.0022)       0.207***     (0.0022)     0.207***        (0.0246)
 5                                           0.203***      (0.0022)       0.203***     (0.0022)     0.203***        (0.0243)
 6                                           0.200***      (0.0022)       0.200***     (0.0022)     0.200***        (0.0243)
 7                                           0.197***      (0.0022)       0.197***     (0.0022)     0.197***        (0.0242)
 8                                           0.190***      (0.0022)       0.190***     (0.0022)     0.190***        (0.0239)
 9                                           0.182***      (0.0023)       0.182***     (0.0023)     0.182***        (0.0233)
 10                                          0.157***      (0.0023)       0.157***     (0.0023)     0.157***        (0.0216)
 11                                          0.097***      (0.0026)       0.097***     (0.0026)     0.097***        (0.0147)

 Consumer Confidence                                                      0.001***     (0.0001)      0.0010         (0.0007)
 Time fixed effects                                  Yes                         Yes                          Yes
 Bank fixed effects                                  Yes                         Yes                          Yes
 Standard errors clustered at bank level                                                                      Yes

 Diagnostics
 Adj. R2                                           21.84%                      21.84%                     21.84%
 Wald Test: All coefficients = 0 (p-value)         <0.0001                     <0.0001                    <0.0001
 Difference-in-differences
 DID estimate: (1) - (2)                          0.082***                     0.082***                  0.082***
 Wald test: (1) - (2) [p-value]                    <0.0001                      <0.0001                   <0.0001
 Number of observations                           1,244,441                    1,244,441                 1,244,441




                                                                                                                          44
Panel B: Consumer and mortgage loans
                                                                       Consumer loans                                                             Mortgage loans
                                                    (4)                     (5)                       (6)                      (7)                     (8)                       (9)

(1) Affected x Post-August 2007             -0.059***     (0.0009)   -0.060***   (0.0009)   -0.060***        (0.019)   -0.115***     (0.0022)   -0.116***   (0.0022)   -0.116***       (0.0457)
(2) Unaffected x Post-August 2007           0.014***      (0.0008)   0.013***    (0.0008)    0.013**        (0.0053)   0.007***      (0.0012)   0.005***    (0.0012)     0.0050        (0.0089)

Borrower risk (Internal Rating)
1                                           0.222***      (0.0026)   0.222***    (0.0026)   0.222***        (0.0256)   0.215***      (0.0059)   0.215***    (0.0059)   0.215***        (0.0769)
2                                           0.215***      (0.0025)   0.215***    (0.0025)   0.215***        (0.0247)   0.203***      (0.0059)   0.203***    (0.0059)   0.203**          (0.079)
3                                           0.212***      (0.0024)   0.212***    (0.0024)   0.212***        (0.0243)   0.191***      (0.0059)   0.191***    (0.0059)   0.191**         (0.0785)
4                                           0.210***      (0.0024)   0.210***    (0.0024)   0.210***        (0.0241)   0.188***      (0.0059)   0.188***    (0.0059)   0.188**         (0.0785)
5                                           0.207***      (0.0024)   0.207***    (0.0024)   0.207***        (0.0238)   0.176***      (0.0059)   0.176***    (0.0059)   0.176**         (0.0769)
6                                           0.205***      (0.0024)   0.205***    (0.0024)   0.205***        (0.0238)   0.165***      (0.0059)   0.165***    (0.0059)   0.165**         (0.0747)
7                                           0.203***      (0.0024)   0.203***    (0.0024)   0.203***        (0.0237)   0.153***      (0.0059)   0.153***    (0.0059)   0.153**         (0.0696)
8                                           0.198***      (0.0024)   0.198***    (0.0024)   0.198***        (0.0235)   0.132***       (0.006)   0.132***     (0.006)   0.132**         (0.0582)
9                                           0.189***      (0.0024)   0.189***    (0.0024)   0.189***        (0.0231)   0.129***       (0.006)   0.129***     (0.006)   0.129**         (0.0538)
10                                          0.163***      (0.0025)   0.163***    (0.0025)   0.163***        (0.0226)   0.109***      (0.0061)   0.109***    (0.0061)   0.109***        (0.0388)
11                                          0.096***      (0.0028)   0.096***    (0.0028)   0.096***         (0.016)   0.086***      (0.0064)   0.086***    (0.0064)   0.086***        (0.0226)

Consumer Confidence                                                  0.001***    (0.001)     0.0010         (0.0007)                            0.001***    (0.0002)    0.0010         (0.0012)
Time fixed effects                            Yes                       Yes                   Yes                        Yes                       Yes                   Yes
Bank fixed effects                            Yes                       Yes                   Yes                        Yes                       Yes                   Yes
Standard errors clustered at bank level                                                       Yes                                                                        Yes
Diagnostics
Adj. R2                                          23.17%                   23.18%                 23.18%                     23.88%                   23.88%                 23.88%
Wald test: All coefficients = 0 (p-value)        <0.0001                  <0.0001                <0.0001                    <0.0001                  <0.0001                <0.0001
Difference-in-differences
DID estimate: (1) - (2)                          0.073***                 0.073***               0.073***                   0.122***                 0.121***               0.121***
Wald test: (1) = (2) [p-value]                   <0.0001                  <0.0001                <0.0001                    <0.0001                  <0.0001                <0.0001
Within treatment group:
(B) - (A)                                                                                                                   0.055***                 0.055***               0.055***
Wald test: (B) - (A) [p-value ]                                                                                             <0.0001                  <0.0001                <0.0001
Number of observations                           926,825                  926,825                926,825                    317,616                  317,616                317,616




                                                                                                                                                                                                  45
Table 6
Loan acceptance rates and bank heterogeneity
We estimate the probability that a bank accepts a loan application. All variables are defined in the Appendix. Log (Bank Size) is the natural logarithm of the bank’s
asset size in millions of euros. Liquidity (% of Total Assets) is the ratio of the bank’s cash and marketable securities to total assets. The borrower internal rating is
the bank’s internal risk assessment at the time the loan application is made. The models are estimated using a linear probability model with year fixed effects.
Intercept and year fixed effects are not shown. Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors clustered at the bank level are shown in parentheses. ***, **, and *
denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and10% level, respectively
                                                                                                  Dependent variable: Accepted (Yes/No)
                                                                                                              Affected banks
                                                                                                            (post -August 2007)
                                                Pooled sample             Consumer loans         Mortgage loans         Pooled sample             Consumer loans              Mortgage loans
                                                     (1)                        (2)                   (3)                     (4)                      (5)                         (6)
  Log (Bank Size)                            0.049***    (0.016)        0.044*** (0.0156)     0.0794*** (0.0253)
  Liquidity (% of Total Assets)                                                                                      16.149***    (6.311)       13.910***        (5.26)    31.866***        (11.2482)
 Borrower risk (Internal Rating)
 1                                           0.227***         (0.046)   0.278***   (0.0415)   0.348***    (0.0694)   0.231***        (0.0481)   0.281***        (0.0429)   0.332***          (0.067)
 2                                           0.245***        (0.0416)   0.279***   (0.0409)   0.304***    (0.0666)   0.246***        (0.0427)   0.278***        (0.0418)   0.290***         (0.0633)
 3                                           0.254***        (0.0401)   0.267***   (0.0401)   0.298***     (0.067)   0.253***        (0.0411)   0.264***        (0.0409)   0.287***          (0.064)
 4                                           0.260***        (0.0403)   0.264***   (0.0401)   0.333***    (0.0676)   0.258***        (0.0411)   0.261***        (0.0409)   0.321***         (0.0645)
 5                                           0.250***        (0.0393)   0.253***   (0.0393)   0.307***    (0.0648)   0.247***        (0.0401)   0.249***        (0.0401)   0.294***         (0.0623)
 6                                           0.248***        (0.0388)   0.249***   (0.0386)   0.304***    (0.0658)   0.245***        (0.0394)   0.246***        (0.0394)   0.294***          (0.063)
 7                                           0.250***        (0.0391)   0.252***   (0.0392)   0.276***    (0.0591)   0.245***        (0.0398)   0.247***        (0.0399)   0.260***         (0.0569)
 8                                           0.229***        (0.0402)   0.230***   (0.0403)   0.268***    (0.0588)   0.225***        (0.0406)   0.225***        (0.0409)   0.256***         (0.0566)
 9                                           0.218***        (0.0381)   0.218***   (0.0379)   0.229***    (0.0677)   0.212***        (0.0385)   0.213***        (0.0384)   0.224***         (0.0641)
 10                                          0.173***        (0.0376)   0.174***   (0.0379)   0.156***    (0.0493)   0.168***        (0.0378)   0.170***        (0.0382)   0.146***         (0.0485)
 11                                          0.072***        (0.0263)   0.071***   (0.0266)    0.0716     (0.0445)   0.071***        (0.0268)   0.071***        (0.0272)    0.0570          (0.0439)

 Consumer Confidence                          0.0135         (0.0099)    0.016*    (0.0096)    -0.0076    (0.0149)    0.0128         (0.0098)    0.0155         (0.0096)    -0.0082         (0.0149)
 Time fixed effects                                    Yes                Yes                         Yes                      Yes                        Yes                         Yes
 Standard errors clustered at bank level               Yes                Yes                         Yes                      Yes                        Yes                         Yes
 Diagnostics
 Adj. R2                                           5.13%                      5.64%                  6.95%                  6.26%                     6.44%                      10.21%
 Wald test: All coefficients = 0 (p-value)        <0.0001                    <0.0001                <0.0001                <0.0001                   <0.0001                     <0.0001
 Mortgage - consumer loans
 Δ [Log(Bank Size)] or
 Δ [ Liquidity (% of Total Assets)]                                                                0.035***                                                                     17.965***
 p-value                                                                                           <0.0001                                                                       <0.0001
 Number of observations                           207,609                    176,793                30,816                 207,609                   176,793                      30,816

                                                                                                                                                                                                   46
Table 7
Demand for loans after the onset of the financial crisis (applications)
The dependent variable is the number of loans requested by borrowers each week. We estimate the regressions for the
pooled sample (consumer and mortgage loans, Columns 1 and 2) as well as consumer (Columns 3 and 4) and mortgage
loans (Columns 5 and 6). The regressions are estimated using a fixed effect ordinary least squares (OLS) model and a
negative binomial model with fixed effects to account for the nature of the dependent variable (count data). We further
adjust the standard errors for possible autocorrelation at the state level. The diagnostic section of the table reports the
difference-in-differences (DID) estimate as well as the p-value from the Wald test under the H0 that the DID estimate is
equal to zero. The unit of our analysis is the number of weekly loan applications of each single bank and not an individual
loan application. This reduces our sample size compared with Table 4 and Table 5. We therefore use the mean internal
rating (averaging the internal rating score across all loan applications per bank in a given week) to control for borrower
risk. When using the negative binomial model, we further report the likelihood ratio test and in each case reject the H0
that conditional mean and median of the number of weekly loan applications is identical indicating overdispersion. We
further do not find an elevated number of zeros in the dependent variable and therefore do not report the regressions using
either Poisson or the zero inflated Poisson model. Intercept, bank and year fixed effects are not shown. Heteroskedasticity
consistent standard errors are shown in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and10% level,
respectively.

                                            Consumer and mortgage loans            Consumer loans                  Mortgage loans


                                            (1) OLS        (2) Negative    (3) OLS          (4) Negative   (5) OLS         (6) Negative
                                                             Binomial                         binomial                       binomial

 (1) Affected x Post-August 2007            -8.131**        -0.207**       -8.133**          -0.189**      -10.4366         -0.244**
                                            (3.5957)        (0.0896)        (3.254)          (0.0895)      (5.9764)         (0.1161)

                                            -9.749***       -0.284***     -10.753***         -0.291***     -12.249*         -0.257***
 (2) Unaffected x Post-August 2007
                                             (2.918)         (0.0514)      (2.1651)           (0.0429)      (5.83)           (0.072)

 Mean internal rating                       -1.245**        -0.039***     -1.423***         -0.0682***      -0.3932           0.0128
                                             (0.635)          (0.015)      (0.4195)          (0.0159)      (0.8432)          (0.0189)
 Consumer Confidence                         0.878*         0.023***        0.3830           0.020***      1.482**          0.0245***
                                            (0.4289)         (0.0045)      (0.3657)          (0.0038)      (0.5786)          (0.0068)

 Time fixed effects                           Yes              Yes           Yes                Yes          Yes               Yes
 Bank fixed effects                           Yes              Yes           Yes                Yes          Yes               Yes
 Standard errors clustered at state level     Yes              Yes           Yes                Yes          Yes               Yes

 Diagnostics
 Adj. R2 / Pseudo-R2                         80.98%          22.10%        81.41%             22.03%       86.05%            23.04%
 LR-test: α = 0 (p-value)                                    <0.0001                          <0.0001                        <0.0001
 Difference-in-differences
 DID estimate: (1) - (2)                     1.6180          0.0770         2.6200            0.1010       1.8124            0.0130
 Wald test: (1) - (2) [p-value]              0.6599          0.4293         0.4581            0.3319       0.7939            0.7907
 Number of observations                      32,638          32,638         25,822            25,822       6,816             6,816




                                                                                                                                       47
Table 8
The demand for loans after the onset of the financial crisis (loan amount)
The dependent variable is the natural logarithm of the loan amount requested by the borrower. Loan
amounts are available only for the subset of mortgage loans in our sample that corresponds to 317,583
loans. The borrower internal rating is the bank’s internal risk assessment at the time the loan application is
made. The regressions are estimated using a conditional fixed effect ordinary least squares (OLS) model.
Column 3 further adjusts the standard errors for possible autocorrelation at the state level. The diagnostic
section of the table reports the DID estimate as well as the p-value from the Wald test under the H0 that
the difference-in-differences (DID) estimate is equal to zero. The unit of our analysis is a loan application
and not only an accepted loan. Intercept, bank, and year fixed effects are not shown. Heteroskedasticity
consistent standard errors are shown in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%,
and10% level, respectively.


                                                 (1) OLS                 (2) OLS                 (3) OLS

 (1) Affected x Post-August 2007            -0.049***    (0.0091)   -0.049***    (0.0092)    -0.0490     (0.0203)


 (2) Nonaffected x Post-August 2007         -0.045***    (0.0063)   -0.044***    (0.0066)    -0.0444     (0.0211)

 Borrower risk (Internal Rating)
 1                                          -0.595***    (0.0146)   -0.595***    (0.0146)   -0.595***    (0.0268)
 2                                          -0.449***    (0.0154)   -0.449***    (0.0154)   -0.449***    (0.0133)
 3                                          -0.455***    (0.0154)   -0.455***    (0.0154)   -0.455***    (0.0101)
 4                                          -0.346***    (0.0152)   -0.346***    (0.0152)   -0.346***    (0.0359)
 5                                          -0.298***    (0.0151)   -0.298***    (0.0151)   -0.298***    (0.0324)
 6                                          -0.192***    (0.0151)   -0.192***    (0.0151)   -0.192***     (0.025)
 7                                          -0.117***     (0.015)   -0.117***     (0.015)   -0.117***     (0.022)
 8                                          -0.087***     (0.015)   -0.087***     (0.015)   -0.087***    (0.0117)
 9                                          -0.048***    (0.0149)   -0.048***    (0.0149)   -0.048***    (0.0112)
 10                                         -0.041***     (0.015)   -0.041***     (0.015)   -0.041***    (0.0134)
 11                                         -0.087***    (0.0159)   -0.087***    (0.0159)   -0.087***    (0.0106)

 Consumer Confidence                                                 -0.0004     (0.0012)    -0.0004     (0.0017)
 Time fixed effects                                Yes                     Yes                     Yes
 Bank fixed effects                                Yes                     Yes                     Yes
 Standard errors clustered at state level                                                          Yes

 Diagnostics
 Adj. R2                                          14.17%                  14.17%                  14.17%
 Difference-in-differences
 DID estimate: (1) - (2)                          0.0046                  0.0046                  0.0046
 Wald test: (1) - (2) [p-value]                   0.5762                  0.5729                  0.5953
 Number of observations                          317,583                  317,583                 317,583
Table 9
Bank-borrower relationships during the financial crisis
We estimate the probability that a bank accepts a loan application. All variables are defined in the
Appendix. The borrower internal rating is the bank’s internal risk assessment at the time the loan
application is made. The models are estimated using a linear probability model with bank specific fixed
effects and year fixed effects. Intercept, bank, and year fixed effects are not shown. Heteroskedasticity
consistent standard errors are shown in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and
10% level, respectively.

                                                                 Dependent variable: Accepted (Yes/No)
                                                     Pooled sample         Consumer loans           Mortgage loans
                                                  (1) LPM                  (2) LPM                  (3) LPM

 Secular effects
 Post-August 2007                                 0.011***      (0.0006)   0.014***      (0.0006)   0.006***        (0.0012)
 Relationships                                    0.028***      (0.0019)   0.009***      (0.0019)   0.018***        (0.0025)
 Second level interactions
 Affected x Post-August 2007                      -0.081***     (0.0008)   -0.072***     (0.0008)   -0.119***       (0.0022)
 Relationships x Post-August 2007                  0.004**      (0.0022)     0.007*       (0.004)   -0.007***       (0.0027)
 Relationships x Affected                         0.020***       (0.003)   0.016***       (0.004)   0.048***         (0.005)
 Diff-in-Diff-in-Diff
 Affected x Post-August 2007 x Relationships      0.049***      (0.005)    0.041***      (0.007)    0.018**         (0.008)

 Borrower risk (Internal Rating)
 1                                                0.221***      (0.0023)   0.218***      (0.0026)   0.206***        (0.0059)
 2                                                0.210***      (0.0023)   0.212***      (0.0025)   0.195***        (0.0059)
 3                                                0.204***      (0.0022)   0.209***      (0.0024)   0.184***        (0.0059)
 4                                                0.202***      (0.0022)   0.207***      (0.0024)   0.182***        (0.0059)
 5                                                0.198***      (0.0022)   0.203***      (0.0024)   0.172***        (0.0059)
 6                                                0.195***      (0.0022)   0.202***      (0.0024)   0.162***        (0.0059)
 7                                                0.193***      (0.0022)   0.200***      (0.0024)   0.151***        (0.0059)
 8                                                0.187***      (0.0022)   0.196***      (0.0024)   0.131***        (0.0059)
 9                                                0.180***      (0.0023)   0.188***      (0.0024)   0.128***        (0.0059)
 10                                               0.155***      (0.0023)   0.162***      (0.0025)   0.109***         (0.006)
 11                                               0.097***      (0.0026)   0.096***      (0.0028)   0.086***        (0.0064)

 Time fixed effects                                       Yes                      Yes                        Yes
 Bank fixed effects                                       Yes                      Yes                        Yes

 Diagnostics
 Adj. R2                                                22.04%                   23.25%                   24.07%
 Wald test: All coefficients = 0 (p-value)              <0.0001                  <0.0001                  <0.0001
 Mortgage - consumer loans
 Δ[Affected x Post-August 2007]                                                                          0.047***
 p-value                                                                                                  <0.0001
 Δ[Affected x Post-August 2007 x Relationships]                                                          -0.023***
 p-value                                                                                                  <0.0001
 Number of observations                                1,244,441                 926,825                  317,616




                                                                                                                          49
Table 10
Compare models for loan supply
We estimate the probability that a bank accepts a loan application. All variables are defined in the
Appendix. This table shows that results from the linear probability model are robust to probit as
alternative assumption about the distribution of the error term. We compare the linear probability model
and the probit model (with and without fixed effects). We only show the coefficients for the linear
probability model as well as the marginal effects for the probit model, respectively, for the interaction of
affected and nonaffected banks with post-August 2007. Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors are
shown in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

                                                              Dependent variable:
                                                              Accepted (Yes/No)
                                          Pooled sample              Consumer loans         Mortgage loans

 Linear probability model
 (1) Affected x Post-August 2007       -0.071***   (0.0008)       -0.059***   (0.0009)   -0.116***   (0.0022)
 (2) Nonaffected x Post -August 2007   0.010***    (0.0006)        0.014***   (0.0008)    0.005***   (0.0012)
      Diff-in-Diff (p-value)                <0.0001***                 <0.0001***             <0.0001***

 Probit (without fixed effects)
 (1) Affected x Post-August 2007       -0.081***   (0.0015)       -0.074***   (0.0016)   -0.095***   (0.0035)
 (2) Nonaffected x Post-August 2007    0.006***    (0.0006)        0.011***   (0.0006)    0.004***   (0.0013)
      Diff-in-Diff (p-value)                <0.0001***                 <0.0001***             <0.0001***

 Probit (with fixed effects)
 (1) Affected x Post-August 2007       -0.034***   (0.0009)       -0.025***   (0.0009)   -0.067***   (0.0031)
 (2) Nonaffected x Post-August 2007    0.004***    (0.0003)        0.005***   (0.0003)    0.001***   (0.0007)
      Diff-in-Diff (p-value)                <0.0001***                 <0.0001***             <0.0001***




                                                                                                             50
Table 11
Geographic proximity and access to credit
We estimate the probability that a bank accepts a loan application. All variables are defined in the Appendix. The
borrower internal rating is the bank’s internal risk assessment at the time the loan application is made. The models
are estimated using a linear probability model (LPM) with bank pair-specific fixed effects in Regressions 1 to 3 and
a probit model with standard errors clustered at the bank pair level in Regression 4. Heteroskedasticity consistent
standard errors are shown in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
level, respectively.

                                               Pooled sample,         Consumer loans,        Mortgage loans,        Pooled sample,
                                                    LPM,                   LPM,                   LPM,                  Probit
                      Dependent variable      Accepted (Yes/No)      Accepted (Yes/No)      Accepted (Yes/No)      Accepted (Yes/No)
                                                     (1)                    (2)                    (3)                    (4)

 (1) Affected x Post-August 2007             -0.144***   (0.0022)   -0.114***   (0.0024)   -0.267***   (0.0055)   -0.149***     (0.0737)
 (2) Nonaffected x Post-August 2007          0.007***    (0.0024)   0.011***    (0.0025)    0.015**     (0.006)     0.0052      (0.0146)
 Affected                                    -0.009***   (0.0016)   -0.024***   (0.0017)   0.021***    (0.0049)    -0.0174      (0.0156)



 Borrower risk (Internal Rating)
 1                                           0.145***    (0.0034)   0.185***    (0.0053)   0.187***    (0.0138)   0.041***      (0.0091)
 2                                           0.165***    (0.0039)   0.187***    (0.0045)   0.188***    (0.0142)   0.042***      (0.0074)
 3                                           0.168***    (0.0035)   0.180***    (0.0036)   0.172***    (0.0143)   0.047***      (0.0082)
 4                                           0.172***    (0.0033)   0.177***    (0.0034)   0.186***    (0.0144)   0.051***      (0.0087)
 5                                           0.168***    (0.0033)   0.172***    (0.0033)   0.178***    (0.0144)   0.051***      (0.0087)
 6                                           0.169***    (0.0033)   0.173***    (0.0033)   0.163***    (0.0146)   0.053***      (0.0089)
 7                                           0.168***    (0.0033)   0.171***    (0.0033)   0.160***    (0.0149)   0.053***      (0.0092)
 8                                           0.154***    (0.0033)   0.156***    (0.0033)   0.137***    (0.0153)   0.048***      (0.0079)
 9                                           0.147***    (0.0034)   0.148***    (0.0034)   0.127***    (0.0159)   0.045***      (0.0076)
 10                                          0.125***    (0.0035)   0.128***    (0.0035)   0.059***     (0.017)   0.038***      (0.0077)
 11                                          0.066***    (0.0038)   0.067***    (0.0037)   0.046***    (0.0188)   0.022***      (0.0054)

 Consumer Confidence                          -0.0010    (0.0004)    -0.0005    (0.0004)    -0.0002    (0.001)     -0.0011    (0.0038)
 Time fixed effects                                  Yes                    Yes                    Yes                    Yes
 Pairwise fixed effects                              Yes                    Yes                    Yes
 Standard errors clustered at bank pair                                                                                   Yes

 Diagnostics
 Adj. R2                                           10.30%                  9.87%                17.80%                  19.24%
 Number of Clusters                                  31                      31                   30                      31
 Wald test: All coefficients = 0 (p-value)         <0.0001                <0.0001               <0.0001                 <0.0001
 Difference-in-differences
 DID estimate: (1) - (2)                          0.151***               0.103***               0.252***               0.154***
 Wald test: (1) - (2) [p-value]                   <0.0001                <0.0001                <0.0001                <0.0001
 Number of observations                           206,083                171,901                 34,182                206,083




                                                                                                                         51
Table 12
Public announcements of subprime losses
We estimate the probability that a bank accepts a loan application. All variables are defined in the Appendix. The borrower internal
rating is the bank’s internal risk assessment at the time the loan application is made. The models are estimated using a linear
probability model with bank-specific fixed effects and year fixed effects. In Models 1 to 4 we include Sachsen LB, West LB, and
Bayern LB in the group of affected banks and identify the following quarters in which the announcements have been made: Sachsen
LB: Q3-2007, West LB: Q4-2007, and Bayern LB: Q1-2008. In Models 5 to 8, we also include HSH Nordbank and LBBW in the
group of affected Landesbanken and define Q2 2008 as the event date when they reported losses. We report only the difference-in-
differences (DID) estimate (Affected * Post Public) and triple-diff estimate (Relationships * Affected * Post Public).
Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors are shown in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and10%
level, respectively.

                                              Pooled     Consumer    Mortgages    Pooled     Pooled       Consumer    Mortgages    Pooled
                                               (1)          (2)        (3)         (4)           (5)          (6)         (7)          (8)

 Affected * Post Public                      -0.064***   -0.055***   -0.105***   -0.102***    -0.050***   -0.043***    -0.079***    -0.072***
                                              (0.0177)    (0.0158)    (0.0346)    (0.0045)     (0.0147)    (0.0133)     (0.0248)     (0.0038)
 Relationships * Affected * Post Public                                           0.039***                                           0.021***
                                                                                  (0.0045)                                           (0.0038)

 Internal rating                               Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
 Consumer Confidence                           Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
 Time fixed effects                            Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
 Bank fixed effects                            Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes

 Diagnostics
 Adj. R2                                      21.45%     22.74%       23.36%      21.60%       21.27%      22.59%       23.04%       21.41%
 Wald test: all coefficients = 0 (p-value)    <0.0001    <0.0001      <0.0001     <0.0001      <0.0001     <0.0001      <0.0001      <0.0001
 Number of observations                      1,244,441   926,825      317,616    1,244,441    1,244,441    926,825      317,616     1,244,441
