                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     HOUSEHOLD LEVERAGE AND THE RECESSION

                                        Callum Jones
                                      Virgiliu Midrigan
                                      Thomas Philippon

                                      Working Paper 16965
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w16965


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                           April 2011, Revised June 2018




We thank Sonia Gilbukh for excellent research assistance. We are indebted to Fernando Alvarez,
Andy Atkeson, David Backus, Patrick Kehoe, Andrea Ferrero, Mark Gertler, Veronica Guerrieri,
Erik Hurst, Ricardo Lagos, Guido Lorenzoni, Robert Lucas, Atif Mian, Elena Pastorino, Tom
Sargent, Robert Shimer, Nancy Stokey, Amir Sufi, Ivan Werning, Mike Woodford and numerous
seminar participants for comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
should not be attributed to the IMF, its Executive Board, its management, or the National Bureau
of Economics Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2011 by Callum Jones, Virgiliu Midrigan, and Thomas Philippon. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Household Leverage and the Recession
Callum Jones, Virgiliu Midrigan, and Thomas Philippon
NBER Working Paper No. 16965
April 2011, Revised June 2018
JEL No. E2,E4,E5,G0,G01

                                         ABSTRACT

We evaluate and partially challenge the ‘household leverage’ view of the Great Recession. In the
data, employment and consumption declined more in states where household debt declined more.
We study a model where liquidity constraints amplify the response of consumption and
employment to changes in debt. We estimate the model with Bayesian methods combining state
and aggregate data. Changes in household credit limits explain 40% of the differential rise and
fall of employment across states, but a small fraction of the aggregate employment decline in
2008-2010. Nevertheless, since household deleveraging was gradual, credit shocks greatly slowed
the recovery.

Callum Jones                                   Thomas Philippon
International Monetary Fund                    New York University
jonescallum@gmail.com                          Stern School of Business
                                               44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-190
Virgiliu Midrigan                              New York, NY 10012-1126
Department of Economics                        and NBER
New York University                            tphilipp@stern.nyu.edu
19 W. 4th St.
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
virgiliu.midrigan@nyu.edu
1         Introduction
A salient feature of the Great Recession is that U.S. regions that experienced the largest declines
in household debt also experienced the largest declines in consumption and employment. Fig-
ure 1 illustrates this pattern, originally documented in a series of papers by Mian and Sufi, by
plotting the change in consumption and employment against changes in household debt during
the 2002 to 2007 boom, as well as during the 2007 to 2010 recession.1
        One interpretation of this evidence that has received much attention is the household leverage
view of the recession. According to this view, declines in household debt, caused by a tightening
of credit standards or declines in house prices, forced households to reduce consumption and
led, due to price rigidities and trade frictions, to a reduction in employment.
        The goal of our paper is to quantitatively evaluate the household leverage view of the re-
cession. We ask: how important were shocks to household credit limits in generating the
macroeconomic dynamics across regions and in the aggregate? The evidence in Figure 1 does
not directly answer this question for two reasons. First, individual states and the U.S. aggregate
are subject to a variety of shocks in addition to changes in credit standards. These shocks may
themselves generate the correlation between state-level employment and household credit docu-
mented in Figure 1. For example, changes in a state’s productivity may lead to changes in that
state’s employment, house prices and the amount households borrow. Second, the response of
employment or consumption in an individual state to a given credit shock may be very different
than the response to the same shock in the aggregate. Moving from the cross-sectional to the
aggregate elasticity requires a careful consideration of trade patterns and monetary policy.
        We therefore use a model to isolate the effects of credit shocks and answer our question. We
study a parsimonious and tractable model of a monetary union composed of a large number of
regions that trade with each other. Households in each region face liquidity constraints that
restrict their ability to use the equity in their homes to finance consumption. These constraints
manifest themselves in a time-varying endogenous spread between the equilibrium interest rate
and the households’ rate of time preference. This wedge makes it optimal for households to
borrow against the value of their homes, but their ability to do so is limited by a loan-to-value
constraint which can change over time. Households in each region are subject to a number of
additional exogenous shocks to productivity and preferences. All shocks have both a region-
specific and an aggregate component.
        We estimate the model and the shocks using Bayesian likelihood methods and data on
    1
        See Mian and Sufi (2011, 2014) and Mian, Rao and Sufi (2013) for additional evidence.


                                                         1
employment, consumption, wages, house prices and household debt at the state level, together
with the corresponding series in the aggregate. An important challenge that arises in our
estimation is that the policy interest rate was at the zero lower bound (ZLB) during part of the
period that we study. We account for the non-linearities arising from this bound by using a
piece-wise linear solution method developed by Eggertsson and Woodford (2003), Guerrieri and
Iacoviello (2015), and Jones (2017). Even with this piece-wise linear approximation, a direct
application of Bayesian methods is infeasible in our setting given the large number of regional
and aggregate state variables in the model. We therefore propose a new methodology that
allows us to combine both state and aggregate data to evaluate the likelihood function.
       A popular approach to introducing a motive for household borrowing is to assume het-
erogeneity in agents’ rate of time preference, as in the work of Iacoviello (2005) and a large
literature that builds on it. Given our focus on estimating the model, we pursue a more flexible
approach. We assume instead that agents are subject to idiosyncratic shocks to their liquidity
needs. These shocks imply that the spread between the discount rate and the interest rate is
a smooth function of the amount agents can borrow. This flexibility is useful in estimation
because we do not want to impose a priori an important role for credit shocks in determining
household-level consumption variation. Depending on how volatile individual agents’ liquidity
needs are, the model either collapses to a frictionless benchmark in which consumption does
not respond to a tightening of credit constraints, or to an environment in which consumption
is much more sensitive to how much an agent can borrow.
       The liquidity constraints we model prevent households from converting their housing wealth
into funds available for consumption. We do not think that this is a controversial assumption:
if a household could pay, for example, an unexpected medical bill with the equity in their home,
they would not need to borrow against their homes and a loan-to-value constraint would be of
no consequence. A number of researchers have indeed documented that frictions that prevent
households from extracting home equity to finance consumption are sizable: see the work of
Kaplan and Violante (2014) and Gorea and Midrigan (2018). In contrast to this literature,
which models liquidity constraints as arising from a fixed cost agents must pay to refinance
their mortgage debt, considerations of computational tractability lead us to follow the approach
of Lucas (1990) in assuming that agents can tap home equity at no cost, but must do so prior to
the realization of an idiosyncratic taste shock. We assume that such shocks are i.i.d. and use a
family construct to eliminate the distributional consequences of asset market incompleteness.2
   2
    See also Lucas and Stokey (2011) who emphasize the role of liquidity frictions and Challe et. al. (2015) who
use a family construct to characterize an economy with uninsurable unemployment risk.


                                                       2
We view this set of assumptions as a convenient modeling device that allows us to parsimoniously
capture the role of household credit in the macroeconomy. Our model is flexible enough to
capture many of the insights of richer non-linear Bewley models, yet sufficiently tractable to be
used in a Bayesian estimation with data from a large number of regions.
   The quantity of household debt in our economy has important aggregate consequences. The
presence of idiosyncratic uncertainty leads agents in our environment to save for precautionary
reasons. In a flexible-price variant of the model, the equilibrium interest rate is below the rate
of time preference and is pinned down by the amount agents can borrow. A tightening of credit
leads to a reduction in the equilibrium interest rate, but a negligible drop in consumption or
employment. We refer to the equilibrium interest rate in the flexible-price version of our model
as the natural rate.
   In contrast, when prices and wages are sticky, the response of real variables to credit shocks
depends on the extent to which the nominal interest rate tracks the dynamics of the natural
rate. Absent the ZLB, monetary policy in an economy with sticky prices can replicate the dy-
namics of the flexible-price economy in response to an aggregate credit shock, ensuring negligible
fluctuations in real variables. At the ZLB, the economy’s dynamics are highly non-linear: the
marginal effect of a credit shock depends on how long the ZLB is expected to last. We thus use
survey data on the expected duration of the ZLB together with key macroeconomic time-series
to estimate the model and extract the aggregate shocks that generate the data. With these
shocks in hand we then study the marginal contribution of credit shocks on aggregate variables.
   We estimate three structural parameters that are key for determining the economy’s response
to a credit shock – the degree of idiosyncratic uncertainty, and the degrees of wage and price
stickiness. We also estimate the persistence and volatility of the state- and aggregate shock
processes. At the state-level, we use annual data on household debt, household spending,
employment, wages, and house prices from 1999 to 2015. At the aggregate level, we use the
aggregate counterparts of the state-level series, together with the Fed Funds rate and inflation
from 1984 to 2015.
   Directly combining aggregate series with their regional counterparts is computationally chal-
lenging in the presence of non-linearities arising from the ZLB, because the state-level observ-
ables are a time-varying function of aggregate shocks. To make our Bayesian estimation feasible
we exploit the structure of the model and express state-level variables as deviations from the
corresponding aggregates. Up to a first-order approximation, these deviations evolve according
to a law of motion that is independent of whether the ZLB binds or not. This structure allows



                                                3
us to separate the model’s likelihood function into independent state-level and aggregate com-
ponents. Nevertheless, both state and aggregate information shape the likelihood function and
the posterior distributions of the model parameters. Intuitively our estimation exploits the dif-
ferential rise and fall of individual states’ spending, employment, debt, wages and house prices,
in addition to the aggregate comovement of these series, to identify the structural parameters.
      Using the model, we generate counterfactual series for employment and consumption using
credit shocks alone and find that these account for about 40% of the differential rise and then
fall in state-level employment and consumption during the 2002 to 2010 period. Our findings
are thus consistent with those of Mian and Sufi (2011, 2014) who argued that household credit
played an important role in determining variation in regional consumption and employment.
      Although credit shocks have played an important role at the state level, they had a minor
role in the aggregate at the onset of the Great Recession. Our model implies that changes in
household credit limits generate a 0.8% decline in employment from 2008 to 2010, about one-
tenth of the drop observed, despite the fact that monetary policy was constrained by the ZLB.
This result reflects the gradual nature of household deleveraging which implies a gradual decline
in the natural rate of interest. Nevertheless, since the deleveraging process was long-lasting, the
natural rate of interest continued to decline until 2015. Our model implies that credit shocks
alone account for about one-half of the employment gap in this latter time period and thus have
greatly contributed to the slow recovery.3
      Our model’s implications for the aggregates are robust to a number of perturbations, includ-
ing adding a construction sector, changing the duration of mortgage contracts, the parameters
governing the strength of real rigidities and estimating the structural parameters using state
data only. The model reproduces well the behavior of tradable and nontradable employment in
individual states, as well as the medium-term fluctuations in mortgage rates in the data, series
that were not directly used in estimation.


Related Work In addition to the work of Mian and Sufi and Iacoviello (2005), our paper is
related to Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2015) and Eggertsson and Krugman (2012) who also study
the responses of an economy to a household credit crunch. While they study a closed-economy
setting, our model is that of a monetary union composed of a large number of states. Moreover,
our focus is on estimating the model using state-level and aggregate data.
      Our use of cross-state wage data to estimate the degree of rigidity in the labor market is
related to the work of Beraja, Hurst and Ospina (2015). One puzzle in the literature is that
  3
      See the literature on the slow recovery discussed by Fernald et al. (2017).


                                                         4
wages appear more flexible in the cross-section than in the time series. Our estimation strategy
takes both into account and settles on an intermediate value. Our emphasis on cross-sectional
evidence is also shared by the work of Nakamura and Steinsson (2014). These researchers study
the effect of military procurement spending across U.S. regions, and also emphasize the role of
regional evidence in identification.
       Finally, our work is related to the literature on financial intermediation, originating with
Bernanke and Gertler (1989), Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist
(1999) and more recently Mendoza (2010), Gertler and Karadi (2011), Gertler and Kiyotaki
(2010), and Gilchrist and Zakrajšek (2012).4
       Relative to these papers, we make three contributions. First, we propose a parsimonious
model in which liquidity constraints imply that credit constraints bind in equilibrium and gen-
erate a time-varying spread between interest rates and subjective discount rates. Despite its
parsimony, the model is flexible enough to encompass a wide range of predictions regarding the
role of credit for the macroeconomy and is thus suitable for empirical analysis.
       Second, we develop a novel methodology that allows us to combine state-level and aggregate
data to estimate a model with occasionally binding constraints using Bayesian techniques. We
believe that this methodology can be fruitfully applied in other settings in which regional evi-
dence can help discipline identification of key parameters. We view this as a contribution to the
fast growing literature on the use of regional evidence to identify general equilibrium models,
recently surveyed by Nakamura and Steinsson (2017).
       Finally, we apply our model and methodology to quantify the role of credit shocks in ac-
counting for state-level and aggregate employment during the Great Recession. In doing so, we
keep our analysis transparent by solely focusing on the household leverage view of the Great
Recession and abstract from other forces that have surely played an important role in this
episode, such as bank- and firm-level financing constraints, changes in uncertainty, demograph-
ics, increase in markups and risk premia and other forces. Since we omit all these factors, they
are implicitly accounted for by our rich set of exogenous shocks. Clearly, household credit may
interact with a number of these forces in important ways. For example, a tightening of house-
hold credit that depresses home prices may trigger a wave of default, reducing the net worth
of financial intermediaries.5 Though beyond the scope of this paper, we believe that jointly
modeling household credit and other frictions is a fruitful area for future research.
   4
     See also the work Lustig and van Nieuwerburgh (2005), Garriga, Manuelli and Peralta-Alva (2014), Favilukis,
Ludvigson and van Nieuwerburgh (2015), Burnside, Eichenbaum and Rebelo (2015), Landvoigt, Piazzesi and
Schneider (2015) who study the determinants of house prices.
   5
     See Faria-e-Castro (2017) for a model along these lines.


                                                       5
2     A Simplified Closed-Economy Real Model
We first describe a simplified version of the model we will use in our empirical analysis below.
We focus on the workings of the credit market and explain how liquidity constraints and id-
iosyncratic shocks generate an endogenous spread between the equilibrium interest rate and the
household’s rate of time preference. Owing to this spread, borrowing constraints bind in equi-
librium. A tightening of borrowing constraints or an increase in the variance of idiosyncratic
shocks increases this spread by reducing the equilibrium interest rate. The extent to which the
interest rate responds to a credit tightening depends on the variance of idiosyncratic shocks:
when these shocks are more dispersed, the equilibrium interest rate falls more after a credit
tightening.

2.1     Setup
We describe the assumptions we make on technology and preferences, the nature of securities
agents trade and the frictions we impose.


Technology and Preferences Competitive firms produce output yt with labor nt subject to

                                                 y t = nt .                                       (1)

Competition pins down the real wage so wt = 1. The supply of housing is fixed and normalized
to 1 and we let et denote the price of housing. The consumption good is the numeraire.
    The representative household has preferences of the form
                         ∞     Z 1                                                
                        X
                             t                                            1
                     E0    β        vit log (cit ) di + η̄ log (ht ) −      n1+ν                  (2)
                           t=0       0                                   1+ν t

where ht is the amount of housing the household owns, nt is the amount of labor it supplies and
cit is the consumption of an individual member i. The term vit ≥ 1 represents a taste shifter,
an i.i.d random variable drawn from a Pareto distribution

                                    Pr(vit ≤ v) = F (v) = 1 − v −α .                              (3)

Here α > 1 determines the amount of uncertainty about v. A lower α implies more uncertainty.


Securities Agents trade a long-term perpetuity with coupon payments that decay geometri-
cally at a rate determined by a parameter γ. A seller of such a security issues one unit at a
price qt in period t and repays 1 unit of the good in period t + 1, γ units in t + 2, γ 2 in t + 3 and

                                                     6
so on in perpetuity.6 The household trades this security with perfectly competitive financial
intermediaries.
      It is convenient to describe a household’s holdings of the security by recording the amount
of coupon payments bt that the household has to make period t. Letting lt denote the amount
of securities the household sells in period t, the date t + 1 coupon payments are
                                                ∞
                                                X
                                       bt+1 =         γ i lt−i = lt + γbt .                        (4)
                                                i=0

      We let at denote the amount of coupon payments the household is entitled to receive in
period t and bt the amount it must repay. Thus qt at represents the household’s total asset
holdings (savings), while qt bt represents her outstanding debt. As we explain below, the liquidity
constraint that we assume pins down the gross positions at and bt in isolation. Absent liquidity
constraints, only the net position at − bt would be pinned down.


Budget and Borrowing Constraints Let xt be the amount of funds the household transfers
to the goods market. Since individual members are ex-ante identical and of measure 1, xt is
also the amount of funds any individual member has available for consumption when entering
the goods market. We assume that each member’s consumption is limited by the amount of
funds it has available:
                                                  cit ≤ xt .                                       (5)

We refer to the constraint in (5) as the liquidity constraint.
      The budget constraint states that

                          xt + et (ht+1 − ht ) = wt nt + qt lt − bt + (1 + γqt )at .               (6)

The left-hand side of this expression gives the household’s uses of funds: transfers to individual
members, xt , and expenditure on housing, et (ht+1 − ht ). The right-hand side is the amount of
resources available: date t labor income, wt nt ; the proceeds from issuing lt units of new debt
at price qt , net of the required coupon payments on outstanding debt, bt ; as well as the market
value of the at securities the household owns. Each unit of the security pays a coupon of one
unit of the consumption good and can be sold at a price γqt .
      We also assume a borrowing constraint that limits the household’s ability to issue new loans.
The face value of new loans issued is limited by a multiple mt of the value of one’s home:

                                             qt lt ≤ mt et ht+1 .                                  (7)
  6
    See Hatchondo and Martinez (2009) and Arellano and Ramanarayanan (2012) who describe the properties
of these securities in more detail.

                                                        7
We assume that the parameter governing the credit limit, mt , follows an AR(1) process and is
the only source of aggregate uncertainty in this simplified version of the model:

                         log mt = (1 − ρm ) log m̄ + ρm log mt−1 + σm εm,t .                      (8)

   Our specification of the borrowing limit only restricts a household’s ability to take on new
loans and does not force prepayment of old debt. In our empirical work we resort to piece-
wise first-order perturbation techniques to solve and estimate the model. Given this solution
method, the maturity of debt γ only affects equilibrium outcomes through its impact on the
borrower’s overall credit limit, qt bt+1 ≤ γqt γbt + mt et ht+1 which adjusts gradually in response
to a shock to mt . Introducing additional savings instruments of different maturities would thus
be inconsequential.
   Our model shares a number of similarities with cash-in-advance models, though there are
several important differences. First, we assume that the household can access its date t labor
income wt nt immediately. Second, we allow agents to save in the interest-bearing assets at the
conclusion of their shopping period. The only distortion here is that arising from the household’s
inability to borrow in order to smooth the marginal utility of consumption across its members.


Savings A household’s savings are the unspent funds of its shoppers in the goods market.
The total amount of securities a household purchases at the end of the shopping period is then
                                                   Z 1
                                    qt at+1 = xt −     cit di.                              (9)
                                                       0


Timing We summarize, in Figure 2, the timing assumptions we make. The household enters
the period with at units of savings, ht units of housing and bt units of debt. The uncertainty
about the collateral limit mt is realized at the beginning of the period. The household then
chooses how much to work nt , how much housing to purchase ht+1 , how much to borrow bt+1 ,
and how much to transfer to each individual member xt . Each individual members’ taste for
consumption vit is then realized and individual members purchase cit units of consumption. At
the end of the period all unspent funds are pooled to purchase at+1 units of the security.

2.2    Decision Rules
The household’s problem is to choose ct (v), xt , ht+1 , bt+1 and nt to maximize its life-time utility
in (2) subject to the liquidity constraint in (5), the flow budget constraint in (6), the borrowing
constraint in (7) and the law of motion for the household’s savings in (9). We capture the

                                                  8
assumption that transfers xt are chosen prior to the realization of the idiosyncratic taste shock
v by imposing that xt is not measurable with respect to v.
   Let µt denote the shadow value of wealth, that is, the multiplier on the flow budget constraint
(6); ξt (v) denote the multiplier on the liquidity constraint (5) of a member with realization of
the taste shock v; and λt denote the multiplier on the borrowing constraint (7). Let Rt+1 denote
the realized one-period return of the long-term security:
                                                      1 + γqt+1
                                             Rt+1 =             .                            (10)
                                                         qt
The first-order condition that determines xt is then
                                                   Z 1
                              µt = βEt µt+1 Rt+1 +     ξt (v)dF (v),                         (11)
                                                           0

where Et is the expectation operator over the realization of the aggregate credit shock εm,t+1 .
   This last expression is quite intuitive. The transfer xt is valued at µt , the shadow value
of wealth in period t. Since unspent funds can be used to purchase long-term assets at the
conclusion of the shopping period, they are valued at βEt µt+1 Rt+1 . In addition, transfers
provide a liquidity service by relaxing the liquidity constraint of individual members. Since
transfers are chosen prior to the realization of the idiosyncratic taste shock v, these liquidity
services are equal to the expected multiplier of the liquidity constraint of individual members.
   Consider next the household’s choice of debt. The first-order condition for bt+1 is
                                                                           qt+1
                               µt = βEt µt+1 Rt+1 + λt − βγEt λt+1              ,            (12)
                                                                            qt
where recall that λt is the multiplier on the borrowing constraint. The benefit to borrowing
an additional unit is equal to the shadow value of wealth µt and the cost of doing so is next
period’s repayment, valued at βEt µt+1 Rt+1 . Borrowing an extra unit tightens today’s borrowing
constraint (λt ), but relaxes next period’s constraint (λt+1 ) because of the long-term nature of
securities and our assumption that the credit limit applies to new, rather than old, debt.
   Consider next the choice of housing. The first-order condition is given by
                                                                η̄
                               et µt − βEt µt+1 et+1 = βEt            + λt mt et .           (13)
                                                               ht+1
The left hand side of this expression is the user cost: the difference between the purchase price
and next period’s selling price, appropriately discounted. The right hand side is the marginal
                                η̄
utility of housing services   ht+1
                                     as well as the collateral value of housing λt mt et .



                                                      9
       Consider finally the choice of consumption of individual members. With logarithmic prefer-
ences7 the choice of consumption reduces to
                                                                               
                                                                  v
                              ct (v) = min                                 ,   xt .                         (14)
                                                           βEt µt+1 Rt+1

2.3        Equilibrium
The equilibrium is characterized by a sequence of prices et , wt , qt and allocations such that
agents optimize and the housing, labor and asset markets clear. The asset market clearing
condition is
                                                       at+1 = bt+1 .                                        (15)

The supply of labor is given by
                                                       nνt = µt wt .                                        (16)

Recall finally that firm optimization implies wt = 1 and that the housing stock is in fixed supply.

2.4        The Workings of the Model
We next briefly discuss the workings of the model. Let
                                                                  1
                                                    ct =                                                    (17)
                                                           βEt µt+1 Rt+1
denote the consumption of a member with the lowest realization of the taste shock, v = 1.
Using the first-order-conditions above, one can show that the transfer to individual members
satisfies                                   −α                  −1
                             1          xt               µt+1
                                                   = βEt      Rt+1     − 1 ≈ ρt − rt ,                      (18)
                            α−1         ct                µt
                              
                             µt+1
where ρt = − log βEt          µt
                                    is the household’s subjective discount rate and rt = log Et (Rt+1 ) is
the interest rate.
       Intuitively, the right-hand side of (18) is equal to the spread between the discount rate and
the interest rate, while the left-hand size is proportional to the fraction of constrained household
members with sufficiently large taste shocks, v > xt /ct . As the spread between the discount
rate and the interest rate increases, it becomes costlier for households to save, so transfers fall
relative to consumption and more members end up constrained.
                                                                                       R1
       Consider next the household’s total consumption expenditures, ct =               0
                                                                                            ct (v)dF (v). We have
                                                       1−α !
                                  ct       α        1 xt
                                      =         1−              .                                           (19)
                                  ct    α−1         α ct
   7
       See the earlier draft of this paper for an analysis of the more general case of CRRA preferences.

                                                             10
The lower the spread between the discount rate and the interest rate, the smaller the fraction
of constrained members, and therefore the larger the mean/min consumption ratio.
   Finally, letting                                  −1
                                            µt+1
                                   ∆t = βEt      Rt+1     −1                                            (20)
                                             µt
denote the spread between the discount rate and the interest rate, the savings to consumption
ratio can be written as:
                                                                       −1
                           qt at+1          α               1
                                   =           [(α − 1)∆t ] α − ∆t              − 1,                    (21)
                              ct           α−1
which increases as ∆t decreases and is steeper the higher ∆t is.
   Consider now the household’s decision of how much to borrow. Because the taste shocks
are unbounded, the expected multiplier on the liquidity constraint, the LHS of (18), is positive.
A comparison of (11) and (12) shows that the multiplier on the borrowing constraint, λt , is
positive as well. Intuitively, agents want to borrow because uncertainty regarding taste shocks
pushes the interest rate below the rate of time preference.

2.5    Steady State Equilibrium Interest Rate
Consider next how the equilibrium interest rate is determined in the steady state with a constant
credit limit mt = m̄. We have already discussed the supply of assets in the previous section.
Consider next the demand for assets. Because the borrowing limit binds, the amount of debt in
                                                                     1
the economy is proportional to the value of houses, qb =            1−γ
                                                                        m̄eh.    The value of houses reflects
both their service flow, as well as their collateral value. The latter declines as the interest rate
increases since a higher interest rate makes borrowing less attractive. To see this, notice that
in the steady state the Euler equation for housing (13) reduces to
                                            η̄            1
                                  eh =                                    .                           (22)
                                            µ 1−    m̄
                                                              ρ+    m̄
                                                                        r
                                                   1−βγ            1−βγ


The value of housing is given by the marginal utility of housing, η̄/µ, discounted by a weighted
average of the rate of time preference and interest rate with a weight that depends on how much
the household can borrow. As long as ρ < r, an increase in the loan-to-value ratio m̄ reduces
the effective discount rate, raising house prices.
   Figure 3 illustrate how the interest rate is determined in the steady state of the model. The
left panel assumes a relatively large degree of idiosyncratic uncertainty. The intersection of the
upward-sloping savings curve and the downward-sloping debt curve determines the equilibrium


                                                    11
interest rate. A tightening of the debt limit reduces the demand for debt, thus reducing the
interest rate. The right panel assumes a relatively low degree of idiosyncratic uncertainty. In
this case agents save less and the equilibrium interest rate is higher. Moreover, the intersection
of the asset and debt curves now occurs at a point at which the asset supply curve is relatively
flat, implying that a given decline in the debt limit is associated with a smaller reduction in the
equilibrium interest rate.

2.6          Impulse Response to a Credit Shock
Figure 4 reports the economy’s responses to a one-time negative shock to credit, εm,t . This
shock leads to a gradual reduction in household debt due to the long-term nature of securities
and the assumption that the credit limit applies to new loans, not existing debt. We contrast
the responses in economies with a high and low degree of idiosyncratic uncertainty.
         Notice that the equilibrium interest rate falls after a credit tightening, more so when id-
iosyncratic uncertainty is high. In contrast, employment barely falls. Although a tightening of
credit magnifies the consumption-leisure distortions, these are small here, as in cash-in-advance
models.8
         We provide further intuition for how the equilibrium interest rate responds to a credit shock
by noting that equations (20) and (21) imply that the aggregate Euler equation in this economy
is
                                                          µt+1
                                           (1 + ∆t )βEt        Rt+1 = 1,
                                                           µt
where                                        −1
                       α                1                qt bt+1    debt
                            [(α − 1)∆t ] − ∆t
                                        α         −1=            =                     (23)
                     α−1                                    yt     income
follows from asset market clearing and µt is inversely related to consumption. A decline in
debt limits raises the average multiplier on liquidity constraints, ∆t , more so when idiosyncratic
volatility (α−1 ) is high, thus acting like a natural rate shock in more traditional New Keynesian
models.9 An important difference, however, is that in our model the natural rate is determined
endogenously and responds to changes in credit limits.


3          An Island Monetary Economy with Price Rigidities
We next embed the credit frictions described above into a richer monetary economy with price
and wage rigidities. The economy consists of a continuum of ex-ante identical islands of measure
     8
         Cooley and Hansen (1991).
     9
         See, for example, the work of Christiano, Eichenbaum and Rebelo (2011) and Werning (2012).

                                                        12
1 that belong to a monetary union and trade among themselves. Consumers on each island derive
utility from the consumption of a final good, leisure and housing. The final good is assembled
using inputs of traded and non-traded goods. We assume that intermediate goods producers
are monopolistically competitive. Individual households on each island belong to unions that
sell differentiated varieties of labor. Prices and wages are subject to Calvo adjustment frictions.
Labor is immobile across islands and the housing stock on each island is in fixed supply.10
       Since we estimate the model using Bayesian likelihood techniques, we allow for several ad-
ditional shocks. We include an additional shock to the rate of time preference of individual
households. Recall that in our model credit shocks act much like discount rate shocks, in that
they change the natural rate of interest. Since we do not want to assume that household credit
shocks alone account for all variation in discount rates in the data, we allow for a separate ex-
ogenous source of movements in discount rates unrelated to household credit. We also include
shocks to the household’s disutility from work, their preference for housing, as well as produc-
tivity. Each shock has an island-specific and aggregate component. In addition, we assume
aggregate shocks to the interest rate rule and to the aggregate inflation equation.

3.1        Setup
Household Problem The representative household on each island has preferences identical
to those described above. We let s index an individual island and pt (s) denote the price of the
final consumption good. We assume perfect risk-sharing across households belonging to different
labor unions on a given island. Because of separability in preferences, risk-sharing implies that
all households on an island make identical consumption, housing and savings choices, even
though their labor supply differs depending on the union they belong to. The problem of a
household that belongs to labor union ι is to
           ∞    t−1
                           ! Z
                                 1
                                                                                    ηtn (s)
          X    Y                                                                                         
                                                               h                                     1+ν
  max E0            βj (s)         vit (s) log (cit (s)) di + ηt (s) log (ht (s)) −         nt (ι, s)        (24)
          t=0  j=0             0                                                    1 +   ν

subject to the budget constraint

 pt (s)xt (s)+et (s)(ht+1 (s)−ht (s)) = wt (ι, s)nt (ι, s)+qt lt (s)−bt (s)+(1+γqt )at (s)+Tt (ι, s), (25)

where Tt (ι, s) collects the profits households earn from their ownership of intermediate goods
firms, transfers from the government aimed at correcting the steady state markup distortion, as
well as the transfers stemming from the risk-sharing arrangement. We assume that households
  10
       See our Robustness section below for an extension of the model with a construction sector.

                                                        13
on island s exclusively own firms on that particular island. Here ηth (s) and ηtn (s) affect the
preference for housing and the disutility from work, while βt (s) is the household’s one-period
ahead discount factor. We assume that each of these preference shifters have an island-specific
component and an aggregate component, all of which follow AR(1) processes with independent
Gaussian innovations.
       As earlier, the household also faces a liquidity constraint limiting the consumption of an
individual member to be below the amount of real balances the member holds:

                                                 cit (s) ≤ xt (s),                                                  (26)

a borrowing constraint
                                         qt lt (s) ≤ mt (s)et (s)ht+1 (s),                                          (27)

and the law of motion for a household’s assets is given by
                                                        Z 1          
                           qt at+1 (s) = pt (s) xt (s) −     cit (s)di .                                            (28)
                                                                         0

There are no barriers to capital flows, so all islands trade securities at a common price qt . The
credit limit mt (s) evolves as the product of an island-specific and aggregate component, both
of which are AR(1) processes with Gaussian disturbances.
       We introduce shocks to housing preferences because, as is well known, LTV shocks alone
cannot generate movements in house prices as large as those in the data in this class of models.
We thus assume shocks to both the LTV ratio as well as the consumer’s preference for housing
in order to allow the model to match the state-level and aggregate data on house prices.11 We
note, however, that changes in the preference for housing only matter through their effect on
household credit limits since housing is separable in the utility function and the housing stock
is in fixed supply.


Final Goods Producers Final goods producers on island s produce yt (s) units of the final
good using ytN (s) units of non-tradable goods produced locally and ytT (s, j) units of tradable
goods produced on island j:
                                                                                                           σ
                                                                                                  κ σ−1 ! σ−1
                                                              Z   1                            κ−1 σ
                             1          σ−1               1                         κ−1
                 yt (s) =   ω ytN (s)
                             σ           σ    + (1 − ω)   σ            ytT (s, j)    κ    dj                    ,   (29)
                                                               0

  11
    See Kiyotaki, Michaelides and Nikolov (2011) for an illustration of the problem and Garriga, Manuelli and
Peralta-Alva (2014) and Favilukis, Ludvigson and Van Nieuwerburgh (2015) for approaches to resolve it. We
think of preference shocks as a parsimonious way of capturing changes in risk premia or beliefs that trigger
changes in house prices in these models.

                                                          14
where ω determines the share of non-traded goods, σ is the elasticity of substitution between
traded and non-traded goods and κ is the elasticity of substitution between varieties of the
traded goods produced on different islands. Letting pN          T
                                                     t (s) and pt (s) denote the prices of these

goods on island s, the final goods price on an island is
                                                                                                     1
                                                                Z    1                      1−σ
                                                                                              1−κ
                                                                                                  ! 1−σ
                   pt (s) =      ωpN
                                   t (s)
                                        1−σ
                                            + (1 − ω)                     pTt (j)1−κ dj                   .          (30)
                                                                  0


The demand for non-tradable intermediate goods produced on an island is
                                           N −σ
                                N          pt (s)
                               yt (s) = ω           yt (s),                                                          (31)
                                           pt (s)
while demand for an island’s tradable goods is an aggregate of what all other islands purchase:
                                               Z   1                      κ−σ
                                                                            1−κ
                                                                                Z      1                     
              ytT (s)   = (1 −   ω)pTt (s)−κ            pTt (j)1−κ dj                            σ
                                                                                            pt (j) yt (j)dj .        (32)
                                                0                                   0


Intermediate Goods Producers Traded and non-traded goods on each island are them-
selves CES composites of varieties of differentiated intermediate inputs with an elasticity of
substitution ϑ. The demand for an individual variety k is
                                                                  −ϑ T
                                   ytT (k, s) = pTt (k, s)/pTt (s)   yt (s).

   Individual producers of intermediate goods are subject to Calvo price adjustment frictions.
Let λp denote the probability that a firm does not reset its price in a given period. A firm that
resets its price maximizes the present discounted flow of profits weighted by the probability that
the price it chooses at t will still be in effect at any particular date. As earlier, the production
function is linear in labor, but is now subject to a productivity disturbance zt (s) that is common
to both sectors, so that
                                    ytj (s) = zt (s)njt (s), for j ∈ {T, N }

so that the unit cost of production is simply wt (s)/zt (s) in both sectors.
   For example, a traded intermediate goods firm that resets its price solves
                   ∞     j−1
                                     !                               T ∗ −ϑ
                  X
                       j
                         Y
                                                T∗         wt+j (s)    pt (s)     T
         max          λp     βt+i (s) µt+j (s) pt (s) − τp               T
                                                                                 yt+j (s),                           (33)
         pT
          t
            ∗ (s)
                  j=0    i=0
                                                           zt+j (s)    p t+j (s)

where µt+j (s) is the shadow value of wealth of the representative household on island s, that is,
                                                                                 ϑ−1
the multiplier on the flow budget constraint (25), and τp =                       ϑ
                                                                                            is a tax the government levies
to eliminate the steady state markup distortion. This tax is rebated lump sum to households

                                                           15
on island s. The composite price of traded or non-traded goods is then a weighted average of
the prices of individual differentiated intermediates. For example, the price of traded goods is
                                                                             1
                           pTt (s) = (1 − λp )pTt ∗ (s)1−ϑ + λp pTt−1 (s)1−ϑ 1−ϑ .
                                    
                                                                                                                                            (34)


Wage Setting We assume that individual households are organized in unions that supply
differentiated varieties of labor. The total amount of labor services available in production is
                                                                                           ψ
                                                       Z       1               ψ−1
                                                                                         ψ−1
                                           nt (s) =                 nt (ι, s)    ψ    dι      ,                                             (35)
                                                            0

where ψ is the elasticity of substitution between labor varieties. Demand for an individual
union’s labor given its wage wt (ι, s) is therefore nt (ι, s) = (wt (ι, s)/wt (s))−ψ nt (s). The problem
of a union that resets its wage is to choose a new wage wt∗ (s) to

         ∞      j−1
                             !                           −ψ                                                                      −ψ              !1+ν 
                                                 ∗                        n
                                                                          ηt+j (s)                                      wt∗ (s)
                                                                                                                    
        X
              j
                Y
                                          ∗       wt (s)
max         λ w     β t+i (s) τ w µt+j w t (s)               n t+j (s) −                                                                nt+j (s)       ,
wt∗ (s)
        j=0     i=0
                                                 wt+j (s)                  1+ν                                          wt+j (s)
                                                                                                                                            (36)
                                                                                                                                     ψ−1
where λw is the probability that a given union leaves its wage unchanged and τw =                                                     ψ
                                                                                                                                             is a
labor income subsidy aimed at correcting the steady state markup distortion. The composite
wage at which labor services are sold to producers is
                                                                         1
                           wt (s) = (1 − λw )wt∗ (s)1−ψ + λw wt−1 (s)1−ψ 1−ψ .
                                   
                                                                                                                                            (37)


Island Equilibrium The composite labor services are used by producers of both tradable
and non-tradable goods:
                                  1                   −ϑ                             1                    −ϑ
                                          pN                                                  pTt (ι, s)
                              Z                                                Z         
                                           t (ι, s)
                   nt (s) =                                 ytN (s)dι      +                                     ytT (s)dι.                 (38)
                              0            pN
                                            t (s)                                 0            pTt (s)
The agents’ consumption-savings choices are identical to those described earlier. For example,
the minimum consumption level is equal to
                                                               1           1
                                             ct (s) =                           ,                                                           (39)
                                                        βEt µt+1 (s)Rt+1 pt (s)

where recall that pt (s) is the price of the final good on the island. The choice of transfers xt (s)
is identical to that in (11) above, while total household consumption is given by (19) as earlier.
   The island’s net asset position evolves according to:

      qt (at+1 (s) − bt+1 (s)) = (1 + γqt )(at (s) − bt (s)) + wt (s)nt (s) + Tt (s) − pt (s)ct (s).                                        (40)

                                                                     16
3.2       Monetary Policy
            R1                                                                                 R1
Let yt =      0
                  pt (s)yt (s)/pt ds be total real output in this economy, where pt =            0
                                                                                                     pt (s)ds is the
aggregate price index. Let πt = pt /pt−1 denote the rate of inflation and

                                                   1 + it = Et Rt+1                                            (41)

be the expected nominal return on the long-term security, which we refer to as the nominal
interest rate. Aggregation over the pricing choices of individual producers implies, up to a
first-order approximation,
                                                     (1 − λp )(1 − λp β̄)
              log(πt /π̄) = β̄Et log(πt+1 /π̄) +                          (log(wt ) − log(zt )) + θt ,
                                                              λp
where we add an AR(1) disturbance θt to individual firms’ desired markups, β̄ is the steady
state discount factor and π̄ is the steady-state level of inflation.12
       We assume that monetary policy is characterized by a Taylor rule when the ZLB does not
bind:                                            αy           1−αr       αx
                                       αr         yt                      yt
                1 + it = (1 + it−1 )  (1 +           ı̄) πtαπ  r
                                                         exp(εt )                 ,
                                                  ȳ                     yt−1
where εrt is a monetary policy shock, αr determines the persistence and απ , αy and αx determine
the extent to which monetary policy responds to inflation, deviations of output from its steady
state level, and output growth, respectively. We assume that ı̄ is set to a level that ensures a
steady state level of inflation of π̄. When the ZLB binds, then

                                                         it = 0.

The interest rate may be at zero either because aggregate shocks cause the ZLB to bind, or
because the Fed commits to keeping it at 0 for a longer time period than implied by the
constraint. We thus implicitly assume that the Fed can manipulate expectations of how the
path of interest rates evolves, as in Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) and Werning (2015). In
our estimation we use survey data from the New York Federal Reserve to discipline the expected
duration of the zero interest rate regime during the 2009 to 2015 period.
       Since we assume that an individual island is of measure zero, monetary policy does not react
to island-specific disturbances. The monetary union is closed so aggregate savings must equal
to aggregate debt:                     Z    1                    Z   1
                                                at+1 (s)ds =             bt+1 (s)ds.                           (42)
                                        0                        0
  12
    We assume in our quantitative analysis that π̄ is equal to 2% per year. We eliminate the steady-state costs
of positive inflation by assuming that all prices and wages are automatically indexed to π̄. See Coibion and
Gorodnichenko (2014) and Blanco (2015) who study the size of these costs in the absence of indexation.

                                                            17
3.3        Solution Method
Since we use Bayesian techniques to estimate the model, we need a fast and efficient solution
method. We thus use a piece-wise linear solution method in order to solve the model. The first
step in our algorithm is to linearize all equations of the model in the absence of a ZLB on the
interest rate.
       We accommodate the ZLB using an algorithm developed by Eggertsson and Woodford
(2003), Guerrieri and Iacoviello (2015), and Jones (2017). Jones (2017) contrasts this method
with fully non-linear ones in smaller scale models and shows that that the piece-wise lin-
ear method we use here is accurate.               Lepetyuk, Maliar and Maliar (2017) contrast these
perturbation-based methods with fully non-linear projection methods in larger-scale models
and reach similar conclusions regarding their accuracy.
       We define two regimes, one in which the ZLB binds and another one in which it does not.
The algorithm is based on a piece-wise linear solution of the equilibrium conditions in these
two regimes, under the assumption that agents observe all aggregate shocks in each period, but
believe that no other shocks are possible in the future. Given a conjectured date T at which the
ZLB will stop binding, we iterate backwards by using either the equilibrium conditions under the
ZLB regime or the non-ZLB regime, depending on which one is conjectured to be in effect (note
that we allow for the possibility that a shock at t triggers the ZLB at some future period). This
backward recursion gives a path for all variables of the model, including the interest rate, which
we use to update the initial conjecture until convergence. Once the algorithm has converged,
the solution of the model is
                                           xt = Jt + Qt xt−1 + Gt t ,                                     (43)

where xt collects the endogenous variables, t collects the shocks, and the matrices J, Q and G
are varying over time due to the ZLB constraint.13

3.4        The Workings of the Model
We next provide some intuition for how this richer model works by showing impulse responses
to state-level and aggregate credit shocks for a range of parameter values.


Impulse Response to a State-Level LTV Shock Figure 5 reports the impulse response
to a state-level shock to the LTV constraint in the baseline parameterization using the modal
posterior estimates discussed below. Panel A shows that the shock leads to a gradual decline in
  13
       See Kulish and Pagan (2016) and Jones (2017) for more details on the recursion underlying this solution.


                                                        18
that island’s debt because of the long-term nature of debt contracts. The island’s asset position
falls as well, yet not as much as debt does, so the island runs a current account surplus, reducing
consumption of both tradable and non-tradable goods. Since prices are sticky, the decline in
non-tradable consumption leads to a decline in employment owing to price and wage rigidities.
   Figure 6 shows the responses to the same state-level LTV shock in an economy with a
lower degree of idiosyncratic uncertainty. Notice that the responses of wages, employment and
consumption are all dampened compared to those under the baseline estimates. Mechanically,
this dampening is due to the much sharper decline in the asset position on the island, shown in
Panel A, which now drops almost as much as debt does. As a result, the island no longer runs
a large current account surplus and consumption and employment barely change.
   The intuition for why assets fall much more when idiosyncratic uncertainty is low is as
follows. Households can respond to a tightening of credit limits in two ways: either by reducing
their assets or by cutting consumption. When idiosyncratic uncertainty is low, it is relatively
costless to reduce asset holdings because the liquidity constraints are not very severe. Both sides
of the households’ balance sheets thus contract, with little impact on other variables. Credit in
this case is a veil that has little consequence for macroeconomic aggregates. In contrast, when
idiosyncratic uncertainty is high, reducing asset holdings is costly because individual members
are more likely to be liquidity constrained. Households thus find it optimal to respond to the
credit tightening by cutting consumption a lot more.
   Intuitively, a tightening of debt constraints distorts allocations in two ways: it prevents
households from smoothing the marginal utility of consumption both across members as well as
across time. Households thus face a tradeoff: they can respond to a tightening of credit limits
by either reducing overall consumption, thus worsening the intertemporal allocations, or by
reducing asset holdings, thus worsening the allocation of consumption across agents. The more
dispersed the idiosyncratic shocks are, the more the household chooses to reduce the overall
level of consumption to avoid the high costs of variation of the marginal utility of consumption
across its members.
   Figure 7 illustrates the role of price rigidities in determining the state-level responses to a
credit shock. We consider two economies, one in which prices and wages are sticky, and another
in which they are flexible. When prices are flexible, wages respond immediately to the credit
tightening owing to wealth effects on labor supply. Employment thus increases and consumption
falls relatively little. In contrast, when prices are sticky, employment falls since wage rigidities




                                                19
effectively act like a tax on labor supply and price rigidities lead to a rise in firm markups.14
The decline in employment amplifies the drop in consumption as well.


Impulse Response to an Aggregate Credit Shock To understand the effect of an aggre-
gate credit shock in our model, recall from Equation (23) that changes in household credit lead
to changes in the natural interest rate. The degree to which a shock to credit affects real vari-
ables therefore depends crucially on the extent to which the monetary authority accommodates
these changes in the natural rate.
       We illustrate this in Figure 8 where we contrast the effect of a large and gradual credit
tightening with and without a binding ZLB. On impact, the credit shock causes the ZLB to
bind for five years and employment to fall by 6.5 percent. Absent the ZLB, the Fed would
gradually reduce the nominal rate below zero and employment would fall very little.
       A broader implication of these impulse responses is that we cannot simply extrapolate state-
level correlations to inform about the role of credit shocks in generating fluctuations in the
aggregate. Even though credit shocks may have large effects on state-level employment, owing
to the presence of price rigidities, price rigidities alone are not sufficient for credit shocks to
affect employment in the aggregate – monetary policy must be constrained as well. Thus, while
the state-level evidence is important for identifying the key parameters of the model, one needs
to use the structure of the model to isolate the role of credit shocks in generating aggregate
fluctuations in real variables.


4        Estimation
We next describe how we have chosen parameters for our model. We first discuss the parameters
we assign values to based on the literature or steady-state considerations, and then the ones we
estimate using Bayesian likelihood methods and state-level and aggregate data.
       The parameters that we estimate are those that are critical in determining the model’s
responses to a credit shock: the degree of wage and price stickiness, λw and λp , as well as
the volatility of idiosyncratic taste shocks, α. We refer to these parameters as our structural
parameters. In addition, we estimate the AR(1) processes characterizing the island-specific and
aggregate components of the various shocks. We next describe the parameters we have assigned,
the construction of the likelihood function, and then our results.
  14
    See Kehoe, Midrigan and Pastorino (2016) for cross-sectional evidence from the U.S. Great Recession that
both of these margins account for the drop in employment in states that have experience the largest declines in
household credit.


                                                      20
4.1       Assigned Parameters
We report the parameter values we assign in Table 1. The period is one quarter. We assume
a Frisch elasticity of labor supply of 1/2 and thus set ν equal to 2. We set γ, the parameter
governing the duration of debt, to 0.985, so that the Macaulay duration of debt in our model
is equal to that of mortgage debt in the data, approximately 13 years.15 We follow the trade
literature in setting the weight on non-traded goods in an island’s consumption basket, ω, equal
to 0.7, the elasticity of substitution between traded and non-traded goods, σ, equal to 0.5, and
the elasticity of substitution between varieties of traded goods produced in different islands,
κ, equal to 4. We follow Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005) in choosing ψ to ensure a
wage markup of 5%.16 We use the Justiniano and Primiceri (2008) estimates of the parameters
characterizing the Taylor rule.
       We pin down three additional parameters using steady state considerations. The steady
state discount factor β̄ is chosen so that the steady state real interest rate is equal to 2% per
year. The steady state weight of housing in preferences η̄ h is chosen so that the aggregate
housing to (annual) income ratio is equal to 2.5, a number that we compute using the 2001
Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF). Finally, the steady state LTV ratio is chosen so that the
aggregate debt to housing ratio is equal to 0.29, a number once again computed from the SCF.
Since the debt constraint binds in the model, these two last two targets imply an aggregate
debt to (annual) income ratio of 2.5 × 0.29 = 0.725.

4.2       Estimation Procedure
Our approach is motivated by the work of Mian and Sufi (2014) and Beraja, Hurst and Ospina
(2015) who illustrate the value of using regional variation in identifying the effect of credit
shocks on real activity. Since our goal is to study both the model’s regional and aggregate
implications, we depart from these papers by combining regional as well as aggregate data in the
estimation. Since we study a model with occasionally binding constraints (the ZLB), evaluating
the likelihood function using conventional methods is computationally infeasible due to the very
large number of state variables and the curse of dimensionality. We therefore propose a novel
methodology that exploits the structure of the model and allows us to combine state-level and
aggregate data to form the likelihood.
  15
     The Macaulay duration is the weighted average maturity of the flows, with weights given by the present
value of the flows accruing at each date. In our model with geometrically decaying perpetuities this duration is
given by (1 + r)/(1 + r − γ).
  16
     We show in our Robustness section that our conclusions are not sensitive to alternative values of this
parameter.

                                                      21
       We first describe the details of our approach, and then report our results.

4.2.1      The Parameters

We estimate the three structural parameters, α, λp , λw , as well as the persistence and volatility of
the state and aggregate components of the shocks to productivity, the discount factor, preference
for housing, disutility from work, and the credit limit.

4.2.2      The Data

Regional Data We use a panel of employment, household spending, wages, household debt
and house prices in the cross-section of 51 U.S. states from 1999 to 2015. The household debt
information is from the FRB New York Consumer Credit Panel.17 Since the measure of debt
in the data is the book value of outstanding debt, we construct a corresponding series for our
model using
                                     debtt (s) = γdebtt−1 (s) + qt lt (s),

where qt lt (s) is the market value of mortgage debt issued in period t on island s and γdebtt−1 (s)
is the book value of outstanding debt. We found that our results are largely unchanged when
we alternatively use the market value of debt qt bt+1 (s) to proxy for household credit in the data.
       We use data on house prices from the FHFA, and data on employment, consumption expen-
ditures and wages from the BEA. Our measure of employment is the employment-population
ratio in a given state. Our measure of wages is total employee compensation divided by the
number of workers. Since we do not model the construction sector, we subtract construction
employment and compensation in computing measures of employment and wages.18


Aggregate Data We use aggregate data on employment, household consumption, wages,
household debt, house prices, inflation and the Fed Funds rate from 1984 to 2015. We construct
this data in a similar way to the state-level data. An additional critical input in the estimation
is the sequence of expected durations of the ZLB between 2009 and 2015, which we take from
the Blue Chip Financial Forecasts survey from 2009 to 2010 and the New York Federal Reserve’s
Survey of Primary Dealers from 2011 to 2015.19
  17
     We include credit card debt, auto loans and student loans, in addition to mortgage debt in our measure of
household credit. Since mortgage debt makes up a large fraction of household debt, our results are virtually
unchanged when we only use mortgage debt in our estimation.
  18
     See our Robustness section for an extension that explicitly models the construction sector and uses data on
construction employment in estimation. Our results are robust to this modification.
  19
     See the Appendix for a more detailed description of the data we use.



                                                      22
4.2.3     The Likelihood Function

Consider first the state-space representation of the piece-wise linear approximation of our model
discussed in Section 3.3. Recall that the solution of the model is:

                                        xt = Jt + Qt xt−1 + Gt t ,

where xt collects the endogenous variables, both state and aggregate and t collects the shocks,
both state and aggregate.
      The conventional approach to estimating the model would be to write down a likelihood
function that directly uses state and aggregate data and the above solution. This approach is
computationally infeasible in part because of the non-linearity induced by the ZLB, captured
by the time-varying reduced-form matrices, Jt , Qt , Gt , which change depending on how long
the ZLB is expected to last. This non-linearity, combined with the curse of dimensionality
which arises from our use of 51 regions, each of which has 10 individual state variables (the
island’s savings, debt positions as well as the past wage and price composites, together with the
5 shocks) renders the conventional approach infeasible.
      We thus formulate an alternative approach to constructing the likelihood function, one that
exploits relative variation across individual states’ outcomes during the 1999 to 2015 period.
Intuitively, our approach recognizes that, up to a first-order approximation, the difference be-
tween employment in, say, Nevada and in the aggregate is a linear function of the Nevada state
variables only. This observation allows us to separate the likelihood into state-level components
and an aggregate component.
      Formally, let xjt denote the vector of variables for each island j, expressed in log-deviations
from the steady state. Given our piece-wise linear approximation, we can write:

                            xjt = Qs xjt−1 + Gs jt + Jat + Qat x∗t−1 + Gat ∗t .               (44)
                                  |      {z      } |             {z          }
                                  state-level component        aggregate component

Here, Qs and Gs encodes how island j’s variables depend on its own state variables and island-
specific shocks jt , while the vector x∗t collects the aggregate variables and evolves according
to:

                                       x∗t = J∗t + Q∗t x∗t−1 + G∗t ∗t .                        (45)

Here, ∗t are the aggregate shocks. Notice that the piecewise-linear approximation gives our
problem a very specific structure, whereby the ZLB affects individual islands through a time-
varying matrix of coefficients Qat and Gat multiplying aggregate variables only. Since these

                                                          23
matrices depend on the underlying structural parameters in a non-linear way, computing them
for each parameter draw in the estimation is too time-consuming given the dimensionality of
the model.
       In contrast, the matrix of coefficients Qs and Gs multiplying the island-level variables is
time-invariant. Intuitively, since each island is of measure zero, shocks specific to an island do
not change the expected date at which the ZLB will stop binding for the rest of the economy.
Moreover, agents on each island take aggregate prices, including the interest rate, as given.
Therefore, conditional on the aggregate state variables, whether or not the ZLB binds does not
affect the evolution of island-level relative variables. From the perspective of agents in a given
island, the presence of the ZLB acts like any other aggregate shock which, up to a first-order
approximation, does not change how that island responds to its own history of idiosyncratic
shocks.
                                                              xjt dj denote the economy-wide average of the
                                                          R
       Given this structure our model, letting xt =
island-level variables, the deviation of island-level variables from their economy-wide averages,

                                                x̂jt = xjt − xt ,                                         (46)

can be written as a time-invariant function of island-level variables alone:

                                            x̂jt = Qs x̂jt−1 + Gs jt ,                                   (47)

                                       jt dj = 0, that island-level shocks have zero mean in the aggre-
                                   R
where we use the assumption
gate.
       We therefore use the representation in (45) and (47), rather than the computationally in-
feasible representation in (44) to estimate the model using state-level and aggregate U.S. data.
To do so, we first express each state’s observable variable as deviations from its aggregate coun-
terpart by subtracting a full set of time effects, one for each year and each variable. We also
subtract a state-specific fixed effect and time trend for each observable since in our model all
islands are ex-ante identical.20 Since the island-level shocks in (47) are independent and do
not affect aggregate outcomes, we can write the likelihood of the model as the product of each
individual state’s likelihood, computed from (47) and the aggregate likelihood, computed from
(45). To summarize, our estimation exploits the differential rise and fall of individual states’
spending, debt, wages, house prices and employment, in addition to the aggregate comovement
of these series, to identify the structural parameters of the model.
  20
   In practice, subtracting the state-specific fixed effects only, as we have done in an earlier version of the
paper, does not change our substantive results.

                                                       24
       We use a Kalman filter to compute forecast errors that enter the calculation of the likeli-
hood,21 and a Metropolis-Hastings algorithm to sample from the posterior distribution, which,
by Bayes’ rule, is proportional to the product of the prior and the likelihood. We initialize the
Kalman filter for each state and for each proposal of the parameters at the steady-state implied
by those parameters. The state-level data is observed at an annual frequency, while the model is
quarterly, so we conduct a mixed-frequency estimation, by computing forecast errors every four
quarters for state-level variables. The aggregate data, in contrast, is observed quarterly and for
a longer time-period, from 1984 to 2015. To account for differences in the size of different states
and ensure that smaller states exert a relatively smaller influence on the shape of the likelihood,
we weight the likelihood contribution of each state by their 1999 population shares.22 We assign
an equal weight to the aggregate likelihood and the combined state-level likelihood.

4.3       Parameter Estimates
Table 2 reports moments of the prior and posterior distributions of the structural parameters we
estimate. We used diffuse priors. The modal estimate of the Pareto tail parameter α is equal to
3.68, implying a 0.3% spread between the subjective discount rate and interest rate at the annual
frequency. The posterior distribution for α is relatively tight around its mode, with a 10th and
90th percentile of 3.2 and 4.1, respectively. As we discussed earlier, this parameter is largely
identified from the comovement of state-level household debt, consumption and employment
which, as Figure 1 shows, are highly correlated in the data. When α is too high, fluctuations in
credit have no consequences for real variables since an island’s asset holdings adjust one-for-one
with credit, leaving its net asset position unchanged. In this case the model lacks an endogenous
mechanism to replicate the observed correlation between credit and real variables in the data
and the value of the likelihood is low. Similarly, when α is too low, the model implies too strong
a relationship between household debt and consumption and employment, which also reduces
the value of the likelihood.
       We illustrate this point in Table 3 where we simulate a panel of 51 states using artificial
data generated by our baseline estimates and calculate the correlation between changes in
employment and household debt and changes in consumption and household debt. Notice
that in the data these correlations are equal to 0.17 and 0.23, respectively, numbers which our
baseline model reproduces reasonably well. In contrast, when we impose α = 2, this correlation
  21
    Details of how we construct the likelihood function are discussed in the Appendix.
  22
    See Agostinelli and Greco (2012) who show that this simple weighting scheme preserves the asymptotic
properties of the true likelihood function.



                                                  25
increases to 0.58 and 0.7, respectively. Similarly, when we simulate artificial data from a model
with α = 10, these correlations fall to zero.
   We find, consistent with the work of Del Negro, Giannone and Schorfheide (2015), that
wages and prices are sticky, with a modal estimate of λw of 0.85 and a modal estimate of λp
of 0.97. As is well known, accounting for the stability of inflation around the Great Recession
requires a great deal of price stickiness. We show below that estimating the model using state-
level data alone implies a much lower degree of price stickiness, consistent with the evidence
in Beraja, Hurst and Ospina (2015). We explore the implications of this alternative set of
parameter estimates in our Robustness section below.
   We report in the Appendix the posterior estimates of the parameters governing the persis-
tence and volatility of state and aggregate shocks, as well as theoretical forecast error variance
decompositions of state and aggregate observables into the various shocks at different horizons.
These theoretical decompositions allow us to interpret the estimates of the persistence and
volatility of shocks. In a short sample, however, these decompositions do not necessarily reveal
which particular shock explains movements in the actual variables in the data. Because of this,
we next use the filtered shocks to calculate the contribution of each shock to the variance of
observed consumption and employment.
   Consider first Panel A of Table 4 which reports this variance decomposition for state-level
variables. Recall that these are expressed in deviations from their aggregate counterparts.
State-level credit shocks account for about 10% of the variation of relative employment and
18% of the variation in relative household spending. State-level productivity shocks account
for about 29% of the variation in relative employment and a negligible fraction of the volatility
of consumption. Shocks to the disutility from work account for about 14% of the volatility of
employment and 3% of the volatility of consumption. Finally, shocks to the individual states’
discount rates have the largest impact and account for about 50% percent of the volatility of
relative employment and 80% of the volatility of relative consumption. Shocks to the preference
for housing have a negligible impact on state-level real variables.
   Consider next Panel B of Table 4 which reports a similar decomposition for aggregate vari-
ables prior to the ZLB period, from 1984 to 2008. Due to non-linearities, this decomposition
is not as straightforward to interpret during the years in which the ZLB binds, so we discuss
it in more detail in the next section. In the pre-ZLB period household credit shocks account
for only 0.2% of the volatility of aggregate consumption and employment. Intuitively, credit
shocks matter much more at the state-level than in the aggregate because individual states are



                                                26
part of a monetary union and cannot use monetary policy to offset their effects. Productivity
shocks account for about 30% of the employment volatility and 1 percent of the volatility of
consumption. Discount rate, monetary policy and markup shocks each account for a substantial
fraction of movements in consumption and employment, while shocks to the disutility from work
or preference for housing have little effect on these real variables.

4.4    Additional Implications
We finally study our model’s ability to reproduce several additional variables that we have not
directly used in estimation. Consider first Figure 9 which shows how in our model state-level
tradable and nontradable employment comove with consumption during the Great Recession.
As Mian and Sufi report, most of the decline in employment at the state level was due to
a decline in nontradable employment. Our model reproduces this fact well: the elasticity of
nontradable employment to consumption is equal to 0.75 in the model (0.55 in the data, as
reported by Kehoe, Midrigan and Pastorino, 2017). Similarly, tradable employment comoves
little with state-level consumption, both in the model (the elasticity of tradable employment to
consumption is -0.22) and in the data (an elasticity of -0.03).
   Consider next the model’s implications for the mortgage interest rate. Since in our model
mortgages are long-term perpetuities with decaying coupon payments, the return on such secu-
rities is not directly comparable to the interest rate on 30-year mortgages in the data. Neverthe-
less, we can derive the implied rate at which the flows underlying these securities are discounted
as the rate im
             t that rationalizes the price of the security qt . This rate is defined by

                                                ∞         k
                                          1 X         γ
                                   qt =                       ,
                                        1 + im
                                             t k=0  1 + im
                                                         t


which gives
                                                      1
                                         1 + im
                                              t =        + γ.
                                                      qt
Figure 10 compares this implied long-term rate in our model with the average interest rate
on 30-year mortgages in the data. Since the latter series has a trend, we detrend both the
model and the data. The model does a reasonable job at reproducing medium-term movements
in the mortgage rate in the data, though it misses the high-frequency variation. Since the
model abstracts from several sources of risk embedded in mortgages rates, such as default and
prepayment risk, we do not view the model’s failure to match these high frequency fluctuations as
critical. Indeed, since our Kalman filter isolates the LTV shocks from the dynamics of mortgage


                                                 27
debt in the data, changes in mortgage spreads in the data are captured in a reduced-form way
as shifts in the LTV constraint.


5     Credit Shocks in the Great Recession
We next study the role of household credit shocks in shaping the dynamics of employment and
consumption in the cross-section and in the aggregate during the Great Recession. Recall that
in our model the borrowing limit always binds, so household credit fluctuates due to exogenous
changes in the LTV parameter mt (s), as well as due to changes in house prices, et (s), which
are mainly driven by shocks to the preference for housing. Since housing is in fixed supply and
separable in preferences, housing preference shocks only affect equilibrium outcomes through
their effect on the credit limit. We thus refer to both shocks to the LTV ratio mt (s) and housing
preferences, ηth (s) as credit shocks, though our estimates imply that the bulk of the movements
in real variables are due to the changes in the LTV ratio mt (s), as the variance decompositions
in Table 4 demonstrate.
    We first show that state-level credit shocks account for a large fraction of the differential
rise and fall in state-level employment and consumption during the boom and the bust years.
Our findings thus reinforce the conclusions of Mian and Sufi (2013, 2016) that household credit
played an important role in accounting for the heterogeneity in state-level outcomes during
the Great Recession. We then study the aggregate implications of credit shocks. We show
that aggregate credit shocks generate a modest decline in the natural rate of interest during
the Great Recession and are not sufficient to trigger the ZLB on their own. Absent the ZLB,
therefore, aggregate credit shocks have a relatively small effect on employment since monetary
policy effectively offsets them. We finally study how the effect of credit shocks on employment
are magnified when monetary policy is constrained, as was the case during the Great Recession.

5.1    Role of Credit Shocks at the State Level
We start by studying the 2002 to 2007 period. In Figure 11 we show how an individual state’s em-
ployment and consumption, expressed in deviations from their aggregate counterparts, changed
from 2002 to 2007. The x-axes in these figures show the actual data we used to extract the
state-level component of the shocks. We construct a counterfactual series for each variable by
shutting down all of the shocks other than those to credit, and plot the 2002 to 2007 changes
in these series on the y-axes. The solid line in each of these plots is the 45 degree line.
    The upper panels of Figure 11 show that credit shocks account for a substantial fraction of

                                                28
the differential changes in consumption and employment during the 2002 to 2007 period. The
correlation between the change in the counterfactual series driven by credit shocks only and the
change in the data is 0.7 for employment and 0.6 for consumption. The slope coefficient of a
regression of these counterfactual changes against the data is 0.43 for employment and 0.25 for
consumption. Credit shocks thus account for about 40% of the differential rise in employment
and 25% of the differential rise in consumption across states during the boom.
   The lower panels of Figure 11 illustrates the corresponding patterns during the 2007 to 2010
recession. Credit shocks account for an even larger fraction of the differential change in con-
sumption and employment during the recession. The correlations between the counterfactuals
and the actual data are 0.7 for employment and 0.75 for consumption, while the slope coeffi-
cients are 0.48 for employment and 0.43 for consumption. Thus, the model implies that credit
shocks alone account for about 40% of the differential decline in consumption and employment
across individual states.
   We emphasize that these results are not simply an artefact of the modeling choices we have
made, but rather are a result of the estimation and the path for shocks extracted by the Kalman
filter from the data. As we report in our robustness section below, if instead the posterior
estimates were centered around a higher value of α, credit shocks would have had much smaller
effects and the scatterplots shown in Figure 11 would simply collapse to 0. Similarly, if we were
to estimate a lower degree of wage and price stickiness, state-level credit shocks account for a
smaller fraction of the differential rise and fall in employment and consumption across states.

5.2    Role of Credit Shocks at the Aggregate Level
Figure 12 presents the dynamics of the key aggregate time series during the 1995 to 2015 period
in the data. We HP-filter the debt-to-income series and report it as deviations from the trend
in Panel A. Panel B reports the evolution of the Fed Funds Rate and the implied natural
rate predicted by the model, Panel C reports the data on employment, measured as the total
number of employees on non-farm payrolls, scaled by the U.S. population and expressed as
percent deviations from a linear trend, and Panel D shows the time series for inflation. We used
these series, together with aggregate data on wages, house prices and consumption, to extract
the aggregate component of the exogenous shocks used in estimation.
   We construct a counterfactual series for each of these variables by shutting down all shocks
other than the two credit shocks. Panel A of Figure 12 shows that credit shocks alone drive
much of the movements in household credit. Panel B shows, however, that credit shocks alone


                                               29
generate much more gradual changes in the natural rate of interest. All shocks combined give
rise to an increase in the natural rate of interest from 2.2% in 2002 to 4.3% in 2007 and then a
fall to -1% by the end of 2009. In contrast, in an economy with credit shocks only the natural
rate would have increased from 2.1% in 2002 to 2.3% in 2007 and then would have fallen to
only 1.8% by the end of 2015.
   The reason credit shocks generate much more gradual movements in the natural rate is
that household debt evolved gradually in the data. Since household debt and the natural rate
of interest are closely related, as equation (23) shows, the gradual increase and then decline
in household debt was associated with a corresponding gradual increase and then decrease in
the natural interest rate. Moreover, our estimate of α implies an elasticity of the natural rate
to changes in debt that is relatively low. Thus, even though our model implies that credit
shocks account for a large fraction of state-level variation in consumption and employment,
they account for a much smaller fraction of the movements in the natural rate in the aggregate.
   Consider next how employment responds to credit shocks. As the lower-left panel of Fig-
ure 12 shows, the Great Recession was associated with a nearly 7% drop in the employment-
population ratio from 2007 to 2010. Credit shocks alone account for a much more modest 0.3%
drop in this time period, less than 5% of the actual decline. The reason employment falls so
little in response to credit shocks alone is that the decline in the natural rate of interest in
response to these shocks is not sufficiently large to trigger the ZLB. Absent additional shocks
monetary policy is not constrained and mimics the dynamics of the natural rate quite well,
implying modest movements in employment and inflation.
   Our findings thus suggest that absent additional shocks around the 2007 to 2008 period,
the household leverage cycle observed in the U.S. would have had little effect on aggregate
employment. This result reinforces the point that one cannot simply extrapolate the state-level
estimates of how credit and employment comove to make inferences about the aggregate. Even
though credit shocks account for a substantial fraction of employment fluctuations in individual
states, they explain little of the aggregate employment decline. The decline in the natural rate
of interest predicted by our model is fairly persistent, however. Thus, if household credit shocks
are accompanied, as they were in the data, by other shocks that reduce the Fed’s ability to cut
interest rates because of the ZLB, the resulting effects on output can be much greater. How
much greater?
   Answering this question is challenging because of the non-linearities arising from the ZLB
and the Fed’s pursuit of forward guidance policies aimed at alleviating its consequences. In our



                                               30
estimation we have taken the Fed’s forward guidance announcements as given, by setting the
expected ZLB duration each quarter equal to that observed in the data. Since these announce-
ments were responding to the path of all shocks, including credit shocks, we cannot turn off
the effect of credit shocks alone without taking a stand on how forward guidance would have
been conducted absent such shocks. In short, the presence of the ZLB presents an additional
identification challenge, one of decomposing the expected ZLB durations into an endogenous
component due to shocks, and one due to forward guidance policies.23
      We isolate the contribution of credit shocks when monetary policy is constrained by con-
sidering a counterfactual experiment in which the Fed does not pursue forward guidance. In
this case the expected duration of the ZLB is solely determined by the size and the persistence
of the aggregate shocks, as well as the structure of the model, including the parameters of the
Taylor rule that govern the dynamics of interest rates upon exit from the ZLB regime. The
dotted line in Panel A of Figure 13 shows what the response of employment would have been
in the absence of forward guidance. Clearly, the decline in employment would have been much
worse than those observed in the data.
      Panel A also reports what employment would have been absent the credit shocks from the
middle of 2007 onward in this environment without forward guidance. The difference between
these two counterfactual series allows us to gauge the contribution of credit shocks alone at
the ZLB holding forward guidance constant (at zero). Panel B shows the difference between
these two series and compares it to the employment decline in the data. Interestingly, the
contribution of credit shocks remains small even at the zero lower bound: they generate a 0.5%
drop in employment relative to trend in 2009, and a 0.8% decline in employment relative to
trend in 2010. Thus, credit shocks alone account for a small fraction of the observed employment
declines during the onset of the Great Recession. This result once again reflects the gradual
decline in household debt observed in the data, as well as our parameter estimates.
      Notice, however, that the contribution of credit shocks to the employment decline gradually
increases over time as household leverage continues to fall. Credit shocks alone generate a much
more sizable 2.5% drop in employment by 2015, about half of the employment gap in the data.
We thus conclude that credit shocks did play a substantial role in delaying the recovery in the
aftermath of the recession, even though they had a modest impact in the years immediately
preceding 2007.
 23
      See Jones (2017) for a more detailed discussion of this identification problem and a solution to it.




                                                         31
6       Robustness
We conclude by gauging the robustness of our findings to alternative parameterizations of the
degree of wage and price stickiness and the duration of mortgage contracts.
      We considered several robustness checks.24 First, we estimated the structural parameters of
the model using regional data alone, in the spirit of Beraja, Hurst and Ospina (2015). Second,
we imposed a much higher value of α, the parameter governing the degree of idiosyncratic
uncertainty, and re-estimated all other parameters as earlier. Third, we have assumed a lower
duration of mortgage contracts, as captured by the parameter γ. Fourth, we have assumed a
lower elasticity of substitution ψ between varieties of labor supplied by different unions. Finally,
we introduce a construction sector and add construction employment as an additional observable
in estimation.

6.1       Using Regional Data Alone
Here we estimate the model’s structural parameters, α, λw and λp using regional data alone.
We then fix these parameters and use aggregate data to only estimate the parameters of the
aggregate shock processes. Table 5 shows that the posterior distribution of the parameters
estimated using regional data alone implies a similar degree of idiosyncratic uncertainty, α = 3.6,
a slightly lower degree of price stickiness, λp = 0.93, compared to 0.97 in our baseline and a
much lower degree of wage stickiness, λw = 0.58, compared to 0.85 in our baseline. Intuitively,
as Beraja, Hurst and Ospina (2015) point out, state-level wages are quite volatile. In contrast,
aggregate inflation has changed little during the Great Recession. Reproducing the aggregate
data thus requires a greater degree of nominal stickiness, while reproducing the regional data
requires a lower degree of nominal stickiness. Our baseline estimates that use both aggregate
and regional data thus fall somewhere in between. Since we allow aggregate and regional shocks
to differ in their persistence and volatility, our results suggest that the puzzle is not explained
by differences in shocks. Instead, our results are consistent with the idea that prices respond
more to large shocks than to small shocks. This is consistent with menu cost models (e.g.,
Alvarez, Le Bihan and Lippi, 2016, Midrigan and Kehoe, 2014) and with models of rational
inattention (Mackowiak and Wiederholt, 2009). We emphasize regional differences, but similar
evidence exists for sectoral differences (Boivin, Giannoni, and Mihov, 2009).
      Figure 14 shows that the model estimated using regional data alone implies a smaller role for
credit shocks in generating the differential rise and fall in employment across U.S. states during
 24
      We report the main checks here, with further robustness exercises left to the Appendix.


                                                       32
the boom and the recession. Although the counterfactual series for employment constructed
with credit shocks alone is quite strongly correlated with the data (0.69 during the boom, and
0.72 during the recession), the slope coefficient is much smaller (0.26 during the boom and
0.40 during the recession), implying that credit shocks alone account for about 25–40% of the
volatility of relative changes in employment in the data.
   Panel A of Figure 15 shows that credit shocks alone imply a similar decline in employment
as our baseline model when the economy is at the ZLB and absent forward guidance. As earlier,
the model predicts a minor role for credit shocks at the onset of the Great Recession, but these
shocks have a substantial role in delaying the recovery. Intuitively, the degree of price stickiness
has an ambiguous impact on how employment reacts to credit shocks at the ZLB. More flexible
prices may, in fact, exacerbate the response of employment to credit shocks by implying a larger
deflation and a sharper increase in the real interest rate.

6.2    Lower Degree of Idiosyncratic Uncertainty
Matching the comovement between household credit and consumption in the data requires
a relatively high degree of idiosyncratic uncertainty. Here we impose a much lower degree of
idiosyncratic uncertainty, by changing α = 5 compared to 3.68 in our baseline, and re-estimating
all other parameters of the model.
   As Panel B of Figure 14 shows, credit shocks now produce almost no relative movements
in employment across states. As discussed earlier, absent a large degree of idiosyncratic uncer-
tainty, agents in a state subject to a credit tightening can simply adjust the asset side of their
balance sheet, with little consequence for consumption and employment. Similarly, as Panel B
of Figure 15 shows, credit shocks alone generate virtually no employment drop in the aggregate
even at the ZLB. This experiment shows that our results regarding the role of credit shocks at
the state-level and in the aggregate are not an artefact of our modeling choices, but rather come
from the richness of the data used to estimate the model.

6.3    Lower Duration of Mortgage Contracts
So far we have imposed a value of γ, the parameter determining the decay rate of coupon
payments in the mortgage contract, equal to 0.985, consistent with the maturity of mortgage
contracts in the data. One could argue, however, that the effective duration of mortgages in the
data is lower, due to households’ ability to refinance their mortgages or take on home equity
loans. Here we reduce γ to 0.965, implying a duration of mortgages about half that in our


                                                33
baseline (6 years versus 13 years) and reestimate the model. Table 5 shows that our estimates
of the degree of price and wage rigidity are similar to those in our baseline model, while the
estimate of α is somewhat lower, 2.97 vs. 3.68. As Panel C of Figure 14 shows, credit shocks
now explain almost as much of the variation in employment across regions as in our baseline
estimation. Mechanically, the volatility and persistence of the shocks, especially the credit
shocks, adjusts when we reduce γ, so that the model can reproduce the dynamics of household
credit across regions, with little consequence for the behavior of the other variables. Panel
C of Figure 15 shows that credit shocks now account for a slightly larger drop in aggregate
employment during the recovery.

6.4    Lower Elasticity of Substitution Between Labor Varieties
In our baseline estimation, we assigned a value of this elasticity, ψ, equal to 21, following
Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005). This parameter acts like a real rigidity, in that it
prevents reset wages from responding too much to a given shock. Here we reduce this parameter
to 5, and re-estimate all other parameters of the model. As Table 5 shows, the estimation now
favors an even greater degree of nominal wage and price stickiness to compensate for the removal
of the real rigidity. Since we now estimate a greater degree of idiosyncratic uncertainty (the
modal estimate of α falls to 3.2 from its baseline value of 3.7), the model now assigns a greater
role to credit shocks in accounting for the state-level variation in employment (Panel D of
Figure 14) as well as in delaying the recovery in aggregate employment (Panel D of Figure 15).
Nevertheless, the model continues to assign a small role to household credit shocks in generating
the drop in aggregate employment at the onset of the recession.

6.5    Construction Sector
So far we have assumed that the housing stock is in fixed supply and for consistency have re-
moved construction employment from state and aggregate data. Here we introduce a construc-
tion sector and add construction employment as an additional observable in our estimation. We
assume that the housing stock on each island evolves according to


                               ht+1 (s) = (1 − δh ) ht (s) + ytH (s),

where δh is the rate at which housing depreciates and ytH (s) is new housing investment, produced
using a technology that uses a fixed factor and construction employment, nH
                                                                          t (s):

                                                           χ
                                   ytH (s) = ztH (s) nH
                                                      t (s)   ,

                                                34
where ztH (s) is the productivity of the construction sector on island s. The problem of a firm
in the the construction sector is to maximize its profits, given by
                                      χ                         ξ H           2
                  et (s)ztH (s) nH
                                 t (s)   − wt (s)nH
                                                  t (s) − wt (s)   nt (s) − n̄H ,
                                                                 2
where the last term is an adjustment cost that capture frictions that prevent movement of
employment across sectors.
    We set χ = 0.37 as in Garriga and Hedlund (2017) and δh = 0.012 to match the 4.9%
share of construction employment in total employment. We estimate the process for ztH (s)
as well as the other parameters of the model using the original variables as well as state and
aggregate data on construction employment. We report our estimates in Panel E of Table 5. Our
estimates of the structural parameters are very similar to those in the baseline model. Figure 16
shows the model’s implications for the role of credit shocks in determining relative movements
in state-level non-construction employment, consumption and construction employment in the
boom and the bust. Our estimates imply that credit shocks alone account for about 40%
of state-level employment variation, 20-35% of consumption variation and about 70-80% of
variation in construction employment. Construction employment is much more volatile than
non-construction employment, but since it accounts for a small fraction of overall employment,
movements in it do not greatly change our baseline model’s predictions. As Panel E of Figure 15
shows, the model’s implications for the dynamics of aggregate employment are unchanged.

6.6    Alternative Estimates of the Taylor Rule
In our baseline estimates we have used the parameters of the Taylor rule estimated by Justiniano
and Primiceri (2008) using pre-Great Recession data. We have also estimated these policy
parameters ourselves using a longer sample inclusive of the 2009 to 2015 period. As reported in
the Appendix, our estimates of the Taylor Rule are similar to those of Justiniano and Primiceri
(2008), so our model’s implications are largely unchanged.


7     Conclusions
A popular account of the U.S. Great Recession is the view that declines in households’ ability to
borrow led to a reduction in consumption and employment due to price rigidities and constraints
on monetary policy. This view is motivated, in part, by the observation that employment co-
moves strongly with changes in household debt in the cross-section of U.S. regions. This paper
asks: what are the aggregate implications of these regional correlations?

                                                35
   We develop a model that captures this view by introducing a role for credit in alleviat-
ing household liquidity constraints. The more uncertain households are about their individual
liquidity needs, the stronger their precautionary savings motive and the more sensitive their
consumption is to changes in credit limits. Aggregating across individual households implies
that the natural rate of interest fluctuates more in response to changes in credit limits when
idiosyncratic uncertainty is higher. We use both state-level and aggregate data on the comove-
ment between consumption and household credit to identify the key parameter governing the
strength of the precautionary savings motive and thus the sensitivity of macroeconomic variables
to credit shocks.
   We use Bayesian likelihood methods together with state-level and aggregate data, to estimate
the parameters of the model and the processes of a rich set of shocks that drive regional and
aggregate fluctuations. To make the estimation feasible, we propose a novel methodology that
exploits the structure of the model and identifies parameters from the relative variation of
state-level variables, as well as from the U.S. aggregates. Our approach allows us to efficiently
calculate the likelihood function in an economy with a large number of aggregate and regional
state variables and with non-linear dynamics caused by the ZLB constraint on monetary policy.
   Our estimates imply that credit shocks account for about 40% of the differential rise and
fall in state-level employment and consumption during the boom and bust years of the past
decade. In contrast, credit shocks alone generate a modest 0.8% drop in aggregate employment
from 2008 to 2010, about one-tenth of the 7% observed drop, even though monetary policy was
constrained due to the ZLB. This result reflects the fact that household credit declined very
gradually in the data, causing a gradual decline in the natural rate of interest.
   The persistent nature of household deleveraging implies, however, that credit shocks became
more important over time as the quantity of household debt declined and the natural rate
fell even further. Our estimates suggest that credit shocks account for about one half of the
employment gap in 2015. The tightening in household-level credit limits thus helps account for
the slow recovery of employment in the aftermath of the Great Recession.
   We chose to keep our analysis transparent by focusing on one mechanism, the ‘household
leverage’ view of the recession. In doing so, we have abstracted from other forces, such as con-
straints on financial intermediaries or demographic trends, that played an important role during
the last decade. We captured these additional forces in a reduced-form way with various other
shocks. Though beyond the scope of this paper, explicitly modeling the interaction between
household credit limits and these other factors is an important area for future research.



                                               36
References
[1] Alvarez, Fernando, Herve Le Bihan and Francesco Lippi. 2016 “The real effects of monetary shocks
    in sticky price models: a sufficient statistic approach,” American Economic Review, 106(10), 1-37.

[2] Beraja, Martin, Erik Hurst and Juan Ospina. 2015. “The Aggregate Implications of Regional
    Business Cycles,” Chicago Booth Working Paper.

[3] Bernanke, Ben and Mark Gertler. 1989 “Agency Costs, Net Worth and Business Fluctuations,”
    American Economic Review, 79, 14-31.

[4] Bernanke, Ben, Mark Gertler and Simon Gilchrist. 1999. “The financial accelerator in a quanti-
    tative business cycle framework,” in Taylor, John B. and Michael Woodford, ed., Handbook of
    Macroeconomics vol. 1C.

[5] Blanco, Andres. 2015. “Optimal Inflation Target in an Economy with Menu Costs and an Occa-
    sionally Binding Zero Lower Bound,” University of Michigan Working Paper.

[6] Boivin, Jean, Marc Giannoni, and Ilian Mihov. 2009. “Sticky Prices and Monetary Policy: Evidence
    from Disaggregated US Data.” American Economic Review, 99(1): 350-84.

[7] Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum and Sergio Rebelo. 2015. “Understanding Booms and Busts
    in Housing Prices.” Northwestern University Working Paper.

[8] Burstein, Ariel, Martin Eichenbaum and Sergio Rebelo. 2005. “Large Devaluations and the Real
    Exchange Rate,” Journal of Political Economy, 113(4), 742-784.

[9] Challe, Edouard, Julien Matheron, Xavier Ragot and Juan Rubio-Ramirez. 2016. “Precautionary
    Savings and Aggregate Demand,” Working Paper.

[10] Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum and Sergio Rebelo. 2011. “When is the Government
    Spending Multiplier Large?” Journal of Political Economy, 119(1) 78-121.

[11] Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko and Johannes Wieland. 2012. “The Optimal Inflation Rate
    in New Keynesian Models: Should Central Banks Raise their Inflation Targets in Light of the ZLB?”
    Review of Economic Studies, 79, 1371-1406.

[12] Cooley, Thomas and Gary Hansen. 1991. “The Inflation Tax in a Real Business Cycle Model,”
    American Economic Review, 79(4), 733-748.

[13] Del Negro, Marco and Giannoni, Marc and Schorfheide, Frank. 2015. “Inflation in the Great
    Recession and New Keynesian Models,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 7(1), 168-
    196.

[14] Eggertsson, Gauti and Michael Woodford. 2003. “Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal
    Monetary Policy.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2003(1), 139-233.

[15] Eggertsson, Gauti, and Paul Krugman. 2012. “Debt, Deleveraging, and the Liquidity Trap: A
    Fisher-Minsky-Koo Approach.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3) 1469-1513.

[16] Faria-e-Castro, Miguel. 2017. “Fiscal Multipliers and Financial Crises.” NYU Working Paper.




                                                 37
[17] Favilukis, Jack, Sydney Ludvigson and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh. 2015. “The Macroeconomic Ef-
    fects of Housing Wealth, Housing Finance, and Limited Risk-Sharing in General Equilibrium,”
    forthcoming, Journal of Political Economy.

[18] Fernald, John, Robert Hall, James Stock, and Mark Watson. 2017. “The Disappointing Recovery
    of Output after 2009,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.

[19] Garriga, Carlos, Rodolfo Manuelli and Adrian Peralta-Alva. 2014. “A Macroeconomic Model of
    Price Swings in the Housing Market,” Federal Reserve Bank of Saint Louis Working Paper.

[20] Gertler, Mark and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki. 2010. “Financial Intermediation and Credit Policy in Busi-
    ness Cycle Analysis,” in Friedman, Benjamin and Michael Woodford, ed., Handbook of Monetary
    Economics, vol 3, 547-599.

[21] Gertler, Mark and Peter Karadi. 2011. “A Model of Unconventional Monetary Policy,” Journal
    of Monetary Economics, 58(1), 17-34.

[22] Gilchrist, Simon and Zakrajšek, Egon. 2012. “Credit Spreads and Business Cycle Fluctuations,”
    American Economic Review, 102(4), 1692-1720.

[23] Gorea, Denis and Virgiliu Midrigan. 2015. “Liquidity Constraints in the U.S. Housing Market,”
    NYU Working Paper.

[24] Guerrieri, Luca and Matteo Iacoviello. 2015. “OccBin: A Toolkit for Solving Dynamic Models
    with Occasionally Binding Constraints Easily.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 70, 22-38.

[25] Guerrieri, Veronica and Guido Lorenzoni. 2015. “Credit Crises, Precautionary Savings, and the
    Liquidity Trap,” Chicago Booth Working Paper.

[26] Hatchondo, Juan Carlos and Leonardo Martinez. 2009. “Long-Duration Bonds and Sovereign
    Defaults,” Journal of International Economics, 79(1), 117-125.

[27] Iacoviello, Matteo. 2005. “House Prices, Borrowing Constraints, and Monetary Policy in the
    Business Cycle,” American Economic Review, 95(3): 739-764.

[28] Jones, Callum. 2017. “Unanticipated Shocks and Forward Guidance At the Zero Lower Bound.”
    NYU Working Paper.

[29] Justiniano, Alejandro and Giorgio Primiceri. 2008. “The Time Varying Volatility of Macroeco-
    nomic Fluctuations,” American Economic Review, 98(3), 604-641.

[30] Justiniano, Alejandro, Giorgio Primiceri and Andrea Tambalotti. 2015. “Household Leveraging
    and Deleveraging,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 18(1), 3-20.

[31] Kaplan, Greg, and Gianluca Violante. 2014. “A Model of the Consumption Response to Fiscal
    Stimulus Payments,” Econometrica, 82(4) 1119-1239.

[32] Kehoe, Patrick and Virgiliu Midrigan. 2014. “Prices Are Sticky After All ” Journal of Monetary
    Economics.

[33] Kehoe, Patrick, Virgiliu Midrigan and Elena Pastorino. 2016. “Debt Constraints and the Labor
    Wedge,” forthcoming, American Economic Review Papers & Proceedings.



                                                38
[34] Kehoe, Patrick, Virgiliu Midrigan and Elena Pastorino. 2017. “Debt Constraints and Employ-
    ment,” forthcoming, Journal of Political Economy.

[35] Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, Alexander Michaelides and Kalin Nikolov. 2011. “Winners and Losers in
    Housing Markets,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 43(2-3), 255-296.

[36] Kulish, Mariano, and Adrian Pagan. 2017. “Estimation and Solution of Models with Expectations
    and Structural Changes,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 32(2), 255-274.

[37] Landvoigt, Tim, Monika Piazzesi and Martin Schneider. 2015. “The Housing Market(s) of San
    Diego,” American Economic Review, 105(4), 1371-1407.

[38] Lepetyuk, Vadym, Lilia Maliar and Serguei Maliar. 2017. “Should Central Banks Worry About
    Nonlinearities of their Large-Scale Macroeconomic Models?” Bank of Canada Working Paper.

[39] Lucas, Robert Jr., 1990. “Liquidity and Interest Rates,” Journal of Economic Theory, 50(2) 237-
    264.

[40] Lucas, Robert Jr. and Nancy Stokey, 2011. “Liquidity Crises.” Federal Reserve Bank of Min-
    neapolis Economic Policy Papers.

[41] Lustig, Hanno and Van Nieuwerburgh, Stijn. 2005. “Housing Collateral, Consumption Insurance
    and Risk Premia: An Empirical Perspective,” Journal of Finance, 60(3), 1167-1219.

[42] Mendoza, Enrique 2010. “Sudden Stops, Financial Crises, and Leverage,” American Economic
    Review, 100(5), 1941-1946.

[43] Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi. 2011. “House Prices, Home Equity-Based Borrowing, and the U.S.
    Household Leverage Crisis,” American Economic Review, 101(5), 2132-2156.

[44] Mian, Atif, Kamalesh Rao and Amir Sufi. 2013. “Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, and
    the Economic Slump,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(4), 1687-1726.

[45] Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi. 2014. “What Explains the 2007-2009 Drop in Employment?” Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, 82(6), 2197-2223.

[46] Mackowiak, Bartosz, and Mirko Wiederholt. 2009. “Optimal Sticky Prices under Rational Inat-
    tention.” American Economic Review, 99(3): 769-803.

[47] Nakamura, Emi and Jón Steinsson. 2014. “Fiscal Stimulus in a Monetary Union: Evidence from
    U.S. Regions.” American Economic Review, 104(3), 753-792.

[48] Nakamura, Emi and Jón Steinsson. 2017. “Identification in Macroeconomics.” forthcoming Journal
    of Economic Perspectives.

[49] Werning, Ivan. 2012 “Managing A Liquidity Trap: Monetary and Fiscal Policy.” MIT Working
    Paper.




                                                39
                                        Table 1: Assigned Parameters
Parameter        Value                Description                                   Source/Target
   ν         2           Inverse labor supply elasticity
   γ         0.985       Persistence coupon payments                  13 year mortgage debt duration
   ω         0.7         Weight on non-traded goods
   σ         0.5         Elasticity traded/non-traded
   κ         4           Elasticity traded goods                      Simonovska and Waugh (2014)
   ψ         21          Elasticity labor aggregator                  Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005)
   αr        0.86        Taylor rule persistence                      Justiniano and Primiceri (2008)
   απ        1.71        Taylor coefficient inflation                 Justiniano and Primiceri (2008)
   αy        0.05        Taylor coefficient output                    Justiniano and Primiceri (2008)
   αx        0.21        Taylor coefficient output growth             Justiniano and Primiceri (2008)
                                Parameters chosen to match steady-state target
 − ln(β)     2.31%       Annual discount rate                         2% real rate
    η        0.077       Weight on housing                            Housing-to-income ratio of 2.5
    m̄       0.0044      Credit limit                                 Debt-to-housing ratio of 0.29




                                 Table 2: Estimated Structural Parameters
                                           Prior                                   Posterior
        Parameter        Dist     Median           10%          90%    Mode      Median         10%     90%
            α            N           2.6           1.5          3.8    3.68       3.60          3.18    4.11
            λp           B           0.5           0.2          0.8    0.97       0.96          0.94    0.98
            λw           B           0.5           0.2          0.8    0.85       0.85          0.82    0.88




                             Table 3: Moments from State-Level Simulations
                   Moment                                Data         α = 3.68       α=2               α = 10
                                       debtt
   Correlation (∆ emplt , ∆          incomet
                                              )          0.17           0.19             0.58           0.00
                                      debtt
   Correlation (∆ const , ∆         incomet
                                             )           0.23           0.36             0.70           0.06




                                                            40
 Table 4: Variance of Consumption and Employment Due to Each Filtered Shock, %

           Shock
                    LTV     Housing     Productivity      Leisure   Discount       Fed Funds   Markup
Variable

                                      A. State-level, 1999–2015
Employment          10.3       0.2          28.8           13.5          47.2            −       −
Consumption         18.0       0.3           0.1            3.2          78.5            −       −


                                  B. Aggregate-level, 1984–2008
Employment           0.2       0.0          32.3            0.3          24.4           32.5     10.3
Consumption          0.2       0.0           0.9            0.5          35.7           47.6     15.1




                   Table 5: Estimated Structural Parameters: Robustness
                            A. Regional Data                                    B. α = 5
 Parameter         Mode              10%           90%            Mode            10%          90%
     α               3.60            3.35          4.27            -               -            -
     λp              0.93            0.89          0.96           0.97            0.94         0.98
     λw              0.58            0.46          0.66           0.86            0.83         0.89

                              C. γ = 0.965                                      D. ψ = 5
 Parameter          Mode             10%           90%            Mode            10%          90%
     α               2.97            2.69          3.68           3.15            2.95         3.88
     λp              0.96            0.94          0.98           0.97            0.94         0.98
     λw              0.86            0.82          0.88           0.93            0.91         0.94

                       E. Construction Model
 Parameter          Mode             10%           90%
     α               3.60            2.98          3.80
     λp              0.97            0.94          0.98
     λw              0.86            0.82          0.88




                                                   41
                                                    Figure 1: State Debt, Employment, and Spending




                                                                                                                   .1
                                                         WY




                             .04
        Change in Emp/Pop 02−07




                                                                                             Change in Emp/Pop 07−10
                                                                    UT   HI
                                                                                                                                                                            ND
                                               LA   NY                        AZ




                                                                                                             .05
                                          ND
                       .02
                                              AL     RI MT      FL             NV                                                                               NY LASD
                                                                                                                                                                     DC
                                                                                                                                                                    WV
                                                      NJ                                                                                                         VTPA
                                                         ORWA    MD                                                                                 AK       MA TX NE
                                                                                                                                                                    OKIA
                                                                                                                                                           NH
                                                                                                                                                          RI  NJ ME
                                                                                                                                                                CTKSMS
                                                    NM     ID                                                                                             MD
                                                                                                                                                        ILVA       AR
                                                CT            DC                                                                                          MNOH WIKY
                                                                                                                                                              MO  MT




                                                                                                        0
                                         OK      MA  NH                          CA                                                                  MI          WY
                   0

                                        SDTX
                                           PAIA
                                              VT IL            VA                                                                                  CO         IN
                                                                                                                                                              DE
                                        WVMS       AK                                                                                    CA             WANM   TN
                                                                                                                                                              AL
                                                                                                                                                             HI
                                                    CO
                                                    GA                                                                                              GA OR SC   NC
                                       KSKYWI MN NC
                                                 SC                                                                                           FL      UT




                                                                                           −.1 −.05
                                                 ME
      −.04 −.02



                                          NE
                                           TN
                                           MO                                                                                                         ID
                                      OH AR                                                                                        AZ
                                       IN            DE                                                                    NV
                                     MI

                                   −.25          0            .25            .5                                         −.5       −.3        −.1            .1
                                   Change in HH Debt 02 − 07 (rel. 2001 income)                                          Change HH Debt 07 − 10 (rel. 2001 income)




                                                                                           −.1 −.05 0 .05 .1 .15
                              .2
       Change in Spending 02−07




                                                                                            Change in Spending 07−10
                                                                                 NV                                                                          HI
                                                         WY                   AZ                                                                                            ND
                                                                         HI
                                                              ID    UT
                        .1




                                                                    FL                                                                                             SD
                                                                                                                                                                  WV
                                                          OR
                                        SD
                                         OK        SCNM MT WA                                                                                       AK            OK
                                                                                                                                                                   LA
                                                  NC
                                       NDTX
                                          AR          GA      DCVA               CA                                                                            TXNEDC
                                          LA         CO                                                                                                    MA KY
                                                                                                                                                          NM  NC PAIA
                                                                                                                                                                MT
                                                                                                                                                                 AR
                   0




                                           WIIAALCTME
                                           TN
                                          NE                     MD                                                                                            NY
                                                                                                                                                               VT
                                                                                                                                                               ME
                                       KSMS
                                          KY       MA DE
                                                      NH
                                                       NJ
                                                                                                                                                         VA MO
                                                                                                                                                             TN
                                                                                                                                                               WY
                                                                                                                                                                KSMS
                                           PAVT NYILAK                                                                                             CO WA  NH
                                                                                                                                                         MDSC
                                                                                                                                                         MN   WI
                                                                                                                                                             IN
                                                                                                                                                            DE
                                                                                                                                                             AL
                                       IN
                                        WV            RI                                                                                                    NJ
                                                                                                                                                       ILRI OHCT
                                                  MN                                                                                                GAUT
                                                                                                                                                     MI
           −.1




                                      OH MO                                                                                                   FL     IDOR
                                                                                                                                         CA
                                                                                                                                   AZ
                                     MI
                                                                                                                           NV
      −.2




                                   −.25          0            .25            .5                                         −.5       −.3        −.1            .1
                                   Change in HH Debt 02 − 07 (rel. 2001 income)                                          Change HH Debt 07 − 10 (rel. 2001 income)




                                                                   Figure 2: Timing of the Model


                                                                                       vit                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                  R         
                                                    mt                                                                                    at+1 =   qt    xt −         cit




Enter with:                                                   Choose nt , xt ,                                                                                       End with:
                                                                                                                        Choose cit ≤ xt
 bt , at , ht                                                  ht+1 , bt+1                                                                                        bt+1 , at+1 , ht+1




                                                                                           xt



                                                                                                                           bt+1 , ht+1




                                                                                      42
                  Figure 3: Equilibrium Real Interest Rate in Steady State




           Figure 4: Impulse Response to a Credit Tightening. Simple Model


2.95




 2.9




2.85




 2.8
       0     10       20     30




                                            43
          Figure 5: Response to State-Specific Credit Shock. Modal Estimates




Figure 6: Response to State-Specific Credit Shock. Low Idiosyncratic Uncertainty (α = 5)




                                          44
Figure 7: Response to State-Specific Credit Shock. Flexible Prices and Wages




           Figure 8: Aggregate Impulse Response to Credit Shock




                                    45
                                            Figure 9: Dynamics of Sectoral Employment During the Recession


                                            6                                                                                                      6
% Change in Nontradable Employment 07−10




                                                                                                          % Change in Tradable Employment 07−10
                                                                                           WV

                                                                              SD      ND
                                            3                         DC     NE VT
                                                                                 MEIA
                                                                                 PA                                                                3
                                                                     LA        MS
                                                                          NY AK      MO
                                                                         NH
                                                                          TX MA                                                                                         LAAR        SD
                                                                    AR          MNKY                                                                     UT             CTDC
                                                                      VA OK
                                                                      MD                                                                                    IDCA        MT
                                                                                                                                                                       CO
                                                                     KS       WI                                                                       NV      WYOR       KS DETXNE        ND
                                                                   CT
                                                                   MT    DE OH        MI                                                                                      NH
                                                                     NJILRI                                                                              AZ          GA
                                                                                                                                                                      WA NJ IL NY
                                            0                               IN
                                                                                                                                                   0                        MD  OK VTPA
                                                                   CO NM TN                                                                                       FL        VA  IN
                                                                                                                                                                              RI MAAK
                                                                            SC                                                                                                     MSME
                                                                                                                                                                                  WI
                                                                                                                                                                                   OH
                                                                                                                                                                                    MN IA
                                                                  WA NCAL                                                                                                  NC
                                                       WY                                                                                                              HI     NM TN KY
                                                                  GAHI                                                                                                          SC        MI
                                                                                                                                                                             AL         MO      WV
                                                             FL
                                           −3               OR                                                                                    −3
                                                     IDCA
                                                  UT
                                                  AZ
                                                NV
                                           −6                                                                                                     −6
                                                 −5            0            5                   10                                                      −5            0            5                 10
                                                        % Change Consumption 07−10                                                                             % Change Consumption 07−10




                                                                    Figure 10: Dynamics of the Mortgage Rate




                                                                                                     46
Figure 11: Effect of Credit Shocks on State Employment and Consumption

                                        A. ∆ Employment 02−07                                                                B. ∆ Consumption 02−07
                               .04 slope = 0.43                                                                       .1 slope = 0.25



      Model (credit shocks)




                                                                                            Model (credit shocks)
                                    corr = 0.70                                                                           corr = 0.60
                               .02                CA       HI NV
                                                               AZ                                                    .05
                                                               DC     FL                                                                                  CA NV AZ
                                                                                                                                                          HI
                                                             MD                                                                                          FL
                                                                VA IDWAUT                                                                            MDDC
                                                                           OR                                                                            VA
                                                                                                                                                         WA
                                                                                                                                                        OR   UT
                                                                                                                                                             ID
                                0                 ME DEMA
                                                       CTAK
                                                         MN
                                                           MT NJ
                                                           NH
                                                           IL
                                                           NY
                                                          WI
                                                                RI
                                                                   NM
                                                                       WY                                             0                MN AK NJ
                                                                                                                                      MO    VTIA
                                                                                                                                                 MA
                                                                                                                                                 CO
                                                                                                                                                 WI
                                                                                                                                                TN
                                                                                                                                               PA GA
                                                                                                                                                 NE
                                                                                                                                                    NH
                                                                                                                                                  ILNY
                                                                                                                                                 ME DE
                                                                                                                                                   ALNM
                                                                                                                                                     NC
                                                                                                                                                       RI
                                                                                                                                                      MT
                                                                                                                                                       CT
                                                                                                                                                       SC
                                                                                                                                                                WY
                                            ND VT PANE MOTN
                                                          LA SCCO
                                                            IA  GA
                                                                 NC     AL                                                       ND   MI OHTX
                                                                                                                                      WV       IN
                                                                                                                                              KY OKMS  AR LA
                                                                                                                                                      KS
                                                                                                                                                      SD
                                                    MS
                                                 MI WVAR
                                                      KS
                                                     TX IN
                                                         OKKY
                                                     OH
                                                     SD
                              −.02                                                                                  −.05

                              −.04                                                                                   −.1
                                     −.04     −.02        0          .02         .04                                       −.1        −.05      0         .05         .1
                                                         Data                                                                                  Data


                                            C. ∆ Employment 07−10                                                                 D. ∆ Consumption 07−10
                               .04                                                                                   .06 slope = 0.43
                                      slope = 0.48
      Model (credit shocks)




                                                                                            Model (credit shocks)
                                       corr = 0.70                                                                        corr = 0.75
                               .02                                        WV                                         .03
                                                                OK MSIA    ND                                                                                         WV
                                                            OHKYKS AR PA
                                                                   TXME LA                                                                      OKMSPA      ND
                                                    AL
                                                    NC  TN IN WI
                                                               MOCT NY VTNE SD                                                             KS TX
                                                                                                                                          LA
                                                                                                                                           AR    IN
                                                                                                                                                  NE
                                                                                                                                                  WIOH
                                                                                                                                                     MEKYIA
                                                     SCWY MI NJDE
                                                               MT AK                                                                     CTNCAL
                                                                                                                                              DENYTNSD
                                                                                                                                                     VT  MO
                                                        NM   IL MN                                                                WY     MT   NM
                                                                                                                                           NJIL  SCAK       MI
                                                            RI   MANH
                                0             UTID
                                                 OR
                                                 HI
                                                    GA
                                                       WA CO VA          DC                                           0               GA
                                                                                                                             UT ID OR WAHI DCVA
                                                                                                                                               NH
                                                                                                                                              RI  MAMN
                                                                MD                                                                      CO  MD

                                                FL                                                                                      FL
                              −.02                                                                                  −.03
                                        AZ CA                                                                                AZ CA
                                       NV                                                                                  NV

                              −.04                                                                                  −.06
                                     −.04     −.02        0          .02         .04                                       −.06       −.03      0        .03         .06
                                                         Data                                                                                  Data




     Figure 12: Effect of Credit Shocks Only on Aggregate Variables




                                                                                       47
                                                       Figure 13: Effect of Credit Shocks on Aggregate Employment




                                            Figure 14: Effect of Credit Shocks on State Employment: Robustness

                                                          A. Regional Data                                                                                                                                                            B. α = 5
                                A. ∆ Employment 02−07                                                       C. ∆ Employment 07−10                                                              A. ∆ Employment 02−07                                                        C. ∆ Employment 07−10
                         .04 slope = 0.26                                                            .04 slope = 0.40                                                                   .04 slope = 0.10                                                             .04 slope = 0.10
Model (credit shocks)




                                                                            Model (credit shocks)




                                                                                                                                                               Model (credit shocks)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Model (credit shocks)




                              corr = 0.69                                                                 corr = 0.72                                                                        corr = 0.69                                                                  corr = 0.69
                         .02                      HI
                                                                                                     .02                                                                                .02                                                                          .02
                                                                                                                              OH   OKARIA
                                                                                                                                      MS   WV
                                                                                                                                            ND
                                                     CA          NV
                                                                  AZ                                                          IN KYKS
                                                                                                                                  MO  TXPANE SD
                                                                                                                                         LA
                                                      DC ID
                                                     MD    FLUT
                                                           WA                                                            SCTNMI WI
                                                                                                                        AL
                                                                                                                        NC             ME
                                                                                                                                   CT NY
                                                                                                                                  DE     VT                                                                         CA          HI NV
                                                 AKMTVA     WY OR                                                          NM RI
                                                                                                                        GAWY    ILMT
                                                                                                                                NJMNMAAK
                                                                                                                                     NH                                                                              DC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MDVA   FLUT OR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    AZ                                                  AL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SC TN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           WY   OH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              MIIN KY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  WI OK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     KS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   DECT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MT  MS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         IA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        AR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        TX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ME
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        AK LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          PA WV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            NE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           VT ND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SD
                          0           NDVT MEMS
                                             NE
                                            PA
                                            WV
                                               DE
                                                CT
                                               ARTN
                                                MA
                                                MO
                                                 OK
                                                IN
                                               KS
                                              TX MN
                                                   NY
                                                  LA
                                                   IL
                                                  WIIA
                                                   NH
                                                   KY
                                                       NJNM AL
                                                     SCRI
                                                        NC
                                                       GA
                                                                                                      0              OR
                                                                                                                    ID
                                                                                                                              CO
                                                                                                                                   VA     DC
                                                                                                                                                                                         0                ME
                                                                                                                                                                                                     NDVTMIPA
                                                                                                                                                                                                            NE
                                                                                                                                                                                                            WV
                                                                                                                                                                                                            MS MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                AK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                MN
                                                                                                                                                                                                               CT
                                                                                                                                                                                                              DE
                                                                                                                                                                                                               MO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                TN
                                                                                                                                                                                                               IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                              AR
                                                                                                                                                                                                              KS
                                                                                                                                                                                                             TX
                                                                                                                                                                                                             OHOK
                                                                                                                                                                                                            SD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  MT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  IL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 WI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LA SCRI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   IA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  KY  NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      GA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ID
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NM  WY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             AL                                       0              HI GA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  UTID
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     OR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            NM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           WA   CONJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  IL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 RI MNMA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     VA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MD NH  DC
                                              OH       CO                                                          UTHI    WA      MD                                                                                                                                        NVAZ CA
                                         MI SD
                                                                                                                     FL
                        −.02                                                                        −.02      AZ CA                                                                    −.02                                                                         −.02
                                                                                                             NV

                        −.04                                                                        −.04                                                                               −.04                                                                         −.04
                               −.04    −.02       0       .02         .04                                  −.04    −.02       0        .02          .04                                       −.04    −.02        0       .02         .04                                  −.04   −.02         0       .02          .04
                                                Data                                                                        Data                                                                                Data                                                                         Data


                                                                C. γ = 0.965                                                                                                                                                          D. ψ = 5
                                  A. ∆ Employment 02−07                                                       C. ∆ Employment 07−10                                                              A. ∆ Employment 02−07                                                      C. ∆ Employment 07−10
                         .04 slope = 0.65                                                            .04 slope = 0.68                                                                   .04 slope = 0.73                             NV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .06 slope = 0.81
Model (credit shocks)




                                                                            Model (credit shocks)




                                                                                                                                                               Model (credit shocks)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Model (credit shocks)




                                                  CA                 NV                                                                                                                                           CA            HI
                                                                HI                                        corr = 0.68
                              corr = 0.69                             AZ                                                                                                                     corr = 0.71                              AZ                                  corr = 0.70
                         .02                               FL                                        .02                             OKMS
                                                                                                                                    KS
                                                                                                                                   KY    IA WV
                                                                                                                                       TXPA
                                                                                                                                       AR  LA
                                                                                                                                              ND
                                                                                                                                            NE SD                                       .02                               FL                                         .03
                                                     DC
                                                    MD                                                                   AL
                                                                                                                         NC  TN IN
                                                                                                                                OHWIMO AKMEVT                                                                       DC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MD                                                                   MS WV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       OK  ND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      IA
                                                      VA WAUT                                                             SCWY
                                                                                                                             NMMI DE CT NY
                                                                                                                                    MT                                                                               VA WAUT                                                              AL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 KY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               INWI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            TNOH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   KSTX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  MOARPA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      MENESD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       VT
                                                         ID                                                                       NJ                                                                                    ID                                                                 NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SC      CTNY
                                                               OR                                                                 IL MANH                                                                                     OR                                                            WYMI DE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NM   MT AK
                          0                           RI                                              0            UTID
                                                                                                                      OR
                                                                                                                         GA
                                                                                                                            WA CO
                                                                                                                                 RI MN
                                                                                                                                                                                         0                           RI                                               0                    GA RI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ILMN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MANH
                                              MAAKMT NJ
                                                  NH        WY                                                        HI            VA      DC                                                               MA  MTNJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NH        WY                                                           ID
                                          ME DE
                                              CTMNIL
                                                  NY
                                                 WI     NM                                                                          MD                                                                       CT
                                                                                                                                                                                                         ME DE AK
                                                                                                                                                                                                               MN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 IL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                WI     NM                                                              UTOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         HI WACOMD VA DC
                                                 LA SCCO
                                                      GA                                                                                                                                                             GA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SCCO
                                      NDVT PA
                                            NE MO
                                                TN
                                               IN
                                              AR   IA
                                                  KY   NC   AL                                                                                                                                       NDVT PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                           NEAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                              MOLA
                                                                                                                                                                                                               TN IA  NC AL
                                            MS
                                         MI WVKS
                                             TX
                                            SD
                                             OH
                                                OK                                                  −.02             FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                           MS
                                                                                                                                                                                                            TX
                                                                                                                                                                                                        MI WV
                                                                                                                                                                                                            OH
                                                                                                                                                                                                              IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                             KSOKKY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        FL
                        −.02                                                                                                                                                           −.02                SD                                                       −.03
                                                                                                              AZ                                                                                                                                                                    AZCA
                                                                                                    −.04           CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NV
                        −.04                                                                                 NV                                                                        −.04                                                                         −.06
                               −.04    −.02       0       .02         .04                                  −.04    −.02       0        .02          .04                                       −.04    −.02        0       .02         .04                                  −.06   −.03         0       .03          .06
                                                Data                                                                        Data                                                                                Data                                                                         Data




                                                                                                                                                          48
                          Figure 15: Effect of Credit Shocks on Aggregate Employment: Robustness




Figure 16: Effect of Credit Shocks on State Employment: Model with Construction

                             A. ∆ Non Const. Employment 02−07                                                             B. ∆ Consumption 02−07                                                   C. ∆ Const. Employment 02−07
                         .04 slope = 0.36                                                                     .1    slope = 0.21                                                            .3
                                                                                                                                                                                                  slope = 0.67
 Model (credit shocks)




                                                                                    Model (credit shocks)




                                                                                                                                                                   Model (credit shocks)




                                corr = 0.69                                                                         corr = 0.59                                                             .2    corr = 0.70                                        NV
                         .02                                                                                 .05                                                                                                                      FL AZ
                                                      CA              HI NV                                                                                                                                           MD
                                                                          AZ                                                                                                                                                  CA        HI
                                                        DC      FL                                                                                 CA
                                                                                                                                                  HI  NV
                                                       MD
                                                         VA WA UT                                                                            MDDC FL
                                                                                                                                                         AZ                                 .1                      NJ                         ID
                                                              ID     OR                                                                           VA
                                                                                                                                                  WA  UT
                                                                                                                                                      ID                                                                 VADE    OR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  WA
                          0                           MT RI
                                                         NJ                                                   0                          MA     RIOR
                                            ME DE
                                                 MA
                                                 CTAKNH
                                                     IL
                                                    MN
                                                     NY     NM
                                                                 WY                                                            MN AK NJ  ME
                                                                                                                                          CO
                                                                                                                                          GA
                                                                                                                                         WI
                                                                                                                                            NH
                                                                                                                                          ILNY
                                                                                                                                             DEMT
                                                                                                                                              NMCT
                                                                                                                                                SC
                                                                                                                                                         WY                                                           RICT     NM
                                                     WISC CO                                                                  MO    VT  TN
                                                                                                                                       PA
                                                                                                                              MI OHTX IA
                                                                                                                                       IN
                                                                                                                                      KY NE ALNCAR LA                                                  DC                                       UT
                                      ND VT PANE  MO
                                                  INTN
                                                    LAIA GANC     AL                                                     ND   WV         OKMS KS
                                                                                                                                               SD                                                                           WY
                                              MS
                                           MI WV
                                               TX
                                               SD
                                                 AR
                                                KS
                                               OH OK
                                                     KY                                                                                                                                     0                     NYIL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PA  WV           MT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         MS AL
                                                                                                                                                                                                               AKARNH VT     SC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MELA TNNC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             GA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  WI MO
                     −.02                                                                                   −.05                                                                                               MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                              MN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                OKKY
                                                                                                                                                                                           −.1         ND
                                                                                                                                                                                                        MI
                                                                                                                                                                                                              OH
                                                                                                                                                                                                               NEIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 KS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 TX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CO

                     −.04                                                                                    −.1                                                                           −.2
                               −.04      −.02         0         .02           .04                                  −.1        −.05          0       .05       .1                                 −.2         −.1          0          .1         .2    .3
                                                    Data                                                                                   Data                                                                               Data


                             D. ∆ Non Const. Employment 07−10                                                             E. ∆ Consumption 07−10                                                   F. ∆ Const. Employment 07−10
                         .04 slope = 0.39                                                                     .1    slope = 0.35                                                            .2
                                                                                                                                                                                                  slope = 0.82                           KS SD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          NEOK ND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          IA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         TX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        KY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      IN
 Model (credit shocks)




                                                                                    Model (credit shocks)




                                                                                                                                                                   Model (credit shocks)




                                corr = 0.69                                                                         corr = 0.74                                                                                              MT             AK
                                                                                                                                                                                                  corr = 0.75                NCNM AL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SC CO MO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 TN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     WI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      OHVT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        WVAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  WYMENY
                         .02                                                                                 .05                                                                                                      UT      GA MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                DE IL
                                                             OK MSIA
                                                           KYKS    PALA
                                                                        WV
                                                                         ND                                                                                                                 0                             WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ID OR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CTVA NH
                                                   TN INOHWIMO   TXME
                                                                AR    NE SD                                                                                                                                                HI      DC MI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NJ
                                               AL
                                                NC
                                                 SC
                                                  WY        DE   NY VT
                                                              CT AK                                                                      KSAL
                                                                                                                                        LA
                                                                                                                                         AR  OK
                                                                                                                                            TX MS
                                                                                                                                              INOH  IAND WV
                                                                                                                                                  KYMO
                                                                                                                                                 PA                                                                               RI
                                                    NMMI RI
                                                         NJ MT                                                                    WY    CT
                                                                                                                                       MTNC  NY
                                                                                                                                            DE NE
                                                                                                                                               WI
                                                                                                                                               TN
                                                                                                                                              SC ME
                                                                                                                                                SD
                                                                                                                                                 VT
                                                                                                                                                AK
                          0                    GA         IL MN
                                                              MANH                                            0                          NJ RI MA MI
                                                                                                                                           NM
                                                                                                                                           IL
                                                                                                                                            NH                                                                                            MD
                                         UTID
                                            OR     WA CO VA                                                                    UTID ORGA
                                                                                                                                      WA
                                                                                                                                       CO VA MN
                                                                                                                                       HIDC
                                                                                                                                          MD
                                            HI               MD       DC
                                                                                                                                      FL
                                                                                                                               AZ
                                           FL                                                                                 NV CA                                                        −.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     FL        CA
                     −.02           AZ   CA
                                                                                                            −.05                                                                                               AZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                       NV
                                  NV


                     −.04                                                                                    −.1                                                                           −.4
                               −.04      −.02         0         .02           .04                                  −.1        −.05          0       .05       .1                                 −.4                −.2                   0           .2
                                                    Data                                                                                   Data                                                                               Data




                                                                                                                                      49
