NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TRADE LIBERALIZATION AND FIRM DYNAMICS
Ariel Burstein
Marc J. Melitz
Working Paper 16960
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16960
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2011

We thank Javier Cravino for superb research assistance, and Daron Acemoglu and Steve Redding
for many helpful comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Ariel Burstein and Marc J. Melitz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Trade Liberalization and Firm Dynamics
Ariel Burstein and Marc J. Melitz
NBER Working Paper No. 16960
April 2011, Revised October 2011
JEL No. F1,F4
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we analyze the transition dynamics associated with an economy's response to trade liberalization.
We start by reviewing the recent literature that incorporates firm dynamics into models of international
trade. We then build upon that literature to characterize the role of firm dynamics, export-market selection,
firm-level innovation, sunk export costs, and firms’ expectations regarding the time path of liberalization
in generating those transition dynamics following trade liberalization. These modeling ingredients
generate substantial aggregate transition dynamics as they shift and shape the endogenous distribution
of firms over time. Our results show how the responses of trade volumes, innovation, and aggregate
output can vary greatly over time depending on those modeling ingredients. This has important consequences
for many issues in international economics that rely on predictions for the effects of globalization over
time on those key aggregate outcomes.
Ariel Burstein
Department of Economics
Bunche Hall 8365
Box 951477
UCLA
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
arielb@econ.ucla.edu
Marc J. Melitz
Department of Economics
Harvard University
215 Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
mmelitz@harvard.edu

1

Introduction

Firms operating in the same country and industry respond to globalization in very di¤erent ways.
Empirical work using micro-level data on …rms or plants initially highlighted this contrast for export decisions and how this decision correlates with observable …rm performance measures such
as size and productivity: only a subset of relatively bigger and more productive …rms export.1
Subsequent work has documented a wide ranging set of other responses to globalization that consistently vary across …rms in the same country and industry, and are also strongly correlated with
…rm-level performance measures: the number and location of export destinations, entry and exit
from the domestic market, the range of products produced, the international organization of production (including but not limited to multinational status and outsourcing/o¤shoring decisions),
and innovation activities such as R&D.
This empirical work has prompted the development of models with heterogeneous …rms in open
economies that capture how changes in the extent of globalization (indexing frictions to trade and
foreign investment, and the size of the global economy) in‡uence those varied …rm-level responses.
These models highlight the composition e¤ects that are induced by the di¤erent …rm-level responses
to globalization. In order to focus on those composition e¤ects, the majority of models examine
cases where the …rms’ responses to globalization (export decisions, organization of production,
innovation) do not change over time. This assumes a stable aggregate environment with no …rm
dynamics
In this chapter, we focus on a relatively new direction in this literature examining how …rm
responses evolve over time to changes in the extent of globalization (with an emphasis on trade
liberalization). Recent empirical work has documented the dynamic interactions among those …rm
responses, in particular between the export decision and innovation: trade liberalization increases
the return to both …rm activities, while each activity additionally a¤ects the returns to the other.
Clearly, such interactions will induce the mapping between …rm characteristics and their export and
innovation decisions to change over time. This provides one important rationale for the study of
models that incorporate those dynamic interactions. Furthermore, the aggregation of those changing …rm decisions along with the evolution of entry and exit generate substantial di¤erences in the
economy’s overall response to globalization over time. This implies that an analysis of steady state
1

Throughout this chapter, we refer to …rms as the micro-level unit of production. Some of the empirical evidence
we reference is based on more disaggregated plant-level data (which di¤erentiates between a …rm’s di¤erent production
locations).

1

outcomes may give a misleading summary of the overall e¤ects of liberalization. This is the second
rationale for studying models that feature dynamic interactions in …rm responses to liberalization:
they are able to contrast the response of key economic aggregates to trade liberalization at di¤erent
time horizons.
In the next section, we review theoretical models that capture some of these dynamics, and
summarize the associated empirical evidence. Our focus in the current paper is to explain and
motivate in a uni…ed manner how key modeling ingredients of …rm dynamics interact to generate
endogenous aggregate transition dynamics. We develop a range of variants of this type of model to
isolate di¤erent interactions and mechanisms. We analyze some of the simpler variants analytically,
and computationally derive the transition dynamics for the others. We show how the response of
innovative activities magnify the productivity di¤erences between exporters and non-exporters. We
examine how the responses of average productivity and trade ‡ows can be signi…cantly di¤erent to
those in static trade models, and how these response can di¤er substantially at short and long term
horizons, depending on the responses of entry, innovation, and the timing of trade liberalization.
We restrict our analysis to just one type of international market participation decision –export
to a single destination – and one type of technology choice – innovation intensity – and focus
on the key interactions between these two …rm decisions in response to trade liberalization. We
incorporate …xed export costs (potentially sunk), but assume that trade liberalization takes the
form of reductions in the per-unit export costs. We separately consider two cases for innovation:
One where innovation is exogenous to the …rms, so that …rm productivity evolves stochastically,
but independently from any …rm decisions; The other where innovation is endogenous and di¤ers
across …rms and responds to changes in the aggregate trading environment. In all cases, incumbent
…rms also make endogenous exit decisions. When trade is liberalized, the aggregate transition
dynamics re‡ect a combination of all those decisions by incumbent …rms as well as the aggregate
response of entry. We highlight how the interaction of both …rm dynamics and endogenous export
market selection jointly induce long lasting aggregate transition dynamics in response to a onetime unanticipated drop in that variable trade cost. We discuss how comparisons of consumption
across steady-states can signi…cantly over- or under-state welfare measures that take into account
the transition dynamics. We also show how expectations regarding future trade costs give rise to
their own transition dynamics: either because the drop in the trade cost is anticipated ex-ante, or
because it is not expected to last ex-post (the trade liberalization is temporary).
In order to highlight the importance of the interaction between …rm dynamics and export market
2

selection, we develop analytical models that feature either one or the other, and show how, those
models do not generate any endogenous transition dynamics in response to trade liberalization.
These analytical cases show that the entrants’expectation regarding future potential export pro…ts
(relative to incumbent …rms) is a key factor generating aggregate transition dynamics. Endogenous
innovation by …rms further ampli…es productivity di¤erences between exporters and non-exporters,
and generates longer lasting transition dynamics. We show that trade liberalization even induces
some non-exporters to increase their innovation activities (in spite of facing stronger competition
in their domestic market), because they anticipate exporting in the future and respond to the associated higher returns post-liberalization. All of these dynamic e¤ects imply large di¤erences over
time in the response of aggregate trade volumes to trade liberalization: long run trade elasticities
(with respect to the fall in trade costs) are substantially higher than the corresponding short run
elasticities.
We show that …rms’expectations regarding trade liberalization are particularly relevant when
innovation is endogenous. If trade liberalization is only expected to be temporary, then the ampli…cation e¤ect of endogenous innovation is weakened –and is no longer signi…cantly di¤erent than
for the exogenous innovation case. On the other hand, when trade liberalization is anticipated
ex-ante, endogenous innovation induces a signi…cant rise in innovation ahead of the drop in the
trade cost. Di¤erences in the response of innovation between exporters and non-exporters also
amplify (endogenously) productivity di¤erences between those two groups of …rms. Lastly, we incorporate sunk trade costs to examine how trade liberalization a¤ects the option value of becoming
an exporter. This leads to additional anticipation e¤ects ahead of the change in trade costs.
The remainder of the chapter is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a brief overview
of the recent literature on trade liberalization and …rm dynamics. Section 3 present our model
and characterizes the equilibrium with two symmetric countries. Section 4 describes our model
parameterization. Section 5 presents the theoretical and quantitative results for the di¤erent trade
liberalization scenarios. The scenarios are designed to isolate the separate roles of export market
participation, …rm dynamics, endogenous innovation, sunk export costs, and anticipation e¤ects
regarding trade liberalization. Section 6 concludes. An Appendix presents proofs of our analytic
results.

3

2

Literature Overview

Workhorse general equilibrium models of heterogeneous …rm dynamics in closed economies (such
as Hopenhayn 1992, Atkeson and Kehoe 2005, and Luttmer 2007) recently have been extended
to open economy settings.2 For example, Arkolakis (2008) and Irarrazabal and Opromolla (2008)
consider dynamics extensions of Melitz (2003), in which …rms experience exogenous random shocks
to their productivity, to account for salient features of the data on …rm dynamics by domestic
and exporting …rms. While these papers focus on stable aggregate environments, Alessandria and
Choi (2007) and Ruhl (2008) examine the transition dynamics to trade liberalizations, focusing
on the role of entry into domestic and export markets.3 Alessandria and Choi (2007) show, as
we do below, that welfare calculations based on steady-state consumption comparisons can give
signi…cantly di¤erent answers than welfare calculations taking into account transition dynamics
across steady-states. They also consider physical capital, which we abstract from, as another
source of endogenous dynamics as in the neoclassical growth model. Other papers examine more
speci…cally how …rms make joint decisions regarding both export status and technology choice.
For example, Bustos (2007), and Yeaple (2005) consider static models in which there is a binary
technology choice, and highlight how …rms jointly decide to both enter export markets and adopt
the new technology (or do neither).4 Costantini and Melitz (2008) extend this type of joint decision
to a dynamic framework where …rms face both idiosyncratic uncertainty and sunk costs for both
exporting and technology adoption. The sunk costs and uncertainty combine to generate option
values for export and exit decisions. We explore the e¤ects of those option values in the current
chapter. Our model of innovation follows closely the model developed by Atkeson and Burstein
(2010), which builds on Griliches’ (1979) model of knowledge capital. As in Ericson and Pakes
(1995) and more recently in Doraszelski and Jaumandreu (2008), the fruits of innovative activity
are stochastic, so the model can account for simultaneous growth and decline, and entry and exit
of …rms in steady state. While Atkeson and Burstein (2010) focus on the o¤setting responses of
exit, export, innovation, and entry decisions to permanent trade liberalizations and the o¤setting
e¤ects of changes in these decisions on aggregate productivity and welfare, we focus on the e¤ects of
changes in these decisions on transition dynamics of average productivity, trade ‡ows, and output,
2

See Luttmer (2010) for a comprehensive survey of aggregate models of …rm dynamics.
Buera and Shin (2010) examine the transition dynamics of aggregate productivity in response to reforms such as
capital account liberalizations and removal of various micro distortions in economies with underdeveloped …nancial
markets.
4
See also the related work of Ederington and McCalman (2008), Navas-Ruiz and Sala (2007), Long, Ra¤, and
Stähler (2008), and Rubini (2010).
3

4

allowing for sunk export costs, considering both temporary and anticipated liberalizations.
While in this chapter we model …rm dynamics arising from changes over time in productivity
or product quality that a¤ect …rm’s production for all markets simultaneously, a number of recent
papers have focused on demand dynamics as …rms accumulate customers in foreign markets.5
Ruhl and Willis (2008) introduce demand shifters that grow over time to explain the slow growth
of exporters as they enter new markets. Eaton et al (2008) model …rms’ investments directed at
increasing foreign demand (such as searches for foreign buyers and maintaining existing relationships
with current buyers), in response to export market entry. Such demand-related investments have
very similar e¤ects to innovation, except that their returns only a¤ect export pro…ts, as opposed
to overall pro…ts. Chaney (2011) models the growth of exporters as they meet foreign importers
in international social networks.6 There are also a number of recent papers featuring models of
…rm dynamics driven by frictional labor markets. See, e.g., Cosar et al (2011), Cosar (2011),
Dix-Carneiro (2010), Fajgelbaum (2010), and Kambourov (2009). These models can generate slow
transitions from trade liberalization as workers reallocate across …rms and sectors.
Empirical work using micro-level data has con…rmed the importance of dynamics in explaining
…rm export behavior. This behavior is also re‡ected in aggregate export patterns: new exporters
initially account for a small proportion of aggregate exports, but those exporters grow faster than
both established exporters and non-exporters, and they account for a substantial portion of aggregate export growth over longer periods of time (Over 40% for the U.S. export growth from 1987
to 1992, and over 50% for the export growth in both Colombia and Morocco from 1984 to 1991;
See Bernard and Jensen (2004a) and Roberts and Tybout (1997).) Hysteresis e¤ects are one major
driver of those aggregate export dynamics: past export experience explains a very large proportion
of a …rm’s current and future export performance, even after controlling for all observable …rm
performance indicators.7 This type of hysteresis behavior is explained by a combination of sunk
export costs and …rm level uncertainty (some form of stochastic …rm dynamics, which could just
be generated by shocks exogenous to the …rm). Das, Roberts, and Tybout (2007) econometrically
measure sizable sunk export costs for Colombian exporters, which induce e¤ects of …rms’ expec5

Foster, Haltiwanger, and Syverson (2010) document the importance of demand accumulation in accounting for
U.S. plant dynamics in a number of U.S. manufacturing sectors.
6
Drozd and Nosal (Forthcoming) present a macroeconomic model of customer accumulation to account for salient
features of international relative prices and the dynamics of aggregate trade ‡ows. Alessandria, Kaboski, and Midrigan
(2010) present a model of trade and inventory management to account for the dynamics of aggregate trade ‡ows and
prices in the aftermath of loarge devaluations.
7
See Roberts and Tybout (1997) for evidence in Colombia, Bernard and Wagner (2001) for Germany, and Bernard
and Jensen (2004b) for the U.S.

5

tations regarding future export market conditions on current export behavior. Ruhl (2008) shows
that this combination of sunk export costs and idiosyncratic …rm uncertainty also explains how the
elasticity of trade with respect to changes in trade costs or aggregate productivity can vary substantially depending on the perceived persistence of those changes. Bergin and Lin (2010) document
another example where …rms’expectations about the future aggregate trading environment induces
noticeable changes in the …rms’current export market entry decisions. They show that European
…rms enter export markets prior to the implementation of EMU (and the associated decreases in
trading frictions).
Another driver of the rapid export growth by new exporters is the link between export market
entry and …rm innovation. Many recent papers using micro-level have documented this link: Lileeva
and Tre‡er (2009) for Canada, Verhoogen (2009) for Mexico, Bustos (2011) for Argentina, and Aw,
Roberts, and Xu (Forthcoming) for Taiwan:8 They all …nd that a …rm’s export market entry (driven
by reductions in trade costs) is associated with increased innovation. Bloom, Draca and Van Reenen
(2008) also document a similar relationship between changes in the trading environment and …rm
innovation and skill upgrading, but on the import competition side: Firms in European industries
most exposed to increased import competition from China respond by increasing their innovation
and information technology intensity.9

3

Model Economy

In this Section we present our model of trade liberalization and …rm dynamics. Time is discrete, and
each period is labeled t = 0; 1; 2; : : : : We do not model any aggregate uncertainty. The economy
has two symmetric countries: home and foreign; foreign variables are denoted with an asterisk
superscript. Given the symmetry across countries, we only focus on the variables relevant for the
home country. Households inelastically supply L units of labor and derive utility from consumption
only. Production in each country is structured as follows. There is a …nal non-traded consumption
good that is produced using a continuum of di¤erentiated intermediate goods with a constant
returns to scale C.E.S. technology with elasticity of substitution
8

> 1.10 These intermediate

There is also another strand of the empirical literature that has documented a reduced form relationship between
export market entry and subsequent …rm productivity growth (often labeled as learning by exporting). See Greenaway
and Kneller (2007) and Lopez (2005) for recent surveys.
9
Bernard, Jensen, and Schott (2006) document a similar e¤ect for import competition on the capital and skill
intensity of the a¤ected U.S. …rms (increases in competition from low wage exporters associated with increases in
both capital and skill intensity).
10
By assuming a demand structure with constant markups, we do not allowed for strategic considerations in pricing.
This could generate some interesting implications for di¤erent returns to innovation across …rms (see e.g. Aghion et

6

goods can be internationally traded subject to …xed and variable trade costs. Firm productivity in
the intermediate good sector is endogenously determined by a …rm’s choice regarding innovation
intensity. Firm entry and exit is endogenous, and determines the aggregate measure of intermediate
goods available in each country.
A …rm in the home country with state z has productivity equal to exp(z)1=(

1)

and produces

output yt (z) with labor lt (z) according to the constant returns to scale production technology:11
yt (z) = exp(z)1=(

1)

lt (z).

(1)

In addition, every operating …rm must pay an overhead …xed cost equal to f units of labor in every
period. We re-scale …rm productivity using the exponent 1= (

1) for expositional convenience:

As we explain below, this re-scales a …rm’s size, variable pro…ts and production employment (net
of the overhead cost) to be proportional to exp (z).
Di¤erentiated intermediate goods produced in home can be used for domestic production of
the …nal good, or exported to foreign for use in foreign’s …nal good production. Let at (z) denote
the domestic absorption of …rm z’s production. Similarly, let at (z) denote the quantity of …rm
z’s production used in foreign’s …nal good production. Exports by …rm z incur both a …xed cost
fX (measured in units of domestic labor) as well as a per-unit cost. The latter takes the form of
an iceberg cost equal to

1 units for each unit of the good exported (with

1). Due to the

…xed export cost, it is unpro…table for some …rms to export. Let xt (z) 2 f0; 1g denote the export
indicator for …rm z at home (xt = 1 if the …rm exports and 0 otherwise). Feasibility requires
at (z) + xt (z) at (z) = yt (z):

(2)

A …rm in the foreign country with state z has the same production technology as the home …rm,
but with output denoted yt (z); production labor lt (z); and domestic absorption bt (z): Exports to
the home country, bt (z), are subject to both …xed and per-unit costs; hence, feasibility requires
that xt (z) bt (z) + bt (z) = yt (z) and that fX units of foreign labor be used to pay the …xed export
al 2005).
11
Since we do not make any assumptions regarding physical quantity units for the di¤erentiated intermediate goods,
…rm productivity in that sector can be directly re-interpreted as product quality. In this alternative variant, …rms
innovate to improve product quality rather than productivity. This re-interpretation does not change any of our
…ndings. Our model can also be extended to include other forms of physical and human capital as variable factors
of production. Consideration of these forms of capital would lead to the standard ampli…cation of the impact of a
change in productivity on aggregate output.

7

cost for all foreign exporting …rms (with xt (z) = 1).12
The constant returns to scale C.E.S. production technology for the …nal good implies that the
total quantity of the good produced at home is given by

Yt =

Z

1 1=

at (z)

Mt (z) dz +

Z

=(

xt (z) bt (z)1

1=

1)

Mt (z) dz

,

(3)

where Mt (z) is the distribution of operating …rms in the home country over the productivity index
z, and Mt the corresponding distribution in the foreign country. The total measure of operating
R
…rms in the home country is given by Mt (z) dz. Production of the …nal good in the foreign
country, Yt ; is de…ned analogously.

The …nal good sector in both countries is competitive. Let Pt denote the …nal good price in
home, and pat (z) and pbt (z) the prices of the domestic and imported intermediate goods in the
home country. We pick labor as the numeraire good, and normalize the wage to 1. Final good
producers take these prices as given; they also take all the decisions by the intermediate good …rms
(that determine xt (z), xt (z), Mt (z), Mt (z)) as given. The …nal good price is thus given by its unit
cost:
Pt =

Z

pat (z)

1

Mt (z) dz +

Z

1=(1

xt (z) pbt (z)1

Mt (z) dz

)

:

(4)

The demand for the intermediate goods at home is then given by:
at (z)
=
Yt

pat (z)
Pt

and

bt (z)
=
Yt

pbt (z)
Pt

:

(5)

Analogous equations hold for prices and quantities in the foreign country.
Intermediate good …rms in each country are monopolistically competitive. A home …rm with
productivity index z faces a static pro…t maximization problem involving the choice of labor input
lt (z); prices pat (z); pat (z); quantities at (z); at (z); and an export decision xt (z) : In so doing, the
…rms take as given the prices and quantities of the …nal good in both countries (recall that the
wage is normalized to 1). Firm z’s pro…t maximization problem is:
t (z)

=

max

yt (z);lt (z);pat (z);pat (z);
at (z);at (z);xt (z)

pat (z)at (z) + xt (z)pat (z)at (z)

lt (z)

subject to (1), (2), and (5). We de…ne zXt as the export productivity cuto¤: zXt
12

xt (z)fX

arg min fxt (z) = 1g.

Symmetry between home and foreign implies that yt (z) = yt (z); xt (z) = xt (z), at (z) = bt (z); at (z) = bt (z).

8

(6)

We now describe the productivity dynamics of individual …rms. At the beginning of each period
t; every existing …rm faces an exogenous probability of incurring a “death”shock that would induce
exit (exogenous exit unconditional on productivity). The remaining 1

portion of …rms can still

choose to exit (endogenous exit conditional on productivity) or to continue to operate and pay
the overhead cost f . Productivity for those …rms then evolves over time depending on the their
investment in innovation, which stochastically improves productivity. We model the evolution of
productivity for producing …rms as follows: In the following period (t + 1), a …rm with productivity
index z has a probability q of having productivity exp(z +
having productivity exp(z

z)

1=(

1) :

We will examine a special case where

1=(
z)

1)

and a probability 1

Hence, the expected growth of z is given by (2q
z

1)

q of
z.

13

= 0, so that productivity is constant throughout a …rm’s

life; this is the case with no productivity dynamics.
In the speci…cation of our model with endogenous innovation, each …rm invests in innovation by
choosing the expected growth of their current productivity z (determined by q). A …rm with productivity z choosing an innovation intensity q must hire exp(z)c(q) units of labor as its investment
in innovation. We assume that c (q) is increasing and convex in q:
With this evolution of …rm productivity, the expected, discounted present value of pro…ts (abstracting from aggregate uncertainty) for a …rm with initial productivity index z is
Vt (z) = max [0; Vto (z)] ;

(7)

where the value for operating …rms is given by the following Bellman equation:
Vto (z) = max

q2[0;1]

t (z)

exp(z)c(q)

f + (1

)

1
[qVt+1 (z +
Rt

z)

+ (1

q)Vt+1 (z

z )] :

(8)

Rt is the world interest rate in period t (in units of labor). Let qt (z) denote the optimal innovation
intensity of the …rm referenced in (8). This choice of innovation intensity must satisfy the …rst
order condition:
exp (z) c0 (q) = (1

)

1
[Vt+1 (z +
Rt

z)

Vt+1 (z

z )] :

(9)

Note that with our scaling of the innovation cost function, exp (z), we are assuming that the
innovation cost required to increase the size of the …rm by a …xed percentage scales with the size
of the …rm. This will imply that, for su¢ ciently large …rms, the innovation decision and derived
13

Note also that if the time period is small, then our binomial productivity process approximates a geometric
Brownian motion in continuous time, as in the work of Luttmer (2007).

9

growth rate is independent of size, consistent with Gibrat’s law, and the …rm size distribution
has a Pareto right-tail. We denote by qt the innovation intensity for such very large …rms, i.e.
qt = limz!1 qt (z).
In our quantitative analysis, we assume that the innovation cost function has the form c (q) =
h exp(bq), so that the curvature of this function is indexed by the parameter b: If this curvature
parameter b is high (or low), then innovation is highly inelastic (or elastic) to changes in the
incentives to innovate. With a very high curvature parameter b, innovation decisions of …rms are
e¤ectively constant both across …rms and over time, qt (z) = q. This is the exogenous innovation
case.
Since the value function of operating …rms Vt0 (z) is strictly increasing in z; the endogenous
exit or operate decision (7) must follow a cuto¤ rule: …rms with productivity at or above a cuto¤
zt choose to operate, while the remaining …rms choose the exit option. Note that if f = 0, then
Vto (z) = Vt (z) and zt =

1; hence, there is no endogenous exit.

New …rms are created with an investment of fE units of labor, which yields a new …rm in the
following period with initial productivity index z drawn from a distribution G (z) : In any period
in which new …rms enter, free entry requires that
1
fE =
Rt

Z

Vt+1 (z)G (z) dz:

(10)

Let MEt denote the measure of new …rms entering in period t that start producing in period t + 1.
P
t
log(Ct ), where Ct is their
Households in the home country have preferences of the form 1
t=0
consumption of the home …nal good in period t and

1 is their discount factor. Each household

in the home country faces an intertemporal budget constraint of the form
1
X
t=0

with R

1

0
@

t
Y

j=0

1

1 A
(Pt Ct

Rj

1

L)

Z

V0 (z) M0 (z) dz ,

(11)

= 1. In writing the budget constraint (11) we have assumed that the free-entry condition

holds with equality in every period and that the representative consumer in each country owns
only the …rms in their respective countries. The right hand side thus represents the initial home
consumer wealth from the existing stock of home …rms in period 0.
With balanced trade (which is immediate with symmetric countries), production and consumption of the …nal good are equalized in every period: Ct = Yt . Without loss of generality, we

10

normalize aggregate labor supply to 1. This labor is used for production of intermediate goods
(LP t ), innovation (LIt ), and to cover the …xed costs for entry, overhead production, and export:14
LP t + LIt + MEt fE +
where
LP t =

Z

Z

[f + xt (z) fX ] Mt (z) dz = 1,

lt (z)Mt (z) dz and LIt =

Z

[exp(z)c(qt (z))] Mt (z) dz.

(12)

The evolution of the distribution of operating …rms Mt over time is given by the exogenous
probability of exit , the decisions of operating …rms to invest in their productivity qt (z), and the
measure of entering …rms in period t, MEt : The distribution of operating …rms Mt+1 (z 0 ) in the
home country in period t + 1 is equal to the sum of three in‡ows of …rms: new …rms that entered
in period t; …rms continuing from period t that draw positive productivity shocks (and, hence, had
productivity equal to z 0

z

in period t); and …rms continuing from period t that draw negative

productivity shocks (and, hence, had productivity equal to z 0 +

z

in period t). We write this as

follows:
8
>
>
M G(z 0 ) + (1
>
< Et
Mt+1 (z 0 ) =
+(1
>
>
>
: 0

)qt (z
) 1

z )Mt (z

qt (z +

z)

z)

Mt (z +

for z 0
z)

0
zt+1

(13)

0
for z 0 < zt+1

An equilibrium in this economy is a collection of sequences of aggregate prices fRt ; Pt ; Pt g and
prices for intermediate goods fpat (z); pat (z); pbt (z); pbt (z)g, a collection of sequences of aggregate
quantities fYt ; Yt ; Ct ; Ct ; LP t ; LP t ; LIt ; LIt g and quantities of the intermediate goods fat (z);
at (z); bt (z); bt (z); lt (z); lt (z)g; and a collection of sequences of …rm value functions and pro…t,
exit, export, and innovation decisions fVt (z); Vt (z); Vto (z); Vto (z);

t (s);

t (s);

z; z ; xt (z);

xt (z); qt (z); qt (z)g together with distributions of operating …rms and measures of entering …rms
fMt ; MEt ; Mt ; MEt g such that households in each country maximize their utility subject to their
budget constraints, intermediate good …rms in each country maximize the net present value of their
per-period pro…ts, …nal good …rms in each country maximize pro…ts, all of the feasibility constraints
are satis…ed, and the distribution of operating …rms evolve as described above.
As we previously mentioned, we focus our analysis on symmetric equilibria across countries. To
14
Note that, by assuming that …xed costs and innovation costs are incurred in terms of labor only, we are assuming
that = 1 in the more general formulation of Atkeson and Burstein (2010).

11

ensure this symmetry, we assume that the initial distribution of …rms is identical across countries:
M0 (z) = M0 (z). This also ensures equality of initial wealth for home and foreign consumers. The
symmetry between home and foreign will then be preserved in every subsequent period. Thus,
all the home country variables that we have introduced will be equal to their foreign country
counterpart.
A steady state of our model is an equilibrium in which all of the aggregate variables are constant. In what follows, we omit time subscripts when discussing the steady state.15 Depending
on parameter values, there are two types of steady states in our model: one with entry and one
without entry. The parameter restrictions required to have a steady-state with entry imply that
the equilibrium innovation decision of large …rms leads them to shrink in expectation.16 Our results
are derived in the case in which every period there is positive …rm entry.
Aggregation in a Symmetric Equilibrium
The equilibrium of our model with heterogeneous …rms and endogenous innovation cannot be fully
solved in closed-form. Appendix A describes a simple algorithm to solve for the symmetric steadystate. The online appendix of Atkeson and Burstein (2010) describes an algorithm to solve for the
transition dynamics across steady-states. We now present some aggregate relations that hold in a
symmetric equilibrium of our model that we use in our analytic results. We also de…ne aggregate
statistics that we report from our experiments.
The solution to the static pro…t maximization problem (6) in a symmetric equilibrium is
t (z)

where

Dt

=

Dt exp (z)

+ max

Dt

1

exp (z)

fX ; 0 ,

(14)

is a domestic market demand index given by

Dt

=

Pt Yt
(
1)1

15

.

(15)

See Atkeson and Burstein (2011) for a detailed discussion of how a similar model of innovation by …rms in a
closed economy can be extended to allow for endogenous and semi-endogenous growth.
16
A
su¢ cient
condition
to
obtain
a
steady
state
with
entry
is
that
limz!1 (1
) fq(z) exp( z ) + [1 q(z)] exp(
In a steady state without entry, this condition is satis…ed with
z )g < 1.
equality, and the expected growth of continuing …rms is exactly o¤set by exit. In this case, aggregate variables are
constant but the distribution of …rms by size is not as production becomes concentrated in a shrinking number of
large …rms.

12

This market demand index also proportionally scales production employment for all …rms:
lt (z) = (

1)

Dt

1 + xt (z)

1

exp(z).

(16)

Given that …rm revenues are proportional to …rm employment, the ratio of exports to the aggregate
value of production (for the intermediate goods sector) is given by
R

1

xt (z) exp(z)Mt (z) dz
R
:
exp(z)Mt (z) dz + 1
xt (z) exp(z)Mt (z) dz

sXt = R

(17)

Similarly, the ratio of exporters’revenues in the domestic market to total domestic revenues (the
market share of exporters in their domestic market) is given by
sDt =

R

xt (z) exp(z)Mt (z) dz
R
:
exp(z)Mt (z) dz

This share of exporters in the domestic market di¤ers from the share of exporters in total production
in that it does not capture the direct impact of changes in trade costs on the size of exporters,
but instead just re‡ects the reallocation of production between non-exporters and exporters in the
domestic market.
Aggregating (16) across …rms, and using the expression for the aggregate price (4), we can
express aggregate output Yt as
1

Yt = Z t
where
Zt =

Z

1+

1

1

LP t ,

xt (z) exp(z)Mt (z) dz

(18)

(19)

is an index of aggregate productivity. Average productivity for domestic production is given by
Zt =

R

exp(z)Mt (z) dz
R
.
Mt (z) dz

Since …rm size on the domestic market is proportional to exp(z), this average productivity index
is also proportional to the average …rm size on the domestic market. Put another way, for a given
level of market demand

Dt ,

changes in average productivity Zt are proportional to changes in

average …rm size on the domestic market.

13

4

Baseline parameterization

To understand our model’s aggregate dynamics to trade liberalizations, we present both analytic
and computational results. The latter are based on a calibration of the model that follows Atkeson
and Burstein (2010). Here we present an overview of this calibration, which is designed to target a
number of salient features of U.S. data on …rm dynamics, the …rm size distribution, and international
trade. We refer the reader to Atkeson and Burstein (2010) for further details.
The parameters that we must choose are the steady-state real interest rate R = 1= ; the distribution G of productivity draws of entrants, the parameters governing the variance of employment
growth for surviving …rms

z,

the exogenous exit rate of …rms , the marginal trade costs , the

…xed costs of operation f and entry fE , the …xed costs of exporting fX , the parameters of the
innovation cost function h and b, and the elasticity of substitution across intermediate goods in
…nal output .
Table 1 summarizes the targets and parameter values used in our baseline parameterization.
We consider two choices of the curvature parameter b for the innovation cost function: one where
b is su¢ ciently high that the innovation decision is e¤ectively inelastic across …rms and over time
(qt (z) = q), and another where b = 10 so that innovation decisions are quite elastic across …rms
and over time. We set

such that the steady-state interest rate (annualized) is 5 percent, and

= 5 consistent with estimates by Broda and Weinstein (2005). We choose the distribution G
of productivity draws of entrants so that all …rms enter with a common productivity index z = 0
(the cross-sectional distribution of z is then determined by the ergodic distribution generated by
the productivity dynamics). We choose

z

to match the standard deviation of the growth rate

of employment of large US …rms. We choose the exogenous exit rate

to match the annual

employment-weighted exit rate of large US …rms. We normalize entry costs fE = 1, and we set
the …xed costs of operation f = 0:1. We choose the parameters fX ;

1

, and h to match three

observations in the U.S.: (1) the fraction of exports in gross output; (2) the fraction of total
production employment accounted for by exporting …rms; and (3) the shape of the right tail of the
…rm size distribution.

5

Trade Liberalization Scenarios

We restrict our analysis of trade liberalization to decreases in the per-unit trade cost . Throughout
all scenarios, we consider the e¤ects of a 3:5% reduction in , starting from the calibrated steady

14

state described above.17 We consider the following experiments. We …rst consider the e¤ects of a
permanent unanticipated reduction in the trade cost, and describe how …rm productivity dynamics interact with endogenous export market selection to generate endogenous aggregate transition
dynamics. We then examine the role of anticipated changes in trade policy. We …rst look at the
case where that same unanticipated drop in the trade cost is anticipated to revert back to the old
steady state (so the trade liberalization is only temporary). We then look at the case where the
initial trade liberalization is anticipated (and permanent thereafter). We present our computational
results graphically, using …gures that show the responses over time of key variables for the economy.
In several cases, we also complement these numerical results with analytical propositions regarding
those dynamic responses (the proofs are relegated to the appendix).
In order to highlight the key interactions between …rm productivity dynamics and endogenous
export market selection, we start with two scenarios that exhibit only one of those features at a
time (eliminating the other). Our …rst scenario eliminates endogenous market selection (all …rms
export), while our second one eliminates …rm productivity dynamics (…rm productivity remains
constant post entry). In both those cases, we show that permanent trade liberalization does not
induce any endogenous transition dynamics. In order to motivate how …rm productivity dynamics
and endogenous export market selection interact to generate transition dynamics, we develop a
simpli…ed analytical variant of our model that nevertheless exhibits both of those features. This
analytical model clari…es how di¤erences in current and future export market pro…tability (relative
to the pro…tability of domestic sales) drives transition dynamics in response to a sudden, permanent
trade liberalization (via its e¤ect on …rm entry). In our third scenario we show that these analytic
results carry over to our full model with exogenous innovation. In our fourth scenario, we add
endogenous innovation and describe its e¤ect on the transition dynamics – contrasting them to
our previous scenario where innovation is exogenous. In our …fth scenario, we examine the case of
a temporary trade liberalization. We show how expectations regarding the permanence of trade
liberalization a¤ect the response of innovation. Lastly, we study the e¤ects of an anticipated trade
liberalization. We return to the case of a permanent decrease in trade costs, but we now assume
that this decrease in trade cost is anticipated (ahead of any change in the trade cost). Scenario six
captures those anticipation e¤ects and shows how they are much more pronounced when innovation
is endogenous (relative to the exogenous innovation case). Our seventh and eight scenarios add
17
We choose this change in trade cost to ensure that our model with endogenous innovation produces a steady
state with entry (with very large changes in trade costs, the increase in the growth rate of exporting …rms induces a
non-stationary …rm size distribution).

15

sunk export market costs, thus introducing partial irreversibility and option values associated to
the export entry decisions. We show how the perceived permanence of the trade liberalization
shapes the strength of entry into exporting, and how anticipated trade liberalization a¤ects the
option values from entry into exporting and induces transition dynamics ahead of the actual drop
in the trade cost.
Scenario 1: No Export Market Selection
In this scenario, we start with our baseline model but eliminate export market selection by setting
the …xed export cost to zero, fX = 0 (all …rms export regardless of their productivity z). The
responses of the key variables of the model are depicted in Figure 1. Panel A reports the time
path of the exogenous per-unit trade cost

as a percentage of the old steady state,

t= 0

(96:5%,

re‡ecting the permanent 3:5% decrease in ). Panels B-F report the other responses in elasticity
format: log (Xt =X0 ) = log ( t = 0 ) for each variable X. Thus, those responses depict the percentage
change in X per 1% change in

. Panel B depicts the response of …nal output Yt (equal to

aggregate consumption Ct ) and production labor LP t ; Panel C depicts the response of entry MEt ;
Panel D depicts the response of average productivity for domestic production Zt ; Panel E depicts
the response of the revenue share of exporters in domestic revenues, sDt , and in total revenues, sXt ;
Panel F depicts the response of the innovation intensity qt for large …rms (technically, limz!1 qt (z)).
As is apparent from those responses in Figure 1, the permanent trade liberalization does not
induce any transition dynamics. Final output jumps up to its new steady state level, along with
the share of exports in total revenues. The change in the trade cost does not induce any further
reallocations: the intensity of innovation, exit threshold (not shown in the …gure), entry, and
production labor remain unchanged, hence there are no composition e¤ects across …rms (no change
in average productivity Zt ). The economy’s response to the lower trade cost

<

0

is identical

to the response in Krugman’s (1980) model with representative …rms: all …rms reallocate their
production towards export sales without varying total employment; there is no change in …rm
entry or exit; and …nal output (consumption) rises only due to the direct e¤ect of the change in the
trade cost (fewer units of output “melt” away). Proposition 1 in Appendix B derives these results
analytically, and shows that the proportional increase in …nal output is
Y
=
Y0

1+

1

1+

1
0

16

!

1
1

This is the same rise in …nal output as in an Armington world where every country produces a single
good with exogenous unit labor requirements. The main intuition for the absence of any inter-…rm
reallocation or change in innovation is that, in a world with C.E.S. demand and constant markups,
the increased export opportunities from lower trade costs are exactly o¤set by the reductions in
domestic sales (driven by increased imports). All …rms face those same exact trade-o¤s, and there is
thus no scope for any inter-…rm reallocations, and no motive for any change in innovation decisions.
The expected value of an entering …rm relative to the entry cost is unchanged, and there is hence
no change in entry behavior.18
Scenario 2: No Firm Productivity Dynamics
We now allow for export market selection (the …xed cost fX > 0 is calibrated to match the aggregate
export patterns described above), but eliminate …rm productivity dynamics. This is equivalent to
setting

z

= 0. In order to match the right tail of the …rm-size distribution of the model with …rm

dynamics, we assume that the initial …rm productivity is drawn at entry from a Pareto distribution
G with shape parameter

>

1.

The responses of the same key variables are depicted in Figure 2. Here too, we see that the
permanent trade liberalization does not induce any endogenous transition dynamics. As in the
previous scenario, there is no response in entry, and …nal output (consumption) immediately jumps
to its new steady state level. However, this scenario does feature some inter-…rm reallocation. The
lower trade cost induces high productivity …rms to become exporters. Firms with low productivity
cannot take advantage of the increased export opportunities, and thus disproportionately su¤er
from the reductions in domestic sales. This induces the exit of the least productive …rms, and labor
is reallocated from non-exporters and exiters towards exporters. The expansion of the exporters
relative to the non-exporters and exiters induces an increase in average …rm productivity (Panel
D). Panel E shows how this expansion of exporters relative to non-exporters is re‡ected in the
increased share of exporters in domestic revenues (which was ‡at in the previous scenario with no
inter-…rm reallocations). The response of the share of exporters in total revenues is now higher
(relative to the previous scenario) due to the e¤ects of the lower trade cost on the extensive margin
of trade (new exporters).19
18

If the cost of entry falls (for instance, if entry cost required both labor and …nal output), then entry rises, giving
rise to endogenous transition dynamics across steady-states. All other results still hold (e.g. innovation and exit
thresholds remain unchanged). Similarly, if innovation requires both labor and …nal output, innovation rises for all
…rms, giving rise to endogenous transition dynamics.
19
In an alternative calibration, in which is chosen to be equal to
1, the trade elasticities in scenarios 1 and 2

17

This scenario features the same inter-…rm reallocations that would be observed in a static model
of trade liberalization. In our dynamic version, those reallocations all take place immediately upon
the decline in trade costs. A key feature driving this result is that trade liberalization does not a¤ect
the incentives for entry. The exit and export market cuto¤s then jump immediately to their steady
state levels, and there are no ensuing transition dynamics. We detail these results in Proposition 2
in Appendix C, but note here that this result for entry is a dynamic version of the result derived
by Arkolakis et al (2010). In both cases, this result is driven by o¤setting e¤ects of lower trade
costs on an entrant’s expected pro…ts. On one hand, the lower trade cost increases the pro…tability
of large exporters (high z); on the other, it also reduces the pro…tability of small …rms (low z).
The exact o¤setting of these two forces is naturally very speci…c to the assumed parametrization
(especially, C.E.S. demand and Pareto distribution for …rm productivity).
Firm Dynamics and the E¤ect of Trade Liberalization on Entry: Building Intuition
We now show that, adding …rm productivity dynamics completely changes the trade-o¤s described
above for the e¤ects of trade liberalization on entry. We …rst build a simpli…ed (and slightly
modi…ed) version of our model that motivates a simple analytic rule governing this trade-o¤. This
rule is not tied to a speci…c parametrization, and allows us to predict the response of entry to trade
liberalization for more general cases. We then show how it applies to our full model with both
endogenous export market selection and …rm productivity dynamics.
Consider the following version of our model that allows for time variation in the …xed export
cost fX . In particular, fX = 1 if the …rm has entered T

0 or less periods ago, and fX = 0 if the

…rm has entered T + 1 or more periods ago. Hence, conditional on survival, …rms start exporting
after T periods of operation. Note that if T = 0, all …rms export. We also assume that all entering
…rms have productivity index z = 0, there are no productivity dynamics (

z

= 0), and there are

no …xed overhead costs, f = 0 (so exit takes place due to exogenous death only).
We denote by s~X the ratio of discounted time-series revenues from exports in total discounted
time-series revenues of entering …rms. That is, while sX measures the export share in the crosssection of …rms, s~X measures the export share in the discounted revenues of entering …rms.20 If
= 1, then s~X = sX ; If
generally, if

< 1 and T > 0, then exporters are back-loaded so s~X < sX . More

< 1, then as T rises (so that it takes longer for an entrant to become an exporter),

would be equal, while our other qualitative results remain unchanged.
20
~ (z)
s~X is calculated analogously to the export share sX using (17), with a “discounted” distribution of …rms M
that is de…ned analogously to M (z) in (13) – except that (1
) replaces (1
) and G (z) replaces G (z).

18

pro…ts from exporting become a less important component of a …rm’s value upon entry, and s~X
falls relative to sX .
Proposition 3 in Appendix D states that in this economy, a permanent reduction in marginal
trade costs, , leads to a decline (increase) in the steady-state mass of entering …rms, ME , if and
only if s~X is strictly lower (higher) than sX , and the steady-state mass of entering …rms remains
unchanged if and only if s~X = sX . The intuition for this result is straightforward. When s~X < sX ,
incumbent exporting …rms bene…t proportionally more than entering non-exporting …rms from
lower trade costs. Hence, trade liberalization makes entry less pro…table, and entry falls. This
result suggests that the relative size of entering …rms plays an important role in shaping the change
in entry and the aggregate transition dynamics in response to a trade liberalization.21
We now apply this logic to understand the response of entry and aggregate transition dynamics
in our full model with productivity dynamics.
Scenario 3: Export Market Selection and Firm Dynamics with Exogenous Innovation
We now return to our baseline model with both endogenous export market selection and …rm productivity dynamics. In this scenario, we assume that the parameter b of the innovation cost function
is su¢ ciently high so that innovation intensity is constant across …rms and over time: qt (z) = q.
This is the exogenous innovation case. The Markov evolution process for …rm productivity is such
that entering …rms are, on average, smaller than incumbents – and are thus less likely to export
than incumbents.22 This implies that, with

< 1, s~X < sX from our previous analytical model.

The responses of the same set of variables for this scenario are depicted in Figure 3. A permanent
trade liberalization makes entry less pro…table as incumbent exporters bene…t proportionally more
than non-exporting entrants. As we see from panel C, entry responds as our simple analytic model
suggests: it drops upon the reduction of the trade costs. Because the new steady state with lower
trade costs features a smaller mass of producing …rms (due to the smaller mass of entrants in
steady-state), there is an “overhang” of incumbent …rms immediately after trade liberalization.
This leads to an overshooting of the entry response as the mass of producing slowly decreases
to its new lower steady-state level. The labor resources that were previously allocated to entry
are available for production employment. There is a spike in production employment (inversely
21

Atkeson and Burstein (2010) extend this result to a more general setting for the structure of productivity and
export participation dynamics. Fattal-Jaef (2010) presents a related result in a model of …rm dynamics and misallocation distortions.
22
This also matches the empirical regularity that most …rms do not export immediately after entry.

19

related to the downward spike in entry) and a similar spike in …nal output. Due to these transition
dynamics, we see that comparing consumption across steady-states understates the welfare gains
from liberalization that accrue during the transition as the mass of …rms declines.
The reallocation of market share towards exporting …rms leads to an increase in average …rm
productivity in the new steady state. Average productivity overshoots this new steady-state level
over the transition due to the overshooting of entry (since entrants are relatively less productive).
The transition dynamics for the fraction of exporters’ revenues in total and domestic revenues
are not very pronounced. They behave in a similar way as the previous scenario with no …rm
productivity dynamics.
In order to emphasize how the di¤erence between the export pro…tability shares s~X and sX
drive the response of entry, Figure 4 contrasts the response of entry and …nal output under our
baseline interest rate and a zero interest rate ( = 1). In the latter case, the delay for entrants to
grow and start exporting becomes inconsequential; their future expected revenues from exporting
s~X is equal to the cross-sectional export share sX . Figure 4 shows how, in this case, the response of
entry becomes very muted, as do the transition dynamics for …nal output. Similarly, if the model
is calibrated so that entering …rms grow faster (and hence become exporters earlier), the decline in
entry is also muted relative to our baseline parameterization.
Scenario 4: Endogenous Export Market Selection and Endogenous Innovation
We now switch to the more elastic parametrization for innovation. The economy’s responses are
reported in Figure 5. This is the …rst scenario to feature a response in …rm innovation intensity
to trade liberalization. This response is exhibited in Panel F for the innovation intensity of large
exporting …rms (all …rms above a given large size threshold). As in the case with exogenous
innovation, the permanently lower trade costs increase the value of exporters relative to nonexporters. In the current case, those exporters respond by innovating relatively more. In Appendix
E we derive analytically this reallocation of innovation from non-exporters to exporters, and discuss
how it depends on key model parameters.
The immediate response of entry is similar to the case of exogenous innovation (and for the
same reasons: trade liberalization makes entry less pro…table as entrants’ exporting pro…ts are
pushed back into the future). Average …rm size and productivity steadily increases (Panel D)
from the combination of selection (reduced entry by smaller, less productive …rms), and increased
innovation by exporters. Although the response in increased innovation intensity is immediate, its
20

e¤ects on the productivity and size of exporters takes a long time to unfold. As the average size
and productivity of exporters grow relative to those of entrants, the expected pro…tability for that
latter group further falls, inducing a second dip in entry (Panel C). The increase in relative size
and productivity of exporters also leads to a steadily increasing share of exporters in domestic and
total revenue (Panel E). Hence, the elasticity of trade volumes to changes in trade costs is higher
when it is calculated over longer time horizons.
The labor resources used for entry are reallocated to production (and some to the increased
innovation activity). Production labor steadily rises, mirroring the decrease in entry (Panel B).
Those changes in production labor are also re‡ected in a rise in …nal output. As opposed to the
exogenous innovation case, steady state consumption now overstates the welfare gains from trade
liberalization because the increase in average productivity takes many periods to materialize. The
main message for welfare comparative statics remains that transition dynamics strongly a¤ect any
comparison based on steady state consumption.
We note that the increase of innovation to trade liberalization is not limited to current exporters:
trade liberalization also spurs the innovation response of non-exporters who anticipate exporting
in the future (given the lower trade costs). In fact, from equation (9), …rms close to the export
threshold have the biggest incentive to innovate, because they have the highest marginal bene…t
from successful innovation (i.e. the di¤erence between pro…ts as an exporter relative to pro…ts
from only serving the domestic market). We highlight this result in Figure 6, which shows the
di¤ erence in innovation intensity,

q(z), across the two steady states (pre- and post-liberalization)

as a function of z. In the …gure, z is reported as the di¤erence relative to the exit threshold
zX . The …gure also shows the change across the two steady states in the export threshold. All
exporters increase their innovation intensity ( q(z) > 0), but …rms around the export threshold –
both current exporters and non-exporters that anticipate to be exporters in the future –have the
highest increase in innovation activity. Due to the increased competition from foreign producers
and more productive domestic producers, a subset of …rms with the lowest productivity (who have
the smallest probability of becoming an exporters) innovate less in response to trade liberalization.
Figures 5 and 6 also highlight how …rm productivity increases immediately following export
market entry need not re‡ect learning by exporting: this observed empirical pattern may also
re‡ect the outcome from the innovation activities undertaken by new exporters.

21

Scenario 5: Temporary Trade Liberalization
In our last scenario, we saw how endogenous innovation can drastically a¤ect the transition dynamics to trade liberalization – so long as the economy also features endogenous export market
selection (recall the result from scenario 1 that endogenous innovation does not induce transition
dynamics in the absence of endogenous export market selection). Those transition dynamics are
driven by the response of innovation intensity by exporters and anticipated exporters (as well as
the response of entry). In this scenario, we highlight one other crucial ingredient needed to deliver
this innovation response: trade liberalization must be perceived to be long-lasting; otherwise, the
incentives for innovation are strongly muted, because its bene…ts accrue slowly over time. This
issue of perceived persistence for trade liberalization is empirically consequential, as it exhibits so
much variation from one trade liberalization episode to another (both across countries and within
countries across episodes). To highlight the role of this perceived persistence for innovation, our
next scenario examines the case of a trade liberalization (same unanticipated 3:5% drop in trade
cost) that is then gradually reversed within a 10 year period. The initial trade liberalization occurs
as in our previous scenario: a sudden unanticipated 3:5% drop in the per-unit trade cost. We
assume that the trade cost remains at its “liberalized” level for 4 years, and then linearly reverts
back to its pre-liberalization level over the following 5 years. This unwinding of trade liberalization
is anticipated by …rms immediately after the initial drop in the trade cost.
We focus on this 4 year period following the initial trade liberalization and contrast the innovation intensity response with the previous scenario, when trade liberalization was anticipated to
be permanent (same assumptions regarding endogenous innovation process). Note that whatever
actually happens to the trade cost after that 4 year window is not critical for our analysis within
that time window. Trade liberalization may end up not being permanent when anticipated as
such, and vice-versa. Within the 4 year window following trade liberalization, the only di¤erence
between the two scenarios is one of anticipation by …rms regarding the permanence of the initial
liberalization.
Figure 7 contrasts the innovation response for the permanent and temporary trade liberalization
scenarios. Panel A shows the divergence in the path of the trade cost 4 years beyond the initial
liberalization (but does not show the key di¤erence in anticipation within the 4 year window).
The anticipation e¤ect for the innovation response is clearly visible in Panel B: the response of
innovation when trade liberalization is anticipated to be temporary is strongly muted following the

22

initial liberalization. Over that 4 year period, the lower increase in innovation intensity translates
into signi…cance di¤erences across scenarios in the growth rates of exporters. The weaker increase
in innovation by exporters, when the trade liberalization is perceived to be temporary, leads to
a smaller increase in the share of exporters’ domestic revenue (see Panel C). Hence, endogenous
innovation matters less for aggregate transition dynamics when the trade liberalization is expected
to be temporary.
Scenario 6: Anticipated Trade Liberalization
We just saw how …rms’ expectations regarding the permanence of trade liberalization a¤ects the
response of endogenous innovation. In a similar way, the response of endogenous innovation is also
sensitive to …rms’anticipation regarding the initial onset of trade liberalization. To highlight this,
we construct a scenario where the initial trade liberalization is anticipated 2 years ahead to the
actual decrease in trade costs, and focus on that 2 year period where the trade cost has not yet
decreased (but is anticipated to do so). Panel A of Figure 8 shows the time path of the trade cost,
which is “announced”to the …rms at t = 0. Panel B shows how exporters increase their innovation
intensity upon this announcement, ahead of the anticipated drop in the trade cost. This increase
in innovation is then re‡ected in a higher growth rate for exporters, which results in an increasing
share of exporters in domestic revenues in Panel C (ahead of the reduction in the trade cost).23
The anticipated response of innovation in this scenario is driven by the …rms’desire to smooth
their innovation activities over time in response to the higher bene…ts to innovate: As the cost of
innovation is convex, …rms do not want to cluster their innovation activities right before the drop
in the trade cost, and prefer to spread them out ahead of the anticipated liberalization.
Scenario 7: Temporary Trade Liberalization and Sunk Export Costs
In our last two scenarios, we examine the consequences for the dynamics of trade liberalization that
relate to the export entry decision in the presence of sunk export costs. We introduce (partial)
irreversibility of the export decision by assuming that some of the …xed export costs are sunk. In
particular, in addition to the …xed export costs fX , we assume that a non-exporter that becomes
an exporter must hire fXS units of labor during the …rst period as an exporter. An exporter that
stops exporting must incur these sunk costs to re-start exporting.
23
Furthermore, the associated rise in the share of exporters in domestic revenues (in advance of the decline in trade
costs) is larger than it is for the case of exogenous innovation (see solid line in Panel E of Figure 8).

23

With sunk export costs, the choice to enter the export market is no longer a static decision as
in expression (14). Instead, current export entry decisions are shaped by expected future exporting
pro…ts, subject to …rms’ expectations regarding their idiosyncratic productivity and the path of
trade costs. This represents an additional channel that generates endogenous aggregate transition
dynamics from trade liberalization. Since this channel operates independently of the endogenous
innovation response, we highlight its e¤ect using the case of exogenous innovation. We …rst examine
how export entry decisions under sunk export costs interact with the perceived persistence of
trade liberalization. Figure 9, Panel A, depicts the path of trade costs under a temporary (i.e.
lasting 4 years) and a permanent trade liberalization. In both cases, the liberalization is initially
unanticipated.
As a reference point, we …rst consider our baseline model calibrated with only …xed export costs
(and exogenous innovation). In this case the perceived permanence of the reduction in trade costs
has little bearing on export decisions (because entry into exporting is a static decision based on
the level of current pro…ts from exporting). This implies, as shown in Panel B, that the increase in
the share of exporters in domestic revenues over the …rst 4 years of the trade liberalization is very
similar in both the temporary and permanent cases.
Next, we designate a proportion of the …xed export cost to be sunk. In particular, we set the
…xed export cost at a low level (fX = 0:2), and choose fXS to match our baseline calibration
targets. In this case, entry of non-exporters into exporting is stronger when the reduction in trade
costs is perceived to be permanent. This can be seen in Panel C: Over the …rst 4 years, the rise in
the share of exporters in domestic revenues (and hence also the overall response of trade volumes)
is larger in the permanent case than in the temporary case. That is, trade liberalization must be
perceived to be long-lasting in order to provide incentives for …rms to pay the sunk export cost.2425
24

This result is similar to the one in Ruhl (2008). The latter shows how sunk export costs induce a larger response
of exports to permanent shocks (i.e. trade liberalization) than to temporary shocks (i.e. business cycles). See also
the related work by Albuquerque and Rebelo (2000).
25
Note also that the nature of …xed export costs shapes the strength of the short run response of entry into export
markets. In particular, comparing Panels B and C for either the temporary or the permanent trade liberalization
case, we see that the short-run increase in the share of exporters in their domestic market (and hence the overall
response of trade volumes) is much larger under …xed export costs than under sunk export costs. In contrast, the
long-run responses of the trade volumes are very similar under …xed or sunk export costs (projecting the responses
beyond the 10 years displayed in the …gures). The hysteresis band in export participation (that we describe in the
next Scenario) plays an important role in generating this di¤erence in the short run responses.

24

Scenario 8: Anticipated Trade Liberalization and Sunk Export Costs
We now illustrate a second implication of export entry decisions in the presence of export sunk costs
for the aggregate dynamics following trade liberalization. Here we focus on an anticipated trade
liberalization, as described in Scenario 6. In the presence of productivity dynamics, sunk export
costs generate an option value associated with the export market entry decision, and an associated
hysteresis band: There is a set of …rms (associated with productivity z in a given range) whose
export decision is determined by their prior export status. This option value is sensitive to the
…rms’ expectations regarding future trade costs, and thus responds to announcements regarding
those future costs.
As a useful starting point, consider …rst a version of our model with no productivity dynamics
(

z

= 0). In the initial equilibrium before trade liberalization is announced, the static pro…t gain

from exporting for any non-exporting …rm z must be lower than the sum of the …xed export cost,
fX , and the per-period ‡ow value of the sunk cost,
1

1

D

R+ 1
fXS :
R

exp (z) < fX +

R+
R

1

fXS .

(20)

Consider now the periods after trade liberalization is announced but ahead of the actual reduction in
trade costs . Abstracting from general equilibrium changes in the domestic market demand index
D,

and in the interest rate R, condition (20) remains unchanged. That is, before the reduction in

trade costs, it is still the case that the static pro…t gains from exporting are lower than the annual
…xed and sunk costs of export. Therefore, …rms that were non-exporters before the announced
trade liberalization will not …nd it optimal to start exporting ahead of the reduction in trade costs.
Once the reduction in trade costs is materialized, condition (20) will be reversed for some …rms,
who will then start exporting. Without productivity dynamics (and abstracting from some general
equilibrium considerations before the reduction in trade costs), sunk export costs do not give rise
to anticipated changes in export decisions. A similar argument can be applied to the innovation
decision. Abstracting from general equilibrium changes in

D

and R, there would be no incentive

to innovate ahead of the reduction in trade costs (in contrast to the results under Scenario 6).
Figure 10 shows how the combination of sunk export costs and productivity dynamics does result
in changes in export decisions ahead of the reduction in trade costs. The path and announcement
regarding the trade costs are identical to Scenario 6 (depicted again in Panel A). We run one
simulation using our previously calibrated model with only …xed export costs, and then another one

25

with sunk export costs (parameterized as described for Scenario 7). Both cases include productivity
dynamics (

z

> 0) but exogenous innovation, and take into account the general equilibrium changes

in the domestic market demand index

D,

and in interest rate R.

Panel B shows how the option value associated with the sunk export cost induces the entry of
…rms into the export market – captured by the rising share of exporters in domestic revenues –
ahead of the decrease in the trade cost. In the pre-liberalization steady state, some …rms just below
the export cost cuto¤ do not export due to the option value associated with waiting (to export):
they want to mitigate potential losses from an adverse productivity shock following export market
entry. The announcement of future trade liberalization then substantially reduces this option value
of waiting to export for those …rms (the consequences of a future adverse shock are not as dire,
as those …rms would still choose to export so long as the per-unit trading costs are reduced); and
those …rms enter the export market ahead of the reduction in trade costs. This is re‡ected in the
increased share of exporters in domestic revenues ahead of the trade liberalization. This increase is
substantially larger in the model with sunk export costs than in the model with only …xed export
costs.
Productivity dynamics are key for this result. Without productivity dynamics (

z

= 0) there

are no noticeable di¤erences in the aggregate response of the economies with …xed and sunk export
costs (even considering the general equilibrium e¤ects on

D

and R that we abstracted from in our

analytic derivation above).26

6

Conclusions

In this chapter, we have reviewed the recent literature that incorporates …rm dynamics in models of
international trade. We have characterized key model ingredients that generate substantial aggregate transition dynamics stemming from endogenous shifts in the …rm-size distribution in response
to trade liberalization. We showed how two ingredients, export market selection and …rm dynamics,
are jointly needed to generate any endogenous transition dynamics. We then examined the aggregate e¤ects resulting from endogenous innovation responses and the anticipation e¤ects regarding
the timing of trade liberalization (when it is expected to begin, and whether it is temporary or
permanent). Our computational results show how the responses of trade volumes, innovation, and
aggregate output vary greatly over time depending on the details assumed for …rm dynamics, en26

Bergin and Lin (2010) study an alternative mechanism, based on heterogeneity in sunk-export costs across …rms.
In this setup, some …rms also enter export markets in anticipation of future trade liberalization.

26

dogenous innovation, and the expected time path of the trade liberalization. This has important
consequences for many issues in international economics that rely on predictions for the e¤ects of
globalization over time on those key aggregate outcomes such as trade volumes, innovation, and
aggregate productivity (an endogenous source of comparative advantage).27 For empirical work,
it is important to recognize that a measured response to globalization at a given point in time
represents just one snapshot for the e¤ects of globalization: one that may evolve considerably in
the future (without any subsequent changes to economic fundamentals), and one that is sensitive
to many unobservables regarding …rms’expectations and anticipations.
In order to keep our analysis tractable, we have limited our modeling exercise to just one form
of international market participation (exports) and one form of innovation. As we noted in our
introduction, the literature has examined many other forms of international market participation.
Our choice should not be construed to imply that dynamics are more important for exports than for
those other forms of market participation. We picked exports as an example (one that is very well
understood) to highlight the importance of dynamic considerations. Similarly, we recognize that we
modeled innovation in a coarse, reduced form way. First, we have assumed that only labor is used for
innovative activities, and thus have not captured how globalization may a¤ect the cost of innovation
via changes in other input costs or spillovers. Second, we have not explicitly speci…ed the channels
through which innovation/investment activities generate performance improvements – other than
through a direct e¤ect on labor productivity. Such channels could include management quality,
o¤shoring that breaks-up the production chain, development of a …rm’s product range, changes in
input usage due to the availability of imported intermediates, and marketing/relationship building
with foreign buyers. Many of these factors apply di¤erentially across a …rm’s destination markets,
and could hence result in destination-speci…c dynamics that di¤er from those of our model in which
productivity improvements apply world-wide. These are all fruitful areas for future work.

References
[1] Aghion, P., Bloom, N., Blundell, R., Gri¢ th, R., & Howitt, P. (2005). Competition and
Innovation: An Inverted-U Relationship. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(2), 701–728.
[2] Albuquerque, R, & Rebelo, S. (2000). On the Dynamics of Trade Reform. Journal of International Economics, Elsevier, 51(1), 21-47.
27

Note that the consequences of those modeling assumptions for welfare outcomes is substantially more muted.
This is discussed in much greater detail in Atkeson and Burstein (2010).

27

[3] Alessandria, G., & Choi, H. (2007). Establishment Heterogeneity, Exporter Dynamics, and the
E¤ects of Trade Liberalization. Mimeo.
[4] Alessandria, G., Midrigan, V., and Kaboski, J. (2010). Inventories, Lumpy Trade and Large
Devaluations. American Economic Review. 100(5): 2304-39,
[5] Arkolakis, C. (2008). Market Penetration Costs and the New Consumers Margin in International Trade. NBER Working Paper.
[6] Arkolakis, C., Costinot, A., & Rodríguez-Clare, A. (2010). New trade models, same old gains?
NBER Working Paper.
[7] Atkeson, A., & Burstein, A. T. (2010). Innovation, Firm Dynamics, and International Trade.
Journal of Political Economy, 118(2010), 433-84.
[8] Atkeson, A., & Kehoe, P. J. (2005). Modeling and Measuring Organization Capital. Journal
of Political Economy, 113(5), 1026-53.
[9] Aw, B.Y, Roberts, M., & Xu, Y.D (Forthcoming). R&D Investment,Exporting, and Productivity Dynamics. American Economic Review.
[10] Bergin, P. R., & Lin, C. Y. (2008). Exchange Rate Regimes and the Extensive Margin of
Trade. NBER Working Paper.
[11] Bernard, A. B., & Jensen, J. B. (2004). Entry, expansion, and intensity in the US export boom,
1987–1992. Review of International Economics, 12(4), 662–675.
[12] Bernard, A. B., Jensen, J. B., & Schott, P. K. (2006). Survival of the best …t: Exposure to lowwage countries and the (uneven) growth of US manufacturing plants. Journal of International
Economics, 68(1), 219–237.
[13] Bernard, A. B., & Jensen, J. B. (2004). Why Some Firms Export. Review of Economics &
Statistics, 86(2), 561-569.
[14] Bernard, A. B., & Wagner, J. (2001). Export Entry and Exit by German Firms.
Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, 137(1), 105-123.
[15] Bloom, N., Draca, M., & Van Reenen, J. (2008). Trade induced technical change? The impact
of Chinese imports on IT and innovation. Mimeo.
[16] Buera, F. J., & Shin, Y. (2009). Productivity Growth and Capital Flows: The Dynamics of
Reforms. NBER Working Papers.
[17] Bustos, P. (2011). Trade Liberalization, Exports and Technology Upgrading: Evidence on the
Impact of MERCOSUR on Argentinean Firms. American Economic Review, 101(1), 304-40.
[18] Chaney, T. (2011). The Network Structure of International Trade. Mimeo.
[19] Cosar, K. & Guner, N. & Tybout, J. (2010). Firm Dynamics, Job Turnover, and Wage Distributions in an Open Economy. NBER Working Paper.
[20] Cosar, K. 2011. Adjusting to Trade Liberalization: Reallocation and Labor Market Policies.
Mimeo.

28

[21] Costantini, J., & Melitz, M. J. (2009). The dynamics of …rm-level adjustment to trade liberalization. In The Organization of Firms in a Global Economy. Harvard University Press.
[22] Das, S., Roberts, M. J., & Tybout, J. R. (2007). Market entry costs, producer heterogeneity,
and export dynamics. Econometrica, 75(3), 837–873.
[23] Dix-Carneiro, R. (2010). Trade Liberalization and Labor Market Dynamics. Mimeo.
[24] Doraszelski, U., & Jaumandreu, J. (2010). R&D and productivity: Estimating production
functions when productivity is endogenous. Mimeo.
[25] Eaton, J., Eslava, M., Krizan, C. J., Kugler, M., & Tybout, J. (2008). A search and learning
model of export dynamics. Mimeo.
[26] Ederington, J., & McCalman, P. (2008). Endogenous Firm Heterogeneity and the Dynamics
of Trade Liberalization. Journal of International Economics, 74(2), 422–440.
[27] Ericson, R., & Pakes, A. (1995). Markov-perfect industry dynamics: A framework for empirical
work. The Review of Economic Studies, 53–82.
[28] Fajgelbaum, P. (2010). Labor Market Frictions, Firm Growth and International Trade. Mimeo.
[29] Fattal Jaef, R. (2010). Entry, Exit and Mis-allocation Frictions. Mimeo.
[30] Foster, L., Haltiwanger, J., and Syverson, C. (2010). The Slow Growth of New Plants: Learning
about Demand. Mimeo.
[31] Greenaway, D., & Kneller, R. (2007). Industry di¤erences in the e¤ect of export market entry:
learning by exporting? Review of World Economics, 143(3), 416–432.
[32] Griliches, Z. (1979). Issues in assessing the contribution of research and development to productivity growth. The Bell Journal of Economics, 10(1), 92–116.
[33] Hopenhayn, H. A. (1992). Entry, Exit, and Firm Dynamics in Long Run Equilibrium. Econometrica, 60(5), 1127–1150.
[34] Kambourov, G. (2009). Labor Market Regulations and the Sectoral Reallocation of Workers:
The Case of Trade Reforms. Review of Economic Studies, 76(4): 1321–1358.
[35] Lileeva, A., & Tre‡er, D. (2010). Improved Access to Foreign Markets Raises Plant-Level
Productivity. . . for Some Plants. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(3), 1051–1099.
[36] Lopez, R. A. (2005). Trade and Growth: Reconciling the Macroeconomic and Microeconomic
Evidence. Journal of Economic Surveys, 19(4), 623-648.
[37] Luttmer, E. (2007). Selection, Growth, and the Size Distribution of Firms. Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 122(3): 1103-1144.
[38] Luttmer, E. (2010). Models of Growth and Firm Heterogeneity. Annual Reviews of Economics.
2: 547-576.
[39] Navas-Ruiz, A., & Sala, D. (2007). Technology Adoption and the Selection E¤ect of Trade.
Mimeo.

29

[40] Roberts, M. J., & Tybout, J. R. (1997a). What makes exports boom? World Bank Publications.
[41] Roberts, M. J., & Tybout, J. R. (1997b). The Decision to Export in Colombia: An Empirical
Model of Entry with Sunk Costs. American Economic Review, 87(4), 545.
[42] Rubini, L. (2010). Innovation and the Elasticity of Trade Volumes to Tari¤ Reductions. Mimeo.
[43] Ruhl, K. J. (2008). Solving the Elasticity Puzzle in International Economics. Mimeo.
[44] Van Long, N., Ra¤, H., & Stähler, F. (2009). Innovation and Trade with Heterogeneous Firms.
Mimeo.
[45] Verhoogen, E. A. (2008). Trade, Quality Upgrading, and Wage Inequality in the Mexican
Manufacturing Sector. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(2), 489-530.
[46] Yeaple, S. R. (2005). Firm Heterogeneity, International Trade, and Wages. Journal of International Economics, 65(1), 1-20.

30

Table 1: Baseline Parametrization

Exogenous
(Inelastic)
Innovation
0.005

Endogenous
(Elastic)
Innovation
0.005

0.25

0.25

-

0.00108

... or implied Pareto coefficient
(employment distribution of large firms)

-0.25

-0.25

Marginal trade cost 

0.231

0.231

1.4

0.285

Calibrated Parameters
Exogenous exit rate 
Innovation step size 
Level of innovation cost function h

Fixed costs of international trade f X

Data

Targets
Employment growth rate of large firms
(standard deviation)

0.25

Employment-based exit rate
(firms with more than 500 employees)

0.0055

Pareto coefficient for employment-based
size distribution (1,000 to 5,000 employees)

-0.20

Exports / Gross Output
(of intermediate goods in model)

0.075

Employment share of exporters
(production employment in model)

0.400

All Scenarios

Other Parameters

0.05

Interest rate 1/
Elasticity of substitution 

5

Entry cost f E

1
0.1

Overhead production cost f
Note: All time-related parameter values are annualized

31

Figure 1: Scenario 1, No Export Market Selection

32
60

70

20

30

40

50

60

70

-0.01

10

0

0

-0.005

0

0.005

1

2

3

Panel E: Export share sX (-) , Exporters domestic share sD (--)
0.01

-0.01

-0.005

0

0.005

0.01

-0.01

50

-0.01
40

-0.005

30

70

-0.005

20

60

0

10

50

0

0

40

Panel C: Entry, ME

30

0.005

20

0.005

10

0

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.01

0

Panel A: Trade cost , relative to pre-liberalization

0.01

0.96

0.97

0.98

0.99

1

1.01

0

0

0

30

40

50

60

20

30

40

50

60

Panel D: Average firm productivity, Zbar

20

70

70

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

Panel F: Innovation by large exporters, q(z) high z

10

10

Panel B: Final output Y (-) , Production labor LP (--)

-0.01

-0.005

0

0.005

0.01

Figure 2: Scenario 2, No Firm Productivity Dynamics

33

10

10

20

20

40

50

30

40

50

Panel C: Entry, ME

30

60

60

70

70

Panel A: Trade cost , relative to pre-liberalization

80

80

0

1

2

3

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

0
80

0.2

0.4

0.6

Panel E: Export share sX (-) , Exporters domestic share sD (--)
1
4
0.8

-0.01

-0.005

0

0.005

0.01

0.96

0.97

0.98

0.99

1

1.01

-0.01

-0.005

0

0.005

0.01

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

0

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

30

40

50

60

20

30

40

50

60

Panel D: Average firm productivity, ZBar

20

70

70

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

Panel F: Innovation by large exporters, q(z) high z

10

10

Panel B: Final output (-) , Production labor (--)

80

80

-0.01
80

-0.005

0

0.005

0.01

Figure 3: Scenario 3, Export Market Selection and Firm Dynamics with Exogenous Innovation

34

0

0

10

10

20

20

40

50

30

40

50

Panel C: Entry, ME

30

60

60

70

70

Panel A: Trade cost W, relative to pre-liberalization

0

1

2

3

4

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

0

0.5

1

Panel E: Export share sX (-) , Exporters domestic share sD (--)

-10

-8

-6

-4

-2

0

0.96

0.97

0.98

0.99

1

1.01

-0.01

-0.005

0

0.005

0.01

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

0

0

0

30

40

50

60

20

30

40

50

60

Panel D: Average firm productivity, Zbar

20

70

70

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

Panel F: Innovation by large exporters, q(z) high z

10

10

Panel B: Final output Y (-) , Production labor LP (--)

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

Figure 4: Scenario 3, Export Market Selection and Firm Dynamics with Exogenous Innovation,
Varying the Interest Rate

35

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

-8

-7

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

0

0

10

10

20

20

30

30

50

40

50

Panel B: Final Output, Y

40

Panel A: Entry, ME

60

60

70

70

80

80

Positive interest rate
Zero interest rate

90

90

Figure 5: Scenario 4, Endogenous Export Market Selection and Endogenous Innovation

36

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

0

10

20

30

40

50

Panel C: Entry, ME

60

70

0

5

10

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

0

2

4

6

8

10

Panel E: Export share sX (-) , Exporters domestic share sD (--)
15
12

-12

-10

-8

-6

-4

-2

0

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0

2

4

6

8

0

0.96

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

0.3

0.05

0

Panel A: Trade cost W, relative to pre-liberalization

0.97

0.98

0.99

1

1.01

0

0

0

30

40

50

60

20

30

40

50

60

Panel D: Average firm productivity, Zbar

20

70

70

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

Panel F: Innovation by large exporters, q(z) high z

10

10

Panel B: Final output Y (-) , Production labor LP (--)

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

Figure 6: Scenario 4, Endogenous Export Market Selection and Endogenous Innovation, Change
in Innovation Intensity

37

-0.5

-0.4

-0.3

-0.2

-0.1

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0

2

4

6

8
10
z - z exit threshold

12

log change in innovation intensity q(z)
initial export threshold
new export threshold

14

16

Figure 7: Scenario 5, Temporary Trade Liberalization

38

0

1

2

3

4

-0.1

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.97

0.98

0.99

1

0

0

0

1

1

1

2

2

2

4

5

6

3

3

5

4

5

Panel C: Exporters domestic share, sD

4

6

6

Panel B: Innovation by large exporters, q(z) high z

3

Permanent
Temporary

Panel A: Trade cost, W

7

7

7

8

8

8

9

9

9

Figure 8: Scenario 6, Anticipated Trade Liberalization

39

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

-0.1

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.97

0.98

0.99

1

0

0

0

0.5

0.5

0.5

1.5

2

1

1

2

1.5

2

Panel C: Exporters domestic share, sD

1.5

Exogenous innovation
Endogenous innovation

Panel B: Innovation by large exporters, q(z) high z

1

Panel A: Trade cost, W

2.5

2.5

2.5

3

3

3

Figure 9: Scenario 7, Temporary Trade Liberalization and Sunk Export Costs

40

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

1.4

0.965

0.97

0.975

0.98

0.985

0.99

0.995

1

0

0

1

1

2

2

3

3

5

4

5

6

6

7

7

Fixed export costs only
Sunk export costs

Panel B: Exporters domestic share, sD

4

Panel A: Trade cost, W

8

8

9

9

Figure 10: Scenario 8, Anticipated Trade Liberalization and Sunk Export Costs

41

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

0

0.5

1

0.97

0.98

0.99

1

0

0

0

1

1

1

2

2

2

4

5

6

4

5

6

3

4

5

6

Panel C: Sunk Export Costs, Exporters domestic share, sD

3

Panel B: Fixed Export Costs, Exporters domestic share, sD

3

Permanent
Temporary

Panel A: Trade cost, W

7

7

7

8

8

8

9

9

9

Appendix: Analytic Results
A

Solving symmetric steady-state

For a given value of

D,

export decisions are determined by the static condition that variable

pro…ts from exports must exceed …xed costs of exporting, or
x (z) = 1 if and only if
The export cuto¤ is de…ned by

D

1

D

1

exp (z)

fX :

(A.1)

exp (zX ) = fX . To solve for …rms’ steady-state exit and

innovation decisions, we must solve the …rms’Bellman equation, (7), removing the time subscripts
from all variables and letting Rt = 1= . Standard arguments give that this Bellman equation
has a unique solution V (z), corresponding to any given value of

D

under appropriate parameter

restrictions.
We use the free-entry condition (10) to solve for the equilibrium value of
arguments, one can show that a unique solution for
…rms, V o (z), is strictly increasing in

D.

D

D.

Using standard

exists because the value function of operating

The solution to this problem now gives us …rms’ exit

decisions z, export decisions x (z), and innovation decisions q (z). These decisions, under certain
parameter restrictions, imply from (13) a steady-state distribution of …rms’ productivities scaled
~ (z) = M (z) =ME . The mass of entering …rms is the solution to
by the mass of entering …rms, M
ME
where LP =ME =

R

LP
+ fE +
ME

Z

~ (z) dz = 1
[exp(z)c(q(z)) + f + x (z) fX ] M

~ (z) dz is determined using (16). We can then solve aggregate output and
l (z) M

productivity using (18) and (19), and the price level as P =

B

(A.2)

1
1 Z.

No export market selection

We state our main result in the following proposition, which is straightforward to extend to asymmetric countries (see Atkeson and Burstein 2010).
Proposition 1: Consider a world economy with no …xed costs of trade (fX = 0). In this economy,
a permanent change in marginal trade costs from

0

to

has no impact on the equilibrium exit

threshold, z, innovation decisions of …rms, q (z), the mass of entering …rms, ME , and the ratio of
exporters’revenues in the domestic market to total domestic revenues, sD . Moreover, the economy
A-1

transits immediately to a new steady-state in which changes in the export share, sX , aggregate
productivity, Z and output, Y , are:
sX
=
s0X

1

= 1+

1

1
0

= 1+

1
0

1+
Z
=
Z0
1+
Y
=
Y0

1+

1

1+

1
0

1
1
0

!

1
1

Proof: We …rst solve for the equilibrium in a symmetric steady-state. With fX = 0 for all
…rms, (A.1) implies that all …rms export and the variable pro…ts of a …rm with productivity z are
D

1

1+

exp (z). Hence, under the assumption that all …rms export, the Bellman equation

in the steady state, (7), can be written with ~ exp (z) replacing

t (z),

where ~ =

D

1+

1

.

Our arguments in the previous section imply that a unique level of ~ exists which satis…es the
free-entry condition (10), independent of the parameter . The corresponding exit thresholds, z,
innovation decisions, q (z), that solve the Bellman equation at this level of ~ are the equilibrium exit
and innovation decisions. Hence, these are also independent of . From (16), variable employment
l(z) for each …rm is independent of , and so is sD and, from (A.2), the mass of entrants. The
change in the other aggregate variables immediate follow from (17), (18), and (19). Given that
…rms’productivity distribution M (z) is unchanged across steady-state, the adjustment to the new
steady-state is immediate.

C

No productivity dynamics

Proposition 2: Consider a world economy with positive …xed costs of trade (fX > 0), no productivity
dynamics (

z

= 0), and the distribution of entering …rms G is such that the distribution of exp (z)

is Pareto,
cdf of G (z) = 1
where

exp (z0 )
exp (z)

, for z > z0

> 1. Suppose that both the exit and export cuto¤s are interior, zD > z0 , zX > z0 . In this

economy, a permanent reduction in marginal trade costs, , leads to an increase in the steady-state
exit cuto¤, z, a decline in the export cuto¤, zX , and has no impact on the steady-state mass of
entering …rms, ME . The economy transits immediately to a new steady-state.
A-2

Proof: We …rst solve for the steady-state. With the Pareto distribution of entering …rms and
no productivity dynamics, the free-entry condition (10) can be written as
(1

(1

))

exp (z0 )
(
1)
(exp (z0 ))

fE =

D

h

exp (z)

1

exp (z)

1

1

+ exp (zX )
f + exp (zX )

fX

i

or using the cuto¤ de…nitions in the model without productivity dynamics, exp (z) = f =
exp (zX ) =

1f =
X

(1

))

fE =

exp (z0 )
(
1

D)

f1

1
+ fX

(1

Note from this equation that a reduction in international trade costs
D

and

D,

(1

pro…tability

D

and a rise in

D

(1

).

)

(C.1)

results in a decline in

Hence, zD rises and zX falls.

The labor market clearing condition (A.2) can be written, using (16) and the de…nition of the
cuto¤s, as
1 = ME fE +

exp (z0 )

(

(

D)

1)
+1
1

f1

1
+ fX

(1

)

(C.2)

Combining (C.1) and (C.2), we obtain the result that in steady-state ME is independent of . In
response to a permanent reduction in , with the mass of entering …rms unchanged and the exit
cuto¤ zD increasing, the transition to a new steady-state is immediate. Note that in response to an
increase in , even though the mass of entrants is unchanged, the exit cuto¤ falls, so the transition
to the new steady-state is not immediate unless

D

= 1.

Not all …rms export, with time variation in …xed export costs

Consider the modi…ed version of our economy described in Section 5.
Proposition 3: In this economy, a permanent reduction in marginal trade costs, , leads to a
decline (increase) in the steady-state mass of entering …rms, ME , if and only if s~X is strictly lower
(higher) than sX , and the steady-state mass of entering …rms remains unchanged if and only if
s~X = sX .

A-3

Proof: The free-entry condition in this economy is

fE =

T
X1

D

t=0
T

1

=

1

t

)t +

(1

D

T +1

1

1+

)T

(1

1
X

t

)t

(1

t=0

T

(1
(1

T +1

)
)

D

+

1

T

(1
(1

)
)

D

1

1+

The share of discounted time-series revenues of exports in total discounted time-series revenues of
entering …rms is:
T +1

s~X =

1
T

1
1

(1
(1

)T
)

D

)T
)

(1
(1

D

T +1

+

1

(1
(1

1

T

=

)T
)

D

1

(1 +

T

1+

)

)T

(1

1

)T

(1

1

.

Given a mass of entrants ME , the mass of non-exporters, MD , and exporters, MX , is
MD = ME

1

)T

(1

and MX = ME

)T

(1

.

The share of revenues accounted for by exports is:
sX =
Note that if

MX 1
MD + MX (1 +

1

)

=

)T

(1

1

)T

1 + (1

1

= 1, then sX = s~X . Di¤erentiating the free-entry condition,
T

0=

log

D

+

log

(1

1+

D

=

T

)T 1 +

1

)T

1

(1
1

1+

s~X

1

1

log 1 +

log 1 +

, or

1

Aggregate output and the price level are given by
Y = M D + MX 1 +
1
=
P

1

1

MD + MX 1 +

1=(

1)

Lp

1=(

1

1)

So,
D

=

P Y
(
1)1

=

1
(

LP
1

1)

A-4

ME

MX
ME

+

MD
ME

(1 +

1

)

and log-di¤erentiating and using the expression for sX ,
log

D

=

log LP

1+

log ME

1

1

sX

=

log LP

log 1 +

1

or substituting,
(sX
We have LP = 1

s~X )

1+

1

1

log 1 +

1

log ME

fE ME or
log LP

fE ME
+1
LP

log ME =

log ME

Combining,
fE ME
+1
LP
When trade costs fall,

E

log 1 +

log ME = (~
sX
1

sX )

1+

1

log 1 +

1

1

> 0, and we obtain the result stated in the proposition.

Endogenous innovation

Here we provide some analytics to understand the response of innovation decisions q (z) to changes
in trade costs. To simplify our analysis, we set …xed overhead costs to zero, f = 0, so that there is
no endogenous exit, and we focus on steady-states.
We …rst use the Bellman equation (7) and free-entry condition (10) to determine the impact of
changes in trade costs on …rm pro…tability
the marginal cost of trade, , on

D.

D

in equilibrium. Consider the impact of a decline in

Since this raises

the free entry condition. Note as well that

D

1

1

,

D

has to fall in equilibrium to restore

must rise if the free entry condition is to be

satis…ed. Hence, for …rms that do not switch export status, the pro…ts of exporters –proportional
to

D

1+

1

, must rise relative to the pro…ts of non exporters. The export threshold falls so

that some …rms that previously did not export now start to export.
Note that the magnitude of the decline in

D

in response to a decline in international trade

costs is determined in large part by the distribution G of productivities of newly entering …rms. If
newly created …rms tend to be small non-exporters, then free entry requires that the discounted
expected value of pro…ts of these …rms remain roughly constant. In this case,
constant and the pro…ts of for large exporting …rms,
A-5

D

1+

1

D

remains roughly

rises by roughly the change in

1

1+

. In contrast, if newly created …rms tend to be large exporting …rms, then free entry

requires that

D

1

1+

remains roughly constant, and

D

falls.

We now examine the impact of these equilibrium changes in …rm pro…tability on the level of
innovation. To do so, we solve for the innovation decisions q(z) in (7) as a function of variable
pro…ts

D

and the other parameters of the model. The Bellman equation (7) is a standard problem

of valuing the pro…ts of the …rm together with an option: the option to start exporting (recall that
in this section we are abstracting from the option to exit by assuming f = 0, so V (z) = V o (z)).
The following Proposition characterizes the shape of the value function V (z) and the innovation
decision q(z) in steady-state.
Proposition 4: Suppose that the …xed overhead costs is set to zero, f = 0. Then, the value
function V (z) that solves (7) in steady-state has the form V (z) = A(z) exp(z) with limz!1 A(z) =
AX and limz!

1 A(z)

= AD , and the optimal q(z) has limz!1 q(z) = qX and limz!

1 q(z)

= qD

where AD and qD solve
AD =

D

1

(1

) [qD exp(

c0 (qD ) = (1

c(qD )
)
z + (1

) AD [exp(

qD ) exp(

z)

and AX and qX solve these two equations with the term

exp(
D

z )]

,

(E.1)

z )] ;

(E.2)

in (E.1) replaced with

D

1+

1

:

These solutions have AX > AD and qX > qD : Moreover, AD ; AX and qD and qX are increasing in
D,

while AX and qX are decreasing in :

Proof: The …rst part of the Proposition follows by construction. The term AD exp(z) with AD
given as above represents the expected discounted present value of variable pro…ts of a …rm that
sets its innovation decision q(z) to the constant qD and which never exports. Likewise, the term
AX exp(z) with AX given as above represents the expected discounted present value of variable
pro…ts of a …rm that sets its process innovation decision q(z) to the constant qX ; which always
exports, and which is so large that the …xed cost of exporting fX is a negligible portion of its
variable pro…ts.
For the second part of the Proposition, we show that AD is increasing in

D.

Di¤erentiating

(E.1):
@AD
=
@ ( D)
1

(1

1
) [qD exp( z ) + (1

A-6

qD ) exp(

z )]

+

@AD @ qD
>0,
@ qD @ D

where we used the fact that innovation choice is optimal, @AD =@ qD = 0, and
(1

) [qD exp(

z)

+ (1

qD ) exp(

z )]

<1

to guarantee that the discounted value of pro…ts is …nite. This same logic can be used to show that
AX > AD , AX is increasing in

D,

and AX is decreasing in :

For the third part of the Proposition, we show that qD is increasing in AD . Di¤erentiating
(E.2):
(1
)
@ qD @AD
= 00
[exp(
@AD @ D
c (qD )
where we used

@AD
@ D

qX is increasing in

z)

exp(

z )]

@AD
>0,
@ D

> 0, and the assumption that c00 (qD ) > 0. The same logic is used to show that
D

and decreasing in .

This Proposition implies that for very small …rms, the innovation decision q(z) is constant at qD
across …rms. These …rms do not export and all grow at the constant rate [qD exp(

z)

+ (1

qD ) exp(

in expectation. Likewise, for very large …rms, the innovation decision q(z) is constant at qX across
…rms: These …rms do export and all grow at the constant rate [qX exp(

z)

+ (1

qX ) exp(

z )]

in

expectation. The intuition for how Ai and qi change with changes in pro…tability is then straightforward. If

D

exp(z) or

1+

D

1

…rm that successfully innovates to z +
to z

z:

exp(z) rise, this raises the spread between the value of a
z

relative to the same …rm that fails to innovate and falls

From equation (9), this increased spread in pro…ts raises the incentives to engage in

innovation.
Note that the responsiveness of very large and very small …rms’ innovation decisions qX and
qD to changes in pro…tability and marginal trade costs is determined by the curvature of the
innovation cost function as indexed by c00 (q)=c0 (q): In particular, because the innovation choice is
optimal, @Ai =@ qi = 0; and hence the change in steady state innovation with a change in pro…ts is
given by
dqD =

c0 (qD )
c00 (qD )

d(
D

D)

c(qD )

and dqX =

c0 (qX )
c00 (qX )

d

D

D

(1 +

1

1+
1

)

c(qX )

:

If c00 ( )=c0 ( ) is very large, then innovation decisions and …rm growth rates are not very responsive
to changes in …rm pro…tability, while if this curvature is small, then innovation decisions and …rm
growth rates are very responsive to changes in pro…tability. By a similar argument, this curvature
of the innovation cost function c00 ( )=c0 ( ) also controls the di¤erence in the innovation decisions
and implied growth rates of very large …rms (qX ) and very small …rms (qD ) in a steady-state.

A-7

z )]

With this Proposition, we have the following results regarding the impact of permanent changes
in trade costs on the innovation decisions of very large …rms (exporters) and very small …rms (nonexporters). A reduction in the marginal costs of trade

leads to a reduction in the innovation of very

small …rms and an increase in the innovation of very large …rms relative to very small …rms. This
result follows directly from the fact that a reduction in the marginal costs of trade reduces
increases

D

1+

1

relative to

D:

D

and

The extent of reallocation of innovation from non-exporters

to exporters depends in part on the size distribution of newly created …rms. If newly created …rms
are small, then
while

D

D

1+

1

increases and innovation in very large …rms rises in absolute terms

remains roughly constant leaving innovation in small …rms roughly unchanged. Con-

versely, if newly created …rms are large exporting …rms, then pro…ts

D

1+

1

and innovation

in these …rms remains roughly unchanged, while for small …rms pro…ts and innovation falls.
Note that a reduction in the …xed costs of trade fX , by lowering the equilibrium level of
pro…tability

D,

leads to a reduction in innovation in both very large and very small …rms (note

that these …rms do not switch export status). Similar arguments give that a decline in the entry
cost fE results in a decline in innovation for both very large and very small …rms.

A-8

