NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHAT DO BUSINESS CLIMATE INDEXES TEACH US ABOUT STATE POLICY
AND ECONOMIC GROWTH?
Jed Kolko
David Neumark
Marisol Cuellar Mejia
Working Paper 16968
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16968
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2011

This paper previously circulated under the title "Public Policy, State Business Climates, and Economic
Growth." Supported with funding from the David A. Coulter Family Foundation and the Donald Bren
Foundation. We are grateful to McKinley Blackburn, Michael Dardia, Ellen Hanak, Debbie Reed,
Robert Tannenwald, Michael Teitz, the editor, and anonymous reviewers for very thoughtful comments.
Kolko and Neumark were affiliated with the Public Policy Institute of California (PPIC) when most
of this research was conducted. Any views expressed are the authors’ alone, and do not reflect the
views of Trulia, PPIC, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Jed Kolko, David Neumark, and Marisol Cuellar Mejia. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

What Do Business Climate Indexes Teach Us About State Policy and Economic Growth?
Jed Kolko, David Neumark, and Marisol Cuellar Mejia
NBER Working Paper No. 16968
April 2011, Revised August 2012
JEL No. H2,H5,J21,O4
ABSTRACT
State business climate indexes capture state policies that might affect economic growth. State rankings
in these indexes vary wildly, raising questions about what the indexes measure and which policies
are important for growth. Indexes focused on productivity do not predict economic growth, while indexes
emphasizing taxes and costs predict growth of employment, wages, and output. Analysis of sub-indexes
of the tax-and-cost-related indexes point to two policy factors associated with faster growth: less spending
on welfare and transfer payments; and more uniform and simpler corporate tax structures. But factors
beyond the control of policy have a stronger relationship with economic growth.
Jed Kolko
Trulia
116 New Montgomery St, 3rd floor
San Francisco, CA 94105
jdkolko@yahoo.com
David Neumark
Department of Economics
University of California at Irvine
3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697
and NBER
dneumark@uci.edu

Marisol Cuellar Mejia
Public Policy Institute of California
500 Washington St., Suite 600
San Francisco, CA 94111
cuellar@ppic.org

1. INTRODUCTION
A fundamental goal of government policy is to encourage economic growth. States use a variety of
strategies to encourage economic growth, such as job training, education, and infrastructure development, as
well as low taxes and light regulation. At the same time, policies intended to protect workers, promote
equity, improve the environment, and achieve other goals are sometimes seen as discouraging economic
growth if they require taxes or regulations that impose costs on businesses or reduce peoples’ incentives to
work. These same taxes and regulations, though, might improve quality of life and make places more
attractive to businesses and workers – ultimately even contributing to economic growth. The relationship,
therefore, between any one policy and economic growth is complex.
The complexity multiplies when we consider all of the policies states use to encourage economic
growth and all of the policies designed to achieve other goals, but which may also affect economic growth.
Considering policies together, however, is necessary, because policies often work in combination rather than
in isolation. For instance, taxes that increase the cost of doing business may also finance investments in
transportation infrastructure – another policy – that helps businesses. While it is a matter for the political
process to determine the right balance between encouraging economic growth and other goals, a crucial
research question essential to informing policy debate over balancing economic growth and other goals is
how state taxes, regulations, and other policies affect economic growth.
State business climate indexes summarize policies (and other factors) that might affect economic
growth, and these indexes – published by many national organizations – often loom large in policy debate
about economic growth. In this paper, we examine the relationships between a large set of state business
climate indexes and state economic growth. We present detailed information on what the indexes capture,
analyze whether they predict economic growth, and assess why particular indexes are or are not predictive of
the economic outcomes we study, owing to the policies they capture or emphasize. We also broaden the
analysis to consider other factors – such as weather1 and geography – that may affect economic growth and
which, if ignored, may obscure the true relationship between the policies captured by business climate
1

“Weather” means time-specific atmospheric conditions, and “climate” means long-term atmospheric tendencies.
Because we use the term “business climate” repeatedly and also include long-term meteorological climate measures as
controls, to avoid confusion we the word “weather” rather than “climate” to refer to meteorological climate measures.

1

indexes and economic growth.
The analysis focuses on state business climate indexes rather than the individual policy components
that constitute them, for two reasons. First, because the indexes play a large role in policy debate, it is useful
to understand their predictive power. More important, though, the indexes represent attempts to reduce to a
single measure a large number of policy variables that could affect economic growth. Because the number of
important policy components is large relative to the number of data points, some method of data reduction is
essential. However, existing research has demonstrated that the estimated effects of individual policies are
quite sensitive to the other policy variables included in models of economic growth (or other outcomes), in
part because of high correlations among policies. Thus, the results from a model with limited policy variables
could reflect either the effects of the included policies or the effects of the omitted policies.2
At the same time, we are of course interested in the effects of the policies the indexes capture, rather
than the indexes themselves. If we focused only on business climate indexes, we would not identify the
effects of individual policies. We therefore also focus more narrowly on better-defined subsets of policies by
examining the “sub-indexes” of several indexes; each sub-index covers a narrower range of policies like
regulatory measures, corporate income tax structure, or welfare and income-transfer policies. This analysis
can provide more specific guidance in identifying policy factors that influence economic growth.
An important caveat should be noted at the outset. While we argue that there is merit in looking at
bundles of policies via business climate indexes, this comes at a cost. In particular, some of the research
strategies used to identify more rigorously the causal effects of a policy in studies focusing on a single policy
are precluded. For example, it is difficult to think about how one would even propose an instrumental
variable for a measure that aggregates many policies. And there is little variation over time, within states, in
business climate indexes, ruling out state fixed-effects estimation. Nonetheless, we do what we can, given the
constraints of the data, to assess and try to rule out non-causal interpretations of our findings. And we would
argue that our evidence is at a minimum complementary to studies focusing on single policies, for which the
2

There are numerous examples of research focusing on a limited or more extensive set of specific policies. Studies of
policies in isolation have focused on taxes (e.g., Bartik, 1991; Buss, 2001; Papke, 1991; Carlton, 1983) and regulation
(e.g., Holmes, 1998); for reviews see Wasylenko (1997), Buss (2001), and Tannenwald (1997). Studies focusing on a
fairly limited set of policies include Wasylenko and McGuire (1985), Bartik (1985), and Helms (1985). In contrast,
Crain and Lee (1999) and Reed (2009) employ long lists of candidate variables to explain state economic growth,
finding that the results are sensitive to model specification, but also identifying a subset of robust variables.

2

gain from more rigorous identification must be offset against the likely confounding of effects of multiple
policies.3
Finally, factors affecting economic growth might vary at the local, regional, or state level. For
example, within a state, metropolitan areas can have different patterns of economic growth, industrial
composition, and workforce characteristics, as well as different local policies.4 Despite the economic
variation within states – especially large ones – we focus on business climate indexes and policy at the state
level. Although state boundaries do not necessarily reflect labor or product markets or have any other
inherent economic meaning, states set important economic policies, and the tendency of business climate
indexes to rank states rather than metropolitan areas or other regions reflects the expected importance of
taxes, regulations, investments, and other policies set at the state level. Also, even though metropolitan areas
within states can have different industrial compositions and different economic growth patterns, economic
growth rates for states overall clearly differ, with some states growing faster than others, often persistently.
There is, therefore, plenty of variation in economic growth rates between states to explain, and many of the
most likely policy factors that affect these economic growth rates are determined at the state level.
2. POLICY DEBATE AND THE CONTRADICTORY NATURE OF STATE BUSINESS CLIMATE
RANKINGS
In policy debate, the question of how government policies affect economic growth is often couched
in terms of the “business climate,” especially at the state level, and there is a cottage industry of state
business climate indexes that fuels this debate. These business climate indexes figure prominently in policy
debate, perhaps most commonly in arguments for lowering taxes and regulations in states that do poorly on
indexes that emphasize these costs of doing business and taxes more generally. Conversely, states that do
well on such indexes – because of low taxes, for example – often tout these indexes or rankings in trying to
attract businesses (Kolko et al., 2011). Not surprisingly, politicians and other organizations use state rankings
provided by business climate indexes to support their point of view. They are often able to do this selectively
3

Parent and LeSage (forthcoming) discuss a similar problem of an extensive list of possible influences – policy and
other factors – in the context of explaining regional patterns of innovation.
4
Indeed there are attempts to rank metro areas’ business climates, either using wage and rent premia, as in Gabriel and
Rosenthal (2004) and Albouy (2009), or business climate rankings of metropolitan areas that parallel the state indexes
(Beacon Hill Institute, 2007). However, emphasizing the point that policies are set more at the state level, the latter
rankings rely heavily on state policy prevailing in the metropolitan area of interest.

3

because state business climate rankings can provide strongly divergent views of state policy environments.
For example, some states that are ranked poorly in terms of taxes are ranked favorably on other dimensions,
such as education and human capital, or quality of life measures including crime rates and health.5
Such conflicting information from state business climate indexes provides part of the motivation for
this study. More generally, though, we study how state policy environments, as captured by state business
climate indexes, predict state economic growth, both to inform our understanding of these indexes, and to
help identify which policies are more important determinants of state economic growth. To do this, we
collected data and detailed information on 11 well-known business climate indexes. We included indexes
that have published rankings for multiple years and made their methods transparent, including providing a
full list of the components that constitute the index. For several indexes, we also collected data and
information on their sub-indexes, which we explain below.
The first column of Table 1 lists the indexes included in our study and the institution that creates the
index (as well as the years covered).6 For reasons discussed later, we label these PROD1-PROD5, TXCST1TXCST5, and FISCPOL. The next two columns describe the focus of each index, and list the categories of
policy variables covered by each index (out of 14 that we have created based on the content of the indexes).
It is clear that the indexes aim to capture different facets of the policy environment. Thus, it would not be
surprising if states are ranked differently depending on the business climate index, and if the indexes varied
in the extent to which they predict economic growth. In addition, the institutions that create these indexes
sometimes have specific agendas that may influence what policies they emphasize, which might or might not
be the factors most predictive of economic growth.7

5

To clarify the language we use below, a higher value of an index implies a better rating of the business climate – so
that the ranking is closer to one.
6
We also examined the American Legislative Exchange Council (ALEC)-Laffer State Economic Competitiveness
Index, the California Economic Performance Card, created by the California Foundation for Commerce and Education,
and Best States for Business created by Forbes Magazine. However, the first is available only for 2008 and 2009, the
second only for 2008, and the third only from 2006 through 2009, hardly overlapping our sample period. In addition,
there is not sufficient detail available for Forbes’ Best States for Business, making it impossible to evaluate how the
index was generated in terms of variables, sources, weights, and aggregation methods.
7
For example, the Economic Freedom Index (TXCST4) is created by the Pacific Research Institute, whose mission is to
“champion freedom, opportunity, and personal responsibility for all individuals by advancing free-market policy
solutions.” (See http://liberty.pacificresearch.org/about/default.asp, viewed November 4, 2009). In contrast, the
Corporation for Enterprise Development, which constructs three of the indexes we study (Table 1), describes itself as
“[d]riven to create a more robust, fair and sustainable economy for all of us, … fueled by the belief that there is a

4

Table 2 shows how the 50 states rank on the business climate indexes. We first average each index’s
ranking across the years for which the index is available. Then in the second and third columns we report the
average of these averages for the first five indexes (PROD1-PROD5) and the next five (TXCST1-TXCST5);
as we discuss later, these sets of indexes naturally group together. In the last two columns, we report the
minimum and maximum for the state across average rankings of the different individual indexes. The table
reveals that states’ positions in the rankings can vary wildly from one index to another. Indeed, the smallest
difference between the minimum and maximum average ranking for states is 21, and for 16 states the range
is 40 or higher. In fact, across all 50 states, every state but one (Hawaii) ranks in the top 20 in at least one
index, and every state ranks in the bottom half in at least one index. Thus, based on these indexes, nearly
every state could be praised for having a good business climate, or criticized for having a bad one.
3. PAST RESEARCH ON BUSINESS CLIMATE INDEXES AND OTHER DETERMINANTS OF
GROWTH
Assessments of Business Climate Indexes8
Erickson (1987) reviews the development of business climate indexes in the United States, ascribing
the beginning of modern business climate indexes to: the 1975 Fantus company index, prepared for the
Illinois Manufacturers’ Association; the Alexander Grant & company (later, Grant Thornton) index, first
prepared for the Conference of State Manufacturers’ Associations in 1979; and the Inc. magazine Report
Card on the States, first published in 1981. Two early academic studies assess the relationship between these
early indexes and economic outcomes (Plaut and Pluta, 1983; and Skoro, 1988). A later paper (Holmes,
1998) suggested that the Fantus index captures an important pro- or anti-business stance of state policy.
Including this index accounted for a positive relationship between right-to-work laws and manufacturing
employment, also highlighting the problem that conclusions about a given state policy can be misleading
without taking account of the many other state policies that can be reflected in a business climate index.
A second and larger wave of business climate indexes – including many of the indexes we consider

tremendous amount of untapped potential in low-income people and distressed communities.” (See
http://www.cfed.org/focus.m, viewed November 4, 2009).
8
We focus on studies of business climate indexes and how well they predict state economic growth. There is a larger
literature on state (and MSA) economic growth and convergence; a recent example is Bauer et al. (forthcoming).

5

in this paper – is assessed in more recent work. Fisher (2005) provides a sweeping critique of five business
climate indexes. He is particularly critical of the “arbitrary” weighting of components in the construction of
most indexes, in contrast to regression models that assign weights based on predictions of economic
performance. Fisher also highlights the sensitivity of business climate indexes to specification and variable
definition, criticizes the inclusion in indexes of variables that should be viewed as outcomes, and flags the
potential for reverse causality with policy responding to growth rather than the other way around.
There are problems with Fisher’s assessment of these business climate indexes, which we improve
upon in a number of ways. First, he restricts tests of predictive power to simple correlations or regressions in
which the only control other than the index is a lagged level of the dependent variable. Because many factors
could be correlated with business climate indexes as well as economic performance, his tests are prone to
omitted variable bias. Second, Fisher assesses indexes on their own terms – such as analyzing how well the
tax-focused State Business Tax Climate index corresponds with other tax measures – rather than comparing
the predictive power of multiple indexes for economic performance measures of interest, like growth in
output, employment, or income. At the same time, we address some of the problems that he highlighted,
including robustness of the evidence, the inclusion of outcomes in the indexes, and reverse causality.
Bittlingmayer et al. (2005) use a more uniform framework that facilitates comparisons across
indexes and attempts to control for other factors. Rather than including controls for other state-level variables
that could affect economic growth, they study pairs of counties that straddle state borders, estimating
relationships between the county ratios of business climate indexes and outcome growth rates. Their
evidence is mixed, but it suggests that for some indexes a better business climate ranking predicts positive
economic outcomes. Foreshadowing our results to some extent, they find that indexes more narrowly focused
on tax policies are more likely to have positive relationships with growth than are broader measures, but also
that the indexes with these positive relationships explain little of the variation in economic growth.
This study also has potentially serious limitations. First, it uses a good deal of data on outcomes two
to three decades prior to the business climate measures. Second, border areas can sometimes be poorly
representative of entire states. Coastal states – where a disproportionate share of U.S. economic activity is
located – tend to have their economic and population centers on the coast since oceans and lakes facilitate
6

trade and transportation. In states with smaller coastlines, like New York or Pennsylvania, economic centers
might be both on the coast and near state borders; but in states with larger coastlines, like California and
Florida, the vast majority of economic activity is far from state borders, and border areas of those states are
economically distinct from the rest of the state. Third, economic activity in border areas is probably more
sensitive to differences in state tax and regulatory policies since both sides of the border share similar
economic conditions and may be in the same labor market. Thus, it is preferable to assess state business
climate indexes using state-level data.
Finally, Garrett and Rhine (2010) assess the relationship between state employment growth and the
Economic Freedom Index of North America index and its sub-indexes. This index and its “size of
government” sub-index has a positive and statistically significant (10-percent level) relationship with
employment growth in the periods 1980-1990, 1990-2000, and 2000-2005; the relationship for the “labor
market freedom” sub-index is significant for the latter two periods and of larger magnitude than for the size
of government sub-index. Similar to the approach we take, they regress growth rates on the initial values of
the index, controlling for density, industry mix, and other factors. However, they consider only the one
index, and in their analysis of sub-indexes they report only regressions on each separately, despite high
positive correlations among the sub-indexes (documented later).
Recent work on regional economic differences estimates the relative productivity of metropolitan
areas, rather than states, using weighted averages of residuals from wage and rent equations, following the
Roback (1982) model of spatial equilibrium (Gabriel and Rosenthal, 2004; Albouy, 2009). This method does
not require selecting or identifying factors that might enhance productivity, which offers the advantage of
avoiding the arbitrary weighting schemes in business climate indexes, although of course it is more reliant on
economic theory. Nonetheless, this approach parallels the use of business climate indexes, in that it studies a
measure that aggregates across many policies to try to characterize the policy environment and economic
conditions facing businesses in different areas. It does not distinguish, however, between policies and other
factors that affect productivity.
Factors Beyond Policy
Factors beyond the immediate or even longer-term control of state and local policymakers likely
7

affect economic growth as well, and if we do not account for these factors, then estimated relationships
between business climate indexes – and the policies underlying them – and economic outcomes can be
misleading. For example, the local and regional growth literature emphasizes persistent – and sometimes
quite immutable – characteristics like the local industry mix (Glaeser et al., 1992; Henderson et al., 1995). In
the short or medium term, policymakers probably can do little to change the industry composition of their
region, even if investments in education or infrastructure might, over the long-term, help shift a local
economy from one set of industries to another. This literature has also emphasized that mild weather and
other amenities can contribute to local quality of life (Glaeser et al., 2001), leading workers to accept lower
wages to live and work in more appealing places, so businesses not tied to specific locations for other reasons
can lower their labor costs by locating in places with positive amenities. Geographic features like coastal
proximity can also matter (Rappaport and Sachs, 2003); historically, proximity to waterways facilitated trade
of manufactured goods, though as the U.S. economy has become more service-based this advantage of
coastal locations (or location next to natural resources) has diminished. Population density can affect growth
in either direction – enhancing growth through the beneficial effects of the proximity of other businesses,
workers, and knowledge (“agglomeration economies”), or slowing growth owing to congestion and higher
land costs.
4. DATA
Economic Outcomes
We focus on growth in employment, total wages, and Gross State Product (GSP). Job growth is at
the center of policy debate, but policymakers also care about earnings,9 perhaps in part because higher wages
generate higher tax revenue and reduce other government expenditures. GSP and wages are related, but GSP
is broader: it is measured as the sum of wages (equivalently, labor income), capital income (returns to
business owners, corporations, and other owners of capital), and business taxes. Finally, we measure job
growth at new businesses, responding to a general and long-standing policy focus on the importance of small
businesses (which new businesses always are) in job creation (Neumark et al., 2011).
9

A state’s policies might be judged as more successful if they create high-wage jobs. The evidence points to the same
types of policies increasing employment growth and wage growth (when they have an effect), suggesting that
employment gains are coming in jobs paying wages that are roughly the same, on average, as the existing stock of jobs.

8

We use the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW) to measure overall employment
growth through 2008. The QCEW also gives a measure of total compensation paid during a calendar quarter
to covered workers, which we aggregate to measure annual wage growth.10 The GSP data (in current dollars)
come from the Bureau of Economic Analysis. GSP is derived as the sum of the GDP originating in all the
industries in a state. Given that there is a discontinuity in the GSP time series in 1997, with the change from
SIC to NAICS industry definitions, we use GSP growth for 1997-2008. We use the National Establishment
Time-Series (NETS) to measure employment growth at new businesses.11 We had NETS data through 2006.
Business Climate Indexes
We collected data on 11 business climate indexes for all available years from 1992 through 2008.12
For each of the 11 indexes we use the index values rather than the ranking, which allows us to capture
information on the magnitudes of the gap between states, which tend to be larger for states nearer to the tails
of the distributions of the indexes. Because index definitions can change from year to year, we standardize
each index for each year, subtracting off its mean and dividing by its standard deviation. The indexes are
signed such that positive values correspond to what is intended to reflect a “better” business climate, based
on the intention of the creators of each index (e.g., low taxes). In some cases, we used the underlying data to
construct modified forms of the indexes, described below.
Business climate sub-indexes
Several of the business climate indexes also define and report scores for sub-indexes; these subindexes aggregate up to the “parent” index, so when we substitute the full set of sub-indexes for the
corresponding index, we do not omit other policies included in the index (although the weighting of specific
policies is fixed). We discuss the content of these sub-indexes later.
Control Variables

10

The wage measure includes total compensation paid during the calendar quarter, regardless of when services were
performed, and includes pay for vacation and other paid leave, bonuses, stock options, tips, the cash value of meals and
lodging, and in some states, contributions to deferred compensation plans (such as 401(k) plans).
11
We also estimated the models for employment growth using the NETS, to verify that the results are similar. The
present paper reports employment results only for the QCEW data. Results with the NETS, and additional information
on the NETS data, are provided in Kolko et al. (2011).
12
Our sample period ends in 2008 but the dependent variables for the last year are measured as changes to 2008, so in
our regressions we use indexes through 2007. However, some of the tables showing descriptive information on the
indexes refer to the latest year for which an index was available.

9

We included other control variables common in the urban and regional literature, except that we are
purposely not using as controls other variables that the literature often includes in growth regressions – like
educational attainment – that are included in business climate indexes (since they reflect policy). Because the
business-climate indexes span so many different variables, this leaves a relatively small set of additional
controls, mainly focused on amenities or other geographic or long-standing economic factors that could
influence economic growth.
First, we use weather variables from Mendelsohn et al. (1994), capturing both temperature and
precipitation. These were originally calculated at the county level; we use county-population-weighted state
averages based on 2006 Census population estimates. We define “Mild” as the negative of the absolute value
of the difference between monthly average temperature and 20 degrees Celsius, summed over January, April,
July, and October, and “Dry” as the negative of the average monthly precipitation for those four months, in
centimeters.13 Second, we use “Proximity,” defined as the negative of the average distance from the state’s
county centroids, weighted by county population, to the nearest coast, Great Lake, or major river (Rappaport
and Sachs, 2003). With the multiplication by −1, higher values of these measures reflect milder weather,
drier weather, and closer proximity to navigable water. Third, we define population density as the tractweighted population density across the state (and use this in natural logarithms), based on 1990 Census data
(Glaeser and Kahn, 2004).14
Finally, we construct a measure of the state-specific “shift-share” or “industry composition effect”
attributable to the baseline industry mix of the state and national growth by industry, to account for variation
13

We experimented with more flexible specifications of the weather variables. First, to allow more flexible effects of
weather, we estimated specifications adding quadratic terms in the mild and dry weather variables. Second, to allow
deviations from mild temperature to be asymmetric in the hot and cold directions, we broke the temperature variable
into two components: one measuring deviations from 20 degrees Celsius in the summer, and one in the winter. The
estimated relationships of our growth measures with the business climate indexes for our main specifications (Tables 6
and 7, discussed below) were very similar.
14
Even though population density is measured prior to our sample period, it could be endogenously related to
government policy that evolves slowly over time. One reason to include population density as a control is to capture
how possible it is for places to grow, and population density seems the best variable to capture this. High-density
metropolitan areas have higher land prices and lower elasticity of housing supply. Thus, if we tried instead to capture
limitations on growth in dense places with land prices, the endogeneity bias would be more severe; the lower elasticity
implies that an outward shift in demand for locations in high-density places will raise price more than quantity relative
to demand shifts in lower-density places. The relative population density of areas changes much more slowly over time
and is less likely to reflect these demand shifts. Nonetheless, we have estimated our main specifications (Tables 6 and 7)
excluding density, and the results were again very similar.

10

in state economic growth due to the mix of industries in each state. For example, California’s strong
economic growth during the high-tech boom of the late 1990’s could have occurred because high-tech
expanded more in California than it did in other states, or California could have exhibited strong economic
growth during the high-tech boom simply because high-tech grew strongly everywhere, and high-tech was
originally over-represented in the state. The industry composition effect variable controls for the second type
of influence, which seems less likely to have anything to do with state policy.
We start with the industry composition of employment in each state in 1992 (our base year), and
calculate how employment would have grown had employment in each industry in the state grown at the
average rate of growth of the industry’s employment in the other 49 states. This calculation is done at the
level of 3-digit NAICS industries. Letting EIS denote the industry composition effect, E denote employment,
the subscripts i and j denote states, and the subscript k denote industry, this variable is defined as:
(1)

.

Descriptive Information on State Economic Growth and Controls
Descriptive statistics on the growth and control variables are reported in Table 3. Of perhaps greatest
interest is employment growth, which averages 1.6 percent annually by state (unweighted). The rates of
growth of GSP and total wages are higher because they are measured in current dollars (nominal growth is
removed in the regressions by including year dummy variables). The rate of employment growth due to
births is also higher, because this measure does not capture employment reductions due to deaths (or
employment changes due to expansions, contractions, or relocation into or out of states).
5. WHAT DO THE BUSINESS CLIMATE INDEXES CAPTURE?
The eleven indexes arrive at such contradictory rankings of business climates across states because
different indexes include or emphasize different factors. Table 4 shows this by grouping our 14 policy
categories into three broad classes: taxes and costs; productivity (and quality of life); and other. We then
show the weights that each index puts on the 14 categories as well as the broad class. This table highlights
sharp differences in the policies that indexes emphasize. For example, the indexes we labeled TXCST1TXCST5 (as well as FISCPOL) focus heavily on taxes, costs, and regulation and litigation. The PROD2
11

index emphasizes quality of life and equity measures, and the PROD1 emphasizes human capital, new
businesses, and technology. More generally, all five of the indexes labeled PROD capture elements of what
we consider productivity of the workforce or quality of life factors; hence the label. The table reveals
differences within these groups – such as the sole emphasis of the TXCST1 index on taxes, the emphasis of
the TXCST4 and TXCST2 indexes on regulation and litigation, and the inclusion of welfare and transfer
payments in the TXCST4 and TXCST5 indexes.15
Table 5 shows the correlations of the indexes, averaged over time, across states. Among the PROD1PROD5 indexes, the correlations are positive and generally large. On the other hand, the correlations of these
five indexes with the next set of five (TXCST1-TXCST5) are mostly negative, and in many cases (especially
when they are not negative) quite small. Conversely, the correlations among the latter fives indexes are
uniformly positive, and again quite large. The correlations of the FISCPOL index with the other ten indexes,
shown in the last row, are generally small and vary in sign, which is why we use a separate label for this
index. To assess more systematically the impressions given by these correlations, we performed a variety of
cluster analyses on the average index values, finding that there were two distinct clusters – one that generally
included the first five indexes listed above, and one that generally included the second set of five indexes.
The last index (FISCPOL) was more or less randomly assigned to one cluster or the other.
The correlations and cluster analysis suggest that there are two distinct clusters of indexes. The first
includes the PROD1, PROD2, PROD3, PROD4, and PROD5 indexes. Tables 1 and 4 showed that these
indexes reflect productivity of the workforce and other quality of life measures; we hence categorize these
indexes as belonging to the “productivity” cluster.16 The second distinct cluster includes the TXCST1,
TXCST2, TXCST3, TXCST4, and TXCST5 indexes, and based on what these indexes cover, we categorize
15

We also constructed a much more detailed list of the variables within each of our 14 categories that go into each
index (available from the authors upon request). This, too, is informative for interpreting the indexes. For example, the
TXCST1 index weighs a broad range of tax rates, while others (the PROD5 and TXCST3 indexes) try to summarize all
of this information in a single tax burden, and yet others (such as the FISCPOL index) emphasize a small set of taxes.
Similarly, the list reveals the kinds of variables used to capture quality of life (such as crime rates and infant mortality)
and equity (such as the poverty rate, and inequality in the income distribution).
16
From the perspective of urban economics, the predicted effects of factors that affect productivity and factors that
affect quality of life are different. But these predictions are for wage levels (positive in the first case, and negative in the
second), not for wage growth or the other dimensions of growth we study. Moreover the spirit of our study is not to
construct new indexes, but to take them as given. In practice, the indexes do combine these two factors. But the table of
correlations (Table 5) combined with the table of weights (Table 4) makes clear that even though the “productivity”
indexes weight different things differently as between quality of life and productivity, the correlations are very high.

12

this as the “tax-and-cost” cluster.”17 We did not assign FISCPOL to either cluster.18 This analysis of the
content of the indexes, and the identification of two main clusters that underlie most of them, helps explain
the contradictory state rankings across the various indexes (as well as why we label the first five indexes
similarly and the next five similarly). Given the broad similarities of how states are ranked within the taxand-cost and productivity clusters, but the lack of relationship between how states are ranked across these
two clusters, we focus on comparing these two clusters in analyzing the relationship between business
climate indexes and economic growth.
6. EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS OF BUSINESS CLIMATE INDEXES AND STATE ECONOMIC GROWTH:
METHODS
We estimate state-level regressions, over time, for growth in four measures: QCEW employment;
QCEW wages; GSP; and NETS employment due to births. Given that the business climate indexes are
typically available only for a subset of years (see Table 1), and that there is often not much overlap between
the years available for different indexes, for the most part we study one index at a time for the years for
which that index is available. Because inter-temporal correlations of the indexes are generally very high,
exceeding 0.7 or 0.8 even for observations eight or nine years apart, we would be unlikely to get very
different answers if we had the index values for other years.
Our specifications define the index or sub-index at time t, and growth from t to t+1. We also
explored the sensitivity of the results to varying the length of the interval over which growth is measured,
and shifting this interval relative to measurement of the business climate index. All specifications include
year fixed effects to capture the aggregate business cycle, so that we identify the effects of the policies
captured by state business climate rankings on how state growth differs from the aggregate.
It is natural to think about estimating these regression models with state-specific fixed effects, to try
to identify the effects of changes in the policies captured by a state’s business climate index while avoiding
17

Note that we group “welfare and transfer payments” with taxes and costs even though we treat equity outcomes as
contributing to quality of life. Net of the income distribution, higher welfare and transfer payments implies more
redistribution via taxes. The latter implies more deadweight loss from taxation, and more importantly more work
disincentives, which can clearly lower the level of economic activity. Likely reflecting this argument, Table 4 shows
that the indexes emphasizing taxes and costs are the ones that put any weight on welfare and transfer payments.
18
FISCPOL also puts weight on taxes, but with lots of weight on a measure of size of government that makes this index
quite independent of the other five indexes in the “tax-and-cost” cluster.

13

the confounding influence of time-invariant state characteristics that affect economic growth. However, the
high inter-temporal correlations within nearly all of the indexes imply that there is little to be learned from
regression models with fixed state effects.19 Consequently, our regression models primarily identify the
effects of variation in the policies captured in business climate indexes and sub-indexes from cross-state
variation, and rather than including fixed state effects, we incorporate the controls for state characteristics
likely to affect economic growth that were described earlier. Finally, we report some results with dummy
variables for the four Census regions.
Letting ∆Yit denote the growth measures for state i in year t, BCit denote the index, Xi denote the
control variables, and Dt denote the year fixed effects, we estimate regression models of the form:
(2)

.
As usual, there are questions of the endogeneity of policy, because policies may be affected by

economic activity, especially when looking at outcomes and policies at the same jurisdictional level. We do
not believe there are compelling instrumental variables to solve this problem, though others have tried to
predict changes in specific policies using political-cycle events like term-end behavior (Besley and Case,
1995) or determinants of political influence related to an area’s political representatives (Hanson and Rohlin,
2010). The problem is particularly difficult because BC captures a number (and often a very large number) of
policies. One could think about using economic development policies in neighboring states, but given the
possibility of inter-jurisdictional competition (e.g., Brueckner, 2003) the exogeneity of neighboring states’
policies is questionable. Thus, we are limited to addressing this issue by carefully controlling for underlying
trends at the state level, through the industry composition effect variable, and through some other analyses
specific to particular variables or hypotheses of interest that are discussed later. We also suspect that any
endogeneity problems are less severe when we study the aggregate business climate indexes, in contrast to
the narrower sub-indexes; in the former case, the large number and types of policies captured in the indexes
makes it less likely that state economic growth drives the measured policy variation.
19

Moreover, within-state variation in the indexes over time may reflect a good deal of measurement error, given the
numerous subjective and somewhat ad hoc decisions that go into constructing the indexes, as well as actual errors in
measurement. With this type of measurement error, controlling for fixed state effects likely biases the estimated effects
of the indexes toward zero, and could result in more biased estimates than cross-sectional regressions without fixed
effects.

14

An ideal analysis of the empirical content of business climate indexes might estimate relationships
between business climate indexes and economic growth over a long sample period in the past, and then test
the ability of business climate indexes to forecast economic growth out of sample. However, given the
relatively short sample period available to us, this is infeasible.
7. EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS OF BUSINESS CLIMATE INDEXES AND STATE ECONOMIC GROWTH:
RESULTS
State Economic Growth and Business Climate Indexes
Tables 6-8 report the estimates of Equation (2) for the different economic growth measures. A set of
regressions for each business climate index is reported. In each case, we first estimate the model with nothing
but the business climate index and year fixed effects as independent variables, defining the dependent
variable as the one-year percentage change. We then augment this model with the controls for the industry
composition effect, population density, weather, and proximity to navigable water, and then add the Census
region dummy variables. We also estimated these specifications for annualized percent changes computed
over two- and three-year periods, to establish that the qualitative findings are robust.20
Table 6 reports results for employment growth as measured by the QCEW. In Table 6, for all of the
productivity indexes, as well as FISCPOL, the estimated relationship between the index and QCEW
employment growth is either small and not statistically significant, with a central tendency of about zero, or
anomalously negative and significant (for PROD4). The estimated coefficients of the tax-and-cost indexes
are all positive, and strongly significant for TXCST1 and TXCST5. The indexes are standardized, so the
coefficients reflect the estimated effect of a one-standard deviation increase in the index. We also report, in
square brackets, the change in the growth rate of employment associated with a move in the rankings from
the 40th to the 10th state – a substantial “jump up” in the rankings – based on the average values of the index
for the included years.
The strongest and most robust evidence is for the TXCST1 and TXCST5 indexes: we find positive,
sizable, and statistically significant estimates for every specification we estimated. Taking the estimate from

20

These and many other findings we discuss but do not report in the tables are available in Kolko et al. (2011), or from
the authors upon request.

15

the second panel of Table 6 of 0.20 for the TXCST5 index implies that moving a state from the 40th to the
10th place in the rankings would increase the rate of growth of employment by 0.36 percentage point – a
substantial increase compared with the mean employment growth rate of 1.61 percent reported in Table 3.
The bottom specification reports the estimates when we add the Census region dummy variables
along with the other controls. In this case, the evidence becomes stronger, with positive and significant
estimates for all five of the tax-and-cost business climate indexes. (The evidence from these specifications is
also strong for wage growth, as reported below.) In our view, it is not obvious that we should rely only on the
evidence from the specifications with Census region dummy variables included. Variation across regions
may be as important as or more important than variation within regions. For example, evidence on migration
patterns suggests that states do not compete only with bordering states or states within the same region.21
Clearly, though, if the reader believes that the effects are better identified within regions, then more weight
should be put on these latter specifications, which only strengthen our findings.
The table divides the results for the different “clusters” of indexes discussed earlier; to reiterate, the
first five constitute the productivity cluster, and the next five the tax-and-cost cluster. All of the indexes for
which there is evidence of a positive relationship between the index and employment growth are in the taxand-cost cluster. Conversely, none of the indexes in the productivity cluster has a positive relationship with
employment growth. Thus, the principal result that emerges is that states with policies that lead them to be
ranked better on the tax-and-cost-focused indexes – meaning lower taxes, lower regulatory costs, etc. – have
faster employment growth.
The results for the control variables are similar for the specification shown in the table and the others
we estimated but do not report (with, for example, longer windows for estimating growth rates). We refer to
the specification reported in the second panel as our “baseline” specification. The estimated coefficients of
the industry composition variable are more or less centered on one. Population density is almost always
negatively associated with employment growth, and the estimate is generally statistically significant. This

21

For a convenient look at migration flows, see http://www.forbes.com/2010/06/04/migration-moving-wealthyinteractive-counties-map.html?preload=48453 (viewed February 13, 2012). See also evidence from the ACS reported in
“Are the Rich Leaving California?” http://www.ppic.org/content/pubs/jtf/JTF_LeavingCAJTF.pdf (viewed February 13,
2012).

16

presumably reflects the higher growth rate associated with a lower base, more room to expand, lower land
costs, and so on, offsetting any agglomeration effects. The “dry” variable is always estimated to be positively
associated with employment growth, although the estimate is not statistically significant. In contrast, there is
a strong positive association between mild weather and employment growth. Somewhat surprisingly,
perhaps, the estimated effect of proximity to navigable water is negative, and sometimes statistically
significant. This is not the usual predicted effect from models of economic geography, but may reflect shifts
in recent decades towards services and low weight-to-value products that have made proximity to water less
important. (These results for the other controls are very similar for the regressions for the other dependent
variables, and hence are not reported in the following tables.)
Table 7 reports estimates for wage and GSP growth. The findings are similar to those for
employment growth, though somewhat less strong. None of the productivity indexes has a positive,
statistically significant relationship with either outcome when we include controls. In contrast, with controls
included the TXCST5 index has a persistent positive and significant estimated effect on these two outcomes.
Although not reported in the table, as in the employment growth regressions, mild weather, the industry
composition effect, and lower population density are positively associated with wage and GSP growth.
Finally, Table 8 reports results for employment change due to establishment births. In contrast to the
previous results, the policies captured in the productivity indexes predict employment change due to births at
least as strongly as the tax-and-cost indexes, when controls are included. Four of five of the productivity
indexes (PROD1, PROD2, PROD3, and PROD4) have a positive, statistically significant relationship (at the
10-percent level) with employment change due to births; several of the tax-and-cost indexes do as well, and
the TXCST4 coefficients are larger than those of the productivity indexes or the other tax-and-cost indexes.
Nonetheless, we emphasize our results on overall growth in employment, wages, and GSP. It is unclear
whether greater employment growth due to births in the absence of greater net employment growth is
advantageous; a larger role for births could lead to higher long-term economic growth if new firms take
advantage of newer technologies and processes that allow them to generate longer-term growth.22 However,

22

If the productivity indexes are associated with employment change due to births but not with overall employment
change, they must also be positively associated with gross job destruction. We confirmed that most of the productivity

17

dividing our years into two time periods and regressing later growth on both earlier and later values of the
indexes revealed no evidence that the policy variables captured in the productivity indexes are associated
with future growth. But given that the index rankings are generally quite stable over time, it is hard to
separate contemporaneous from lagged effects of policies captured in the indexes, and the absence of long
time-series makes it difficult to test propositions about longer-term growth.
We carried out several sensitivity tests or additional analyses to assess the validity of the results.
First, because indexes in the productivity cluster include components that we consider to be outcomes, rather
than policy factors that affect outcomes, we recalculated these indexes and generate modified indexes
stripped of outcome components.23 Our regression results changed little with these modified indexes, which
is perhaps not surprising since the indexes in the productivity cluster generally showed no positive
relationships with growth in net employment, wages, or GSP in the first place.
Second, we repeated the regressions for the tax-and-cost cluster adding a control for the PROD4
index, the only index from the productivity cluster that generally has a statistically significant (albeit
negative) relationship with growth in the regression models with the control variables included. Although we
know from Table 5 that indexes in different clusters have no statistically significant positive correlations,
some pairs – like TXCST3 and PROD4 – exhibit significant and large negative correlations, raising the
possibility that we are misattributing the effects of the policies in an index to those in another cluster when
we include each index singly in Tables 6-8. The tax-and-cost cluster index coefficients changed very little
when the PROD4 index was included as a control.
Third, we re-ran our baseline models with some additional controls from just prior to the sample
period – the share of the population with a high-school degree or more (from the 1990 Census), the share of
the state’s U.S. House delegation in 1991 that was Democratic, and the Democratic share of the presidential
vote in the state in 1992. The first captures baseline skill or education differences, and the latter two capture
political ideology that may shape policy. We did not include these controls in our core models because they
indexes are positively associated with components of gross job creation and gross job destruction, which could imply
that the productivity indexes are associated with the “creative destruction” emphasized by Schumpeter (1942).
23
Examples are: the employment growth measures, unemployment rate, involuntary part-time employment, and pay
measures in the PROD2 index; and initial public offerings and “gazelle” jobs in the PROD1 index. We were able to
generate the PROD1 and the three DRCS indexes (PROD2-PROD4) omitting the outcome components.

18

may to some extent reflect policy, and hence over-control for the policies captured in the business climate
indexes. Nonetheless, the results were robust to the inclusion of these controls. Interestingly, as well, the
Democratic vote share was consistently associated with lower growth of all of our measures, and the
relationship was nearly always statistically significant for employment and GSP growth.
Fourth, we re-ran our baseline models including state fixed effects. As expected from the high
correlation of business climate indexes for states over time, standard errors increased considerably, and
almost no coefficients of the indexes were statistically significant. More specifically, for the tax-and-cost
indexes, the coefficient estimates were often little changed, but the standard errors were so much larger that
these estimated coefficients were no longer statistically significant. We therefore interpret these fixed-effects
results as providing no additional insight while at the same time not contradicting our main results.
Fifth, as noted earlier, it is possible that industry mix is partly a function of policy, given the
persistence over time of the business climate indexes. If so, it is possible that we are over-controlling for
policy by including the industry composition control. We therefore estimated the baseline specification
omitting the industry control. The estimates were largely unchanged. There was, though, a hint of evidence
consistent with the over-controlling concern, as the estimated relationships between some of the tax-and-cost
indexes and employment growth in a couple of instances (wage and GSP growth, for the TXCST2 index)
became stronger positive and statistically significant. However, the qualitative conclusions are the same, and
it is not clear that one wants to give credit to the policies captured in the business climate indexes if industry
composition is actually driving things exogenously.
Sixth, a potential concern is that the tax-and-cost indexes do not isolate the effects of taxes, because
the specifications with these indexes may not adequately control for expenditures. This concern is not
strongly justified, for a number of reasons. First, some of the tax-and-cost indexes have information on
government expenditures; this is discussed in more detail below with respect to the TXCST4 and TXCST5
indexes. Second, as we also discuss below, it appears to be tax complexity (especially with regard to
corporate taxes) that matters, rather than the level of marginal rates, yet there is no reason to expect
complexity to be correlated with expenditures. Nonetheless, given that the PROD2 and PROD3 indexes
include some categories related to government expenditures, we re-estimated the models for the tax-and-cost
19

indexes including these other two indexes as controls. The estimates are often not directly comparable to
what is reported in Tables 6-8, because the PROD2 and PROD3 indexes are not always available for the
same years. Nonetheless, the estimates were generally unchanged qualitatively. For the TXCST1 regressions,
these two productivity indexes are available for the same years, and the estimates were virtually unchanged.
Seventh, one concern in interpreting the evidence relating the policies captured in the tax-and-cost
indexes to growth is that the causality could go the other way, with growth leading to lower taxes
subsequently (and hence a higher ranking). To assess this, we estimated regressions asking whether the
policies captured by the indexes respond to earlier growth. For each index, we divided the years available (as
closely as possible into half) into “early” and “late” years. We then estimated regressions of the average
values of the index for the late years, in each state, on the average values for the early years, and QCEW
employment growth (annualized) over those same early years. If the policies captured by the indexes are
endogenous, we might expect positive coefficients on early growth for the indexes, with earlier growth
leading to lower taxes in the future. There was, in fact, no clear pattern in the data, with positive and negative
estimates for the tax-and-cost indexes; there were three positive and two negative estimates, and of these, one
of the positive and one of the negative estimates were significant. Therefore, there is no indication that high
rankings on the tax-and-cost indexes are explained by earlier strong growth – the endogeneity story of most
concern in interpreting our results.
Finally, one might be interested in growth in per capita wages or GSP, rather than growth in levels.
In our view – which guided our analysis – policymakers focus on growth per se. Consider the emphasis in
the media and national policy discussion on GDP growth, and the broader concerns of increasing versus
decreasing population or sizes of economies (across countries). Nonetheless, we also estimated these per
capita growth regressions. The results are consistent with what one would expect from the results reported
above, when changes in employment are driven principally by changes in population, rather than changes in
employment-to-population ratios. Specifically, the taxes-and-cost indexes have roughly equal relationships
with employment growth on the one hand, and wage growth and GSP growth, on the other, and hence
essentially no predicted relationship with growth in per capita wages or per capita GSP. In addition, because
the policies captured by the productivity indexes are either not associated with wage and GSP growth or
20

negatively associated, and are not associated with employment growth, we get negative associations with per
capita wage and GSP growth. Thus, nothing in these results points to any more evidence of positive effects
of the policies captured in the productivity indexes, and the evidence indicates that the policies captured by
the tax-and-cost indexes predict growth in the size of economies, rather than per capita output or wages.24
We explored two possibilities for heterogeneous effects. First, we added an interaction between the
business climate index and the national value for the dependent variable to our baseline regressions with
controls in Tables 6-8. We also split our sample based on years when national GDP growth was above or
below median annual national growth for the sample period and repeated our baseline regressions for each
sub-period. The relationship between the policies captured by the business climate indexes and economic
growth did not vary with national economic growth. Second, we explored whether the relationship between
the business climate indexes and economic growth was similar in states with a good deal of economic
activity near a state border, like New Hampshire or Maryland, and in states with most economic activity far
from state borders, like California or Texas. To do this, we included an interaction between the share of
workers that commute daily across state lines in either direction (based on 1990 Census data) and the
business climate index (as well as the main effect of this cross-commuting measure) in our baseline
regressions with controls in Tables 6-8. There was no evidence that state economic growth is more sensitive
to the business climate in states where many businesses are near another state’s border.
Our last extension was to look at whether economic growth in more “footloose” industries – based
on industry differences in rates of gross job creation and destruction due to relocation (Kolko and Neumark,
2007) – is more sensitive to differences in state business climates. Industries that serve a national or
international market should be more geographically mobile than those tied to local markets (such as services
delivered in person, like haircuts, or retailers) or dependent on local natural resources or features (like
mining, forestry, or shipping). The most footloose sectors are manufacturing (NAICS 31-33), information
(51), finance and insurance (52), and professional and technical services (54). We re-estimate the regression
24

Results from estimates of wage premia at the state level, following Albouy (2009), parallel this conclusion. These
premia are negatively correlated with the tax-and-cost indexes, and positively correlated with the productivity indexes.
Given that the tax-and-cost indexes are positively associated with economic growth, and assuming that production
amenities dominate wage premia, the implication is that factors that affect productivity levels (raising wages) differ
from factors that affect growth. Urban economic theory does not predict that production amenities are tied to growth
rates.

21

models for manufacturing only and for information, finance and insurance, and professional and technical
services together. We look separately at manufacturing because, unlike the other three sectors, it has long had
a declining share of employment, has traditionally provided reasonably high-paying jobs for middle-class
workers, and is often the target of specific tax credits and economic development efforts. We look at private
sector employment and wages in these industries, from the QCEW.
The results are reported in Table 9. For both employment and wages, the relationship between
business climate indexes in the tax-and-cost cluster and growth is stronger for manufacturing than for overall
employment. The top panel of Table 9 shows that the estimated coefficients on three indexes – TXCST1,
TXCST2, and TXCST3 – are at least twice as large for manufacturing (second row) as for overall privatesector employment (first row), and the TXCST2 and TXCST3 coefficients become statistically significant
for manufacturing. Comparing overall private-sector employment with the three footloose nonmanufacturing sectors (third row), no clear pattern emerges: coefficient magnitudes are similar, and two of
the five indexes are statistically significant for footloose employment and overall private sector employment,
compared with four for manufacturing employment. The results for wage growth in the bottom panel of
Table 9 are broadly similar. Finally, looking at the estimated effect of the policies captured by the
productivity indexes on these same sectors, there is still no consistent relationship with economic growth,
with the exception of PROD1. The stronger predictive power that PROD1 has for QCEW employment and,
even more so, for wages may be due to the overlap between PROD1’s heavy emphasis on indicators relevant
for technology and related industries and our definition of “footloose industries,” which includes the
information sector and other technology industries. These PROD1 results highlight that business climate
measures geared toward specific industries may predict growth in those industries better than they predict
growth for the economy overall.
The Business Climate versus Other Factors
The previous results showed that the policies captured in the tax-and-cost indexes have positive
relationships with economic growth, though factors beyond policy also contribute strongly (as reported in
Table 6). To compare the estimated contributions to state economic growth of the policy and non-policy
factors, for each index we calculate the estimated contribution of the business climate index to QCEW
22

employment growth,
employment growth,

, and the estimated total contribution of the five non-policy factors to
, where

and

are the estimates from Table 6; i indexes states. We average

these estimates over the models for the three indexes with fairly consistent relationships with economic
growth (TXCST1, TXCST4, and TXCST5), yielding two measures for each state: the estimated contribution
of the business climate to employment growth; and the estimated contribution of the five non-policy factors.
Figure 1, which plots the estimates, shows that there is less variation in employment growth
associated with the business climate indexes than with the other factors. The implication is that the business
climate (as captured by the indexes) helps determine economic growth, but it is not as important as the
combined effect of the other factors, although it is most amenable to policy change.
The figure also highlights differences across groups of states regarding the business climate and nonpolicy factors. Mountain states like New Mexico, Nevada, and Arizona have the most favorable set of nonpolicy factors; this region tends to have milder, drier weather, and lower population density. Rhode Island,
Connecticut, and Indiana have the least favorable set of non-policy factors. The business climate makes the
most negative estimated contribution to employment growth in New York, California, and Rhode Island. In
contrast, the business climate makes the most positive contribution in Nevada, Wyoming, and South Dakota,
and in two of these three states the other factors are also advantageous.
Many states have both a favorable business climate and favorable non-policy factors, such as
Nevada, Colorado, Arizona, Wyoming, and Texas, while other states are unfavorable on both dimensions,
like New York, Rhode Island, and New Jersey. For both sets of states, ignoring non-policy factors could lead
to giving the business climate undue credit (or blame) for high (or low) employment growth since the nonpolicy factors contribute to employment growth in the same direction as the business climate does. In a few
states, the business climate and non-policy factors have offsetting estimated effects on employment growth.
Although harder to see in the figure, Indiana, Tennessee, and several other mostly southern states have
favorable business climates yet unfavorable non-policy factors. A more striking outlier is California, which
has one of the least favorable business climates, but is in the top tier of states based on non-policy factors.
8. BUSINESS CLIMATE SUB-INDEXES: WHICH TAXES AND COSTS MATTER?
To dig beneath the indexes while still avoiding the insurmountable problem of using individual
23

policy variables, we use sub-indexes that exist for three of the tax-and-cost indexes – TXCST1, TXCST4,
and TXCST5.25 These sub-indexes are explained in Table 10. Fortunately, this list includes the two indexes
with the strongest positive relationship with economic growth (TXCST1 and TXCST5). Each of TXCST1’s
sub-indexes focuses on a particular type of taxation, while the sub-indexes of TXCST4 and TXCST5 also
cover the level and composition of government spending, regulatory and judicial factors, and other costs of
doing business. Because the sub-indexes capture narrower, more clearly defined sets of policies than the
overall indexes, the relationship with economic growth may be stronger for some individual sub-indexes than
for the parent indexes.
The TXCST5 and TXCST4 sub-indexes require some deciphering with respect to measuring size of
government versus welfare and transfer payments. Only one of the three variables in TXCST5’s size of
government sub-index – “general consumption expenditures by government as percentage of GDP” – falls
under what we classify as size of government. The other two variables in the TXCST5 size of government
sub-index – transfers and subsidies as a percent of GDP, and social security payments as a percent of GDP –
fall into our “welfare and transfer payments” category. Thus, the TXCST5 size of government sub-index,
despite its name, consists mostly of measures reflecting the extent of spending on welfare, social security,26
and transfer payments, and hence is most similar to TXCST4’s welfare spending sub-index; both consist
primarily of components in the welfare and transfer payments category.
The TXCST1 corporate tax sub-index also requires clarification. It is comprised of two groups of
variables. The first group includes measures of the corporate tax rate structure, which includes the top
marginal tax rate but also the number of tax brackets and their threshold levels; a lower top rate and a flatter
rate structure contribute to a better sub-index score. The second group includes measures of the corporate tax
base; more generous net-operating-loss deductions and fewer corporate tax credits are two of the measures
25

We focus only on the tax-and-cost cluster in our analysis of sub-indexes, based on the previous evidence that only the
indexes in this cluster predict economic growth. We were also able to examine evidence for sub-indexes that were
available on a consistent basis over time for four of the productivity indexes (PROD1-PROD4). Paralleling the results
for the “parent” indexes, none of the sub-indexes within the productivity cluster had a consistent, significant positive
relationship with economic growth.
26
This is not the usual meaning of “social security,” but instead refers more generally to unemployment insurance,
disability insurance, workers compensation, and public pensions, defined at the state level. We believe the specific data
item to which this refers is the state government “Insurance Trust Expenditure” category in the Census Bureau’s
government finance statistics (http://www.census.gov/govs/www/06classificationmanual/chapter05.html#p2c534,
viewed July 19, 2010).

24

that contribute to a better sub-index score. Net-operating-loss deductions, in effect, tax firms on their average
profitability over time, which the TXCST1 index considers desirable. Tax credits complicate the tax system
and narrow the tax base, which the TXCST1 index considers undesirable.
Estimates of the same regressions as before, but substituting the sub-indexes for the corresponding
parent index, are reported in Table 11. We present results for the baseline specification; results were similar
for the other variants of the specifications in Tables 6-8. Among the five sub-indexes of TXCST1, the
corporate income tax sub-index has a positive and statistically significant relationship at the 5-percent level
with both wage growth and GSP growth.27 We explored whether this apparent effect of corporate taxes stems
from variation in marginal rates or other aspects of the tax code, by replacing the corporate tax sub-index
with the top marginal rate. The latter variable had no statistically significant relationship with any of our
economic growth measures. Moreover, when we included both the top marginal corporate tax rate and the
corporate tax sub-index in the model, the tax rate had no relationship with any growth outcome, and the
estimated coefficient of the corporate tax sub-index remained of similar magnitude and significance. Thus,
the positive relationship we observe between the sub-index and growth does not appear to be driven by the
top marginal tax rate, but rather by other factors such as the simplicity of corporate taxation and its
uniformity with federal taxation.
Among the TXCST5 sub-indexes, the size of government sub-index stands out as having a positive
and significant relationship at the 1-percent level with employment and wage growth. And among the
TXCST4 sub-indexes, one – welfare spending – stands out; this sub-index has a statistically significant
relationship at the 10-percent level or less with all growth measures except wage growth, and the largest
coefficient estimate among the TXCST4 sub-indexes for all growth measures.28 Note that the TXCST4 and

27

We subjected the TXCST1 sub-indexes to an additional robustness test. Because TXCST1 only includes components
for tax rates and tax burdens, the TXCST1 sub-index model tells us about tax base composition, which could be
correlated with expenditure composition and therefore subject to omitted variable bias since the TXCST5 and TXCST4
results (discussed later) suggest that expenditure composition matter for economic growth. We re-ran the model with all
TXCST1 sub-indexes (Table 11) and added the TXCST5 size of government sub-index (which is available for many of
the same years); this resulted in little or no change in the coefficient estimates or significance on the TXCST1 corporate
tax sub-index.
28
As a sensitivity check for the tax-and-cost sub-index results, we re-estimated these specifications including
(separately) each of the five productivity indexes, for years for which the productivity index was also available. This
analysis allows for the possibility that the productivity index is an omitted variable correlated with tax-and-cost subindexes and an economic growth measure. For only one combination of a sub-index (the TXCST4 welfare spending

25

TXCST5 sub-indexes that stand out comprise similar policy measures; TXCST5’s size of government subindex and TXCST4’s welfare spending sub-index both consist primarily of variables describing government
expenditures on welfare and transfer payments. Because the TXCST5 and TXCST4 indexes have subindexes covering many types of taxes and other costs businesses face – including regulation, policies
affecting labor costs, and more – our finding that the composition of government expenditure matters for
economic growth is based on an analysis that controls for a wide range of other taxes and costs. These subindex results are, in general, stronger and more robust than the results for the business climate indexes
overall.
The sub-index analysis yields two main conclusions. First, among taxes, the corporate income tax
structure and base matter for wage and GSP growth, though not necessarily for employment growth. Only
the TXCST1 index has sub-indexes that distinguish different tax streams, so this finding comes entirely from
that one index. Second, greater government expenditure on welfare and transfer payments is associated with
slower economic growth. The strength of this second conclusion is reinforced by its consistency across two
different business climate indexes, covering different years and different sub-indexes that serve as controls in
our model. Admittedly, the TXCST5 size of government sub-index contains more than conventional welfare
and transfer spending. But the TXCST4 welfare spending sub-index focuses only on the latter, and the results
for the TXCST4 welfare spending sub-index are qualitatively similar (and in some ways stronger, and in
particular predictive of GSP growth) than the results for the TXCST5 size of government sub-index.
At the same time, there are some reasons for caution regarding the findings for welfare and transfer
payments. One is that there may be reverse causality, with welfare and transfer payments rising when
economic growth is slower (as more people become eligible for payments or for higher payments). Because
the TXCST5 size of government sub-index defines these payments as a share of GSP (rather than relative to
population, as in the TXCST4 welfare spending sub-index), the possibility of this type of bias is even
stronger for this sub-index, as slow GSP growth can also feed directly into a higher share of payments

sub-index) and a productivity index (PROD1) does the inclusion of the productivity index change the positive
relationship between the sub-index and outcomes; and this combination is for a single year of data since TXCST4 and
PROD1 were simultaneously available only in 1999.

26

relative to GSP. This suggests that if there is reverse causality, we should find a stronger positive relationship
with the welfare and transfer payment sub-index (a high value of the sub-index implies low payments) and
economic growth for the TXCST5 size of government sub-index, and in particular for the GSP growth results
for that sub-index. It turns out that we can rule out this “mechanical” type of endogeneity bias stemming
from the inclusion of GSP in the denominator of the TXCST5 size of government sub-index. First, we also
find significant estimated effects in this direction for the TXCST4 welfare spending sub-index. Most
important, perhaps, we find a significant relationship between GSP growth and the TXCST4 welfare
spending sub-index but not the TXCST5 size of government sub-index, the opposite prediction from what we
would expect if reverse causality from defining payments as a share of GSP were driving the results.
Another reason to be less concerned about reverse causality is that we use across-state rather than
within-state variation to identify the effects of the policies captured by the business climate indexes.
Endogeneity bias is likely reduced by avoiding reliance on short-term changes in state economic conditions
that could affect some of the policy variables. Indeed, when we simply ran regressions paralleling those in
Table 11 using the state averages (i.e., the between regression), the results were similar, although sometimes
a little weaker.
A second reason for caution about the findings for welfare and transfer payments is that the TXCST5
size of government sub-index includes a broader set of expenditures, including state retirement pensions. The
sub-index could therefore be high when a state has a large retirement population (for example, Florida), and
this could be associated with lower economic growth, but not because these payments change behavior and
lower growth. However, this concern is assuaged by the fact that the results are similar for the TXCST4
welfare spending sub-index, which includes only state expenditures focused much more sharply on the
“welfare” population. In addition, the large retiree population in a state like Florida consists of many
migrants from other states, so the retirees would not likely be a source of high state retirement pension
expenditures.
Overall, these considerations make us more confident – but not definitive – in interpreting the
combined evidence as identifying the effects of welfare and transfer spending on economic growth. At a
minimum, however, the evidence from the tax-and-cost-related business climate indexes implies that
27

concerns that high taxes and costs of doing business slow state economic growth need to be taken seriously.
And this applies particularly to corporate taxation and welfare and transfer payments, identified by the
analysis of the tax-and-cost sub-indexes as the potentially most important policies related to taxes and costs
of doing business.
9. CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION
Business climate indexes that emphasize taxes and costs predict economic growth, especially for the
manufacturing sector. Indexes that focus on productivity measures do not predict growth in employment,
wages, or GSP – only in births. Although factors beyond the control of state policy, such as the industry mix
and weather, generally have a stronger relationship with economic growth than do the tax-and-cost policies
captured by business climate indexes, tax-and-cost-related policies are more amenable to change.
The tax-and-cost indexes span many policy areas. Looking at the sub-indexes of three business
climate indexes focused on taxes and costs identified a subset of individual sub-indexes that predict many
economic growth measures better than their parent indexes do. For one tax-and-cost index (TXCST1), the
sub-indexes cover different types of taxes, and only the corporate income tax sub-index predicts higher
growth. Corporate tax features other than the top marginal rate are responsible for this sub-index’s positive
relationship with economic growth. This evidence is plausible from an economic perspective, as factors that
contribute to a worse ranking on the corporate tax sub-index – like a plethora of corporate tax credits, and
greater complexity of the tax structure more generally – increase costs of compliance and create economic
distortions that could impede growth.
The sub-indexes of two of the other tax-and-cost indexes (TXCST5 and TXCST4) span more areas
of taxes and costs. The sub-indexes that focus on taxation had no significant relationship with economic
growth. However, two sub-indexes focused on welfare and transfer payments exhibit a robust relationship
indicating that lower welfare and transfer payments are associated with faster economic growth. Why might
lower welfare and transfer payments contribute to higher economic growth? Any program whose benefits or
eligibility depends on low income or non-employment status provides some disincentive to work or to work
less if employed. Welfare reforms attempted to encourage work in a number of ways, including job search
requirements, limited years of eligibility, and less steep reductions in welfare payments with increases in
28

earnings. Despite these changes, welfare-type programs and transfer payments – by their nature – still tend to
create work disincentives (just not as strong as they were in the past).
It is important to emphasize that our analysis focuses on economic growth. Other policies that could
adversely affect economic growth – including welfare and transfer payments – might contribute to other
goals like equity. Nonetheless, over the longer run strong economic growth is a prerequisite for generating
the economic resources needed to pursue goals other than growth. In that sense, our findings confirm and
emphasize the equity-efficiency tradeoff with respect to state-level public policy and economic growth.
Finally, in addition to asking what the business climate indexes tell us about policy, we have also
learned something about the potential value of these business climate indexes in policy debate. We noted that
the organizations that create these indexes often have political agendas, and that the indexes are used
selectively in policy debate. Our results indicate that the indexes capturing taxes and other costs of doing
business seem to capture something meaningful about state business climates, insofar as the outcome of
interest is economic growth, whereas those capturing elements of productivity and quality of life do not. Of
course we have not attempted to construct our own index. It is possible that the productivity indexes contain
a more heterogeneous set of factors, and this obscures underlying relationships between economic growth
and some of the policies they capture. However, that argument is at least partially undermined by the failure
to find sub-indexes of the productivity indexes that predict economic growth. An alternative, which we
cannot rule out based on our analysis, is that the policies underlying the productivity indexes contribute to
other desirable features of state economies – or states more generally – that are not related to economic
growth. More evidence along these lines might provide a better rationale for the importance of the
productivity indexes in policy debate about state economic performance.

29

References
Albouy, David. 2009. “What are Cities Worth? Land Rents, Local Productivity, and the Capitalization of
Amenity Values,” Cambridge, MA: NBER Working Paper # 14981.
Bartik, Timothy J. 1985. “Business Location Decisions in the United States: Estimates of the Effects of
Unionization, Taxes, and Other Characteristics of States,” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 3,
14‒22.
Bartik, Timothy J. 1991. “Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development Policies?”
Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.
Bauer, Paul W., Mark E. Schweitzer and Scott Shane. Forthcoming. “Knowledge Matters: The Long-Run
Determinants of State Income Growth,” Journal of Regional Science.
Beacon Hill Institute. “Metro Area Competitiveness Report 2007,” Suffolk University, Boston, MA,
available at http://www.beaconhill.org/compete07/compete2007MetroBHI.pdf (viewed January 31, 2012).
Besley, Timothy and Anne Case. 1995. “Does Electoral Accountability Affect Economic Policy Choices?
Evidence from Gubernatorial Term Limits,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110, 769‒798.
Bittlingmayer, George, Liesl Eathington and Arthur P. Hall. 2005. “Business Climate Indexes: Which Work,
Which Don’t, and What Can They Say About the Kansas Economy?” Topeka, KS: Kansas, Inc., Research
Report.
Brueckner, Jan. 2003. “Strategic Interaction Among Governments: An Overview of Empirical Studies,”
International Regional Science Review, 26, 175‒188.
Buss, Terry F. 2001. “The Effect of State Tax Incentives on Economic Growth and Firm Location Decisions:
An Overview of the Literature,” Economic Development Quarterly, 15, 90‒105.
Carlton, Dennis W. 1983. “The Location and Employment Choices of New Firms: An Econometric Model
with Discrete and Continuous Endogenous Variables,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 65, 440‒449.
Crain, W. Mark and Katherine J. Lee. 1999. “Economic Growth Regressions for the American States: A
Sensitivity Analysis,” Economic Inquiry, 37, 242‒257.
Erickson, Rodney A. 1987. “Business Climate Studies: A Critical Evaluation,” Economic Development
Quarterly, 1, 62‒71.
Fisher, Peter. 2005. Grading Places, Washington, DC: Economic Policy Institute.
Gabriel, Stuart A. and Stuart S. Rosenthal. 2004. “Quality of the Business Environment Versus Quality of
Life: Do Firms and Households Like the Same Cities?” Review of Economics and Statistics, 86, 438‒444.
Garrett, Thomas and Russell Rhine. 2010. “Economic Freedom and Employment Growth in U.S. States,” St.
Louis, MO: Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Working Paper 2010-006A.
Glaeser, Edward, Hedi D. Kallal, Jose A. Scheinkman and Andrei Shleifer. 1992. “Growth in Cities,”
Journal of Political Economy, 100, 1126‒1152.
Glaeser, Edward L. and Matthew E. Kahn. 2004. “Sprawl and Urban Growth,” in J.V. Henderson and J.F.
Thisse (eds.), Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, Vol. 4. Amsterdam: Elsevier B.V, 2004, pp.
2482‒2527.
Glaeser, Edward, Jed Kolko and Albert Saiz. 2001. “Consumer City,” Journal of Economic Geography, 1,
27‒50.
Hanson, Andrew and Shawn Rohlin. 2010. “Do Location-based Tax Incentives Attract New Business
Establishments?” Journal of Regional Science, 51, 427‒449.
Helms, L. Jay. 1985. “The Effect of State and Local Taxes on Economic Growth: A Time Series – Cross
Section Approach,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 67, 574‒582.
Holmes, Thomas. 1998. “The Effect of State Policies on the Location of Manufacturing: Evidence from State
Borders,” Journal of Political Economy, 106, 667‒705.
Kolko, Jed and David Neumark. 2007. Business Location Decisions and Employment Dynamics in

California. San Francisco, CA: Public Policy Institute of California.
Kolko, Jed, David Neumark and Marisol Cuellar Mejia. 2011. “Public Policy, State Business Climates, and
Economic Growth,” Cambridge, MA: NBER Working Paper No. 16968.
Mendelsohn, Robert, William D. Nordhaus and Daigee Shaw. 1994. “The Impact of Global Warming on
Agriculture: A Ricardian Analysis,” American Economic Review, 84, 753‒771.
Neumark, David, Brandon Wall and Junfu Zhang. 2011. “Do Small Businesses Create More Jobs? New
Evidence for the United States from the National Establishment Time Series,” Review of Economics and
Statistics, 93, 16‒29.
Papke, Leslie E. 1991. “Interstate Business Tax Differentials and New Firm Location,” Journal of Public
Economics, 45, 47‒68.
Parent, Olivier and James P. LeSage. Forthcoming. “Determinants of Knowledge Production and their
Effects on Regional Economic Growth,” Journal of Regional Science.
Plaut, Thomas and Joseph Pluta. 1983. “Business Climate, Taxes and Expenditures, and State Industrial
Growth in the United States,” Southern Economic Journal, 50, 99‒119.
Rappaport, Jordan and Jeffrey Sachs. 2003. “The United States as a Coastal Nation,” Journal of Economic
Growth, 8, 5‒46.
Reed, W. Robert. 2009. “The Determinants of U.S. State Economic Growth: A Less Extreme Bounds
Analysis,” Economic Inquiry, 47, 685‒700.
Roback, Jennifer. 1982. “Wages, Rents, and Quality of Life,” Journal of Political Economy, 90, 1257‒1278.
Schumpeter, Joseph. 1942. Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy. Harper: New York (republished in 1975).
Skoro, Charles. 1988. “Rankings of State Business Climates: An Evaluation of Their Usefulness in
Forecasting,” Economic Development Quarterly, 2, 138‒152.
Tannenwald, Robert. 1997. “State Regulatory Policy and Economic Development,” New England Economic
Review, March/April, 83‒99.
Wasylenko, Michael. 1997. “Taxation and Economic Development: The State of the Economic Literature,”
New England Economic Review, March/April, 37‒52.
Wasylenko, Michael and Therese McGuire. 1985. “Jobs and Taxes: The Effect of Business Climate on
States’ Employment Growth Rates,” National Tax Journal, 38, 497‒511.

TABLE 1: Business Climate Indexesa
Index, institution, and years

Stated focus of index

Policy categories

PROD1: State New Economy Index,
Progressive Policy Institute (1999,
2002) , Information, Technology and
Innovation Foundation and Kauffman
Foundation (2007, 2008)
PROD2: Development Report Card for the
States─Performance, Corporation for
Enterprise Development (2000-2007)
PROD3: Development Report Card for the
States─Development Capacity,
Corporation for Enterprise
Development (2000-2007)

Compatibility of state’s economy
with “New Economy”

Business incubation; human capital;
technology, knowledge jobs, and digital
economy, and external sector

Opportunities for employment,
income, and improving quality of
life
Capacity for future development

PROD4: Development Report Card for the
States─Business Vitality,
Corporation for Enterprise
Development (2000-2007)
PROD5: State Competitiveness Index,
Beacon Hill Institute (2001-2008)

Dynamism of the state’s large and
small businesses

Quality of life; equity; employment, earnings,
job quality, and resource
efficiency/environment
Cost of doing business (excl. taxes); quality of
life; business incubation; human capital;
infrastructure; technology, knowledge jobs, and
digital economy, and resource efficiency/
environment
Business incubation; technology, knowledge
jobs, and digital economy, and external sector

TXCST1: State Business Tax Climate
Index, Tax Foundation (2003-2009)
TXCST2: Small Business Survival Index,
Small Business and Entrepreneurship
Council (1996-2008)

Tax rates

TXCST3: Cost of Doing Business Index,
Milken Institute (2002-2007)
TXCST4: Economic Freedom Index,
Pacific Research Institute (1999,
2004, 2008)
TXCST5: Economic Freedom Index of
North America, The Fraser Institute /
National Center for Policy Analysis
(1992-2005)
FISCPOL: Fiscal Policy Report Card on
the Nation’s Governors, Cato
Institute (1992-2008, biennial)

Long-term competitiveness for
attracting and incubating new
businesses and growth of existing
firms

Government-imposed or
government-related costs affecting
investment, entrepreneurship, and
business
Fundamental business costs,
including labor, taxes, real estate,
and electricity
Government favors free enterprise
and consumer choice; individual
rights to pursue interests through
voluntary exchange of private
property under rule of law
Restrictions on economic freedom
imposed by governments: takings
and discriminatory taxation; size of
government; and labor market
freedom
Fiscal performance of governors in
terms of restraining the growth of
taxes and spending

Cost of doing business; size of government; tax
rates and burden; quality of life; welfare and
transfer payments; employment, earnings, and
job quality; business incubation; human capital;
infrastructure; technology, knowledge jobs, and
digital economy, resource
efficiency/environment, and external sector
Tax rates and tax burden
Cost of doing business (excl. taxes); size of
government; tax rates and tax burden;
regulation and litigation; quality of life;
infrastructure
Cost of doing business (excl. taxes); tax rates
and tax burden
Cost of doing business (excl. taxes); size of
government; tax rates and tax burden;
regulation and litigation; welfare and transfer
payments
Cost of doing business (excl. taxes); size of
government; tax rates and tax burden; welfare
and transfer payments
Cost of doing business (excl. taxes); size of
government; tax rates and tax burden

a
For the PROD1 index, the author of all four reports is the same (Robert Atkinson). The PROD2, PROD3, and PROD4 indexes go back earlier, but only the information
beginning in 2000 was available on-line. The second column lists the focus of the index as stated by the creating institution. The third column gives our (more objective)
categorization, although they are often the same as those used by the institutions that create the indexes.
Sources (for latest version of each index):
PROD1: http://www.kauffman.org/uploadedfiles/2008_state_new_economy_index_120908.pdf (viewed November, 2008); PROD2, PROD3, PROD4:
http://www.cfed.org/focus.m?parentid=2&siteid=2346&id=2346 (viewed November, 2008); PROD5: http://www.beaconhill.org/compete08/BHIState08-FINAL.pdf
(viewed November, 2008); TXCST1: http://www.taxfoundation.org/files/bp58.pdf (viewed November, 2008); TXCST2:
http://www.sbecouncil.org/uploads/sbsi%202008%5B1%5D1.pdf (viewed December, 2008); TXCST3: http://www.milkeninstitute.org/pdf/2007CostofDoingBusiness.pdf
(viewed November, 2008); TXCST4: http://special.pacificresearch.org/pub/sab/entrep/2008/Economic_Freedom/map.html (viewed November, 2008); TXCST5:
http://www.freetheworld.com/efna2008/EFNA_complete_Publication.pdf (viewed November, 2008); FISCPOL: http://www.cato.org/pubs/pas/pa-624.pdf (viewed
November, 2008).

TABLE 2: Average State Ranks by Index, 1992-2009a

a

State
Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming

Average rank
across PROD
indexes
38.4
34.3
30.1
42
15.3
6.4
8.9
10.4
28.9
25.6
39.3
22.4
23.3
31.9
26.2
23.6
37.5
45.5
28
12.7
4.4
25.2
6.7
47.8
29
33.4
23.5
32.4
11.9
15.6
36.8
21.6
29.5
29.9
28.8
37.6
17.8
19.3
23.7
34.5
30.1
33.1
24.8
11.2
18.1
9.8
11.5
47.8
20.2
28.1

Average rank
across TXCST
indexes
14.2
28.9
20.6
23.2
45.6
13.5
38.4
18.3
14.6
19.1
38.9
20.4
27.6
14.9
27.2
22.2
27.9
26.1
39.1
29.1
35
29.4
40.6
16.4
15.8
22.7
25.1
13.3
13.1
43.3
34.5
48.2
28.6
21.8
38.2
19.1
27.7
30.3
45.7
15
3.7
12.9
12.6
15.5
39.6
13.8
26.1
33.5
32.6
11.2

FISCPOL
32
27
27
31
14
21
35
16
17
25
26
30
17
30
27
19
34
25
30
11
16
19
17
27
29
20
20
18
28
13
12
31
25
33
20
39
23
26
13
11
23
13
21
22
26
21
29
21
26

Min of
all
indexes
9
3
7
11
4
1
5
2
5
11
23
2
10
11
5
7
15
14
14
5
1
12
1
10
13
4
10
2
1
5
13
12
13
2
18
8
9
10
13
8
1
1
5
4
3
5
3
14
8
1

Max of
all
indexes
45
46
37
48
47
26
47
42
33
32
49
34
37
36
44
35
43
50
47
38
48
40
46
50
34
43
44
42
33
48
46
50
42
44
47
42
40
45
49
40
46
39
47
26
43
30
40
49
38
46

We first average each index across years, and then average these averages to get the numbers reported in the first two
columns. The last two columns report the minimum and maximum of the averages of each individual index.

TABLE 3: Descriptive Statistics for Growth Measures and Control Variablesa
Std.
Variable
Source
N
Mean
dev.
Growth rates
Employment
BLS-QCEW
768
1.61
1.71
Total wages
BLS-QCEW
768
5.26
2.56
Gross State Product (GSP)
BEA
528
5.07
2.40
Employment change due to
NETS
672
5.14
1.78
births
Controls
Industry composition
NETS
768
0.98
0.17
Population density (logs)
Census of
768
7.74
0.74
Population

a

Min.

Max.

-3.51
-2.63
-3.21
2.24

10.17
15.67
14.10
13.36

0.61
6.62

1.41
10.22

Dry

Mendelsohn et
al. (1994)

768

-7.54

2.90

-12.09

-1.70

Mild

Mendelsohn et
al. (1994)

768

-40.05

11.25

-62.68

-17.12

Proximity

Rappaport and
Sachs (2003)

768

-189.96

238.36

-959.02

-10.14

Employment, wages, and GSP growth are one-year percent changes, multiplied by 100. Employment due to births is the
percentage growth in total employment attributable to births, and equals the change in employment due to births relative to startyear total employment (multiplied by 100). The births measure exceeds the overall percent change in employment because it is a
gross job flow. The descriptive statistics in this table cover 1992-2006 for NETS employment change due to births; 1992-2008 for
QCEW employment and wages; and 1997-2008 for GSP. The control variables are defined as the negatives of measures of
precipitation, temperature extremes, and distance to water; therefore more positive values imply drier, milder, and closer to water.
In the regressions in tables that follow, subsets of the observations are used, depending on the years in which an index is available.
Alaska and Hawaii are excluded from the descriptive statistics as well as the regressions that follow because some of the control
variables are unavailable; however, they are included in the industry composition effect calculation. “Mean” refers to the
unweighted average of state values for each variable.

TABLE 4: Distribution of Weights of Components of Business Climate Indexes (%)a
PROD1 PROD2 PROD3 PROD4 PROD5 TXCST1
0.0
0.0
4.0
0.0
20.9
100.0
Taxes and costs category
Cost of doing business
4.0
9.3
(excluding taxes)
Size of government
7.0
Tax rates and tax burden
2.3
100.0
Regulation and litigation
Welfare and transfer
2.3
payments
90.4
80.0
92.0
75.0
65.1
0.0
Productivity category
Quality of life
20.0
12.0
23.3
Equity
20.0
Employment, earnings and
40.0
4.7
job quality
Business incubation
25.1
20.0
52.5
9.3
Human capital
3.4
20.0
7.0
Infrastructure
20.0
2.3
Technology, knowledge
61.8
20.0
22.5
18.6
jobs, and digital economy
9.6
20.0
4.0
25.0
14.0
0.0
“Other” category
Resource efficiency /
20.0
4.0
7.0
environment
External sector
9.6
25.0
7.0
a

TXCST2
94.1
8.8

TXCST3
100.0
80.0

8.8
47.1
29.4

20.0

5.9
2.9

TXCST4
100.0
1.3

TXCST5
100.0
22.2

FISCPOL
100.0

14.7
19.2
40.5
24.3

22.2
33.3

66.7
33.3

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

22.2

2.9
0.0

See notes to Table 1 for more details on the indexes; the categories listed here correspond to the third column of that table. To get the percentages shown, we began with the list of variables in each index and assigned
to each variable a weight according to each index’s methods. TXCST2 weights each variable equally in the index, and TXCST3 and PROD1 each assigns different weights to each variable in the index. The other
indexes create sub-indexes: variables are weighted equally in each sub-index, and then the sub-indexes are either weighted equally (PROD2, PROD3, PROD4, PROD5, TXCST5, and FISCPOL) or are assigned
different weights (TXCST4) in the final index. Even within an index with equally weighted sub-indexes containing equally weighted variables, each variable’s weight in the final index depends on the number of
variables in its sub-index. All of the TXCST1 variables fall under the “tax rates and tax burden” category, making it unnecessary to replicate the index’s weighting scheme for this table.

TABLE 5: Correlations of Average Indexes across States, 1992-2009a
PROD1
PROD2
PROD3
PROD4
PROD5

a

TXCST1

TXCST2

TXCST3

TXCST4

TXCST5

PROD1

1

PROD2

.56*

1

PROD3

.76*

.72*

1

PROD4

.72*

.30*

.58*

1

PROD5

.61*

.75*

.77*

.31*

1

TXCST1

-.12

-.05

-.12

-.24

.18

1

TXCST2

-.17

-.11

-.13

-.09

.04

.79*

1

TXCST3

-.65*

-.29*

-.30*

-.37*

-.12

.25

.39*

1

TXCST4

-.30*

-.01

-.15

-.17

.19

.55*

.54*

.66*

1

TXCST5

.04

-.01

.03

.26

.10

.41*

.61*

.33*

.60*

1

FISCPOL

.14

.11

.02

.16

.16

.22

.35*

-.11

.07

.17

Table reports correlations of the average across years for each index. * indicates statistically significantly different from zero at the 5-percent level. All 50 states are included.

TABLE 6: Regressions for Yearly QCEW Employment Growth, 1992-2008a
Business
climate index
R2
R2 (regression
on year
dummies only)
N
Business
climate index

Controls
Year
effects
only

Baseline
controls
added

Industry
composition
Population
density
Dry

Mild

Proximity
R2
Business
climate index
a

R2

Census
region
added

PROD1
0.08
(0.08)
[0.15]
0.49
0.49

PROD2
-0.10
(0.07)
[-0.18]
0.45
0.44

PROD3
-0.09
(0.09)
[-0.17]
0.45
0.44

PROD4
-0.28
(0.10)***
[-0.50]
0.48
0.44

PROD5
0.15
(0.12)
[0.26]
0.45
0.44

TXCST1
0.47
(0.10)***
[0.705]
0.39
0.28

TXCST2
0.23
(0.11)**
[0.40]
0.54
0.52

TXCST3
0.32
(0.08)***
[0.39]
0.37
0.33

TXCST4
0.29
(0.12)**
[0.49]
0.07
0.01

TXCST5
0.29
(0.10)***
[0.51]
0.54
0.51

FISCPOL
0.05
(0.05)
[0.10]
0.50
0.50

144
0.07
(0.08)
[0.12]
1.87
(0.41)***
[0.52]
-0.25
(0.10)**
[-0.38]
0.00
(0.04)
[0.002]
-0.003
(0.01)
[-0.08]
-0.001
(0.000)**
[-0.27]
0.57
0.02
(0.08)
[0.04]
0.58

288
-0.01
(0.09)
[-0.03]
1.73
(0.49)***
[0.48]
-0.34
(0.10)***
[-0.52]
0.02
(0.04)
[0.12]
0.01
(0.007)*
[0.32]
-0.002
(0.001)**
[-0.40]
0.59
-0.04
(0.09)
[-0.08]
0.60

288
0.02
(0.09)
[0.03]
1.71
(0.50)***
[0.48]
-0.35
(0.11)***
[-0.54]
0.02
(0.04)
[0.13]
0.02
(0.006)**
[0.37]
-0.002
(0.001)**
[-0.40]
0.59
-0.03
(0.08)
[-0.06]
0.60

288
-0.20
(0.10)**
[-0.35]
1.42
(0.47)***
[0.40]
-0.18
(0.10)*
[-0.28]
0.02
(0.04)
[0.10]
0.02
(0.005)***
[0.37]
-0.002
(0.001)***
[-0.42]
0.60
-0.24
(0.10)**
[-0.44]
0.62

336
0.12
(0.10)
[0.21]
1.46
(0.59)**
[0.41]
-0.35
(0.12)***
[-0.54]
0.04
(0.05)
[0.24]
0.02
(0.006)***
[0.57]
-0.002
(0.001)**
[-0.44]
0.61
0.08
(0.09)
[0.14]
0.62

192
0.25
(0.09)***
[0.37]
0.57
(0.67)
[0.16]
-0.10
(0.14)
[-0.16]
0.02
(0.05)
[0.12]
0.01
(0.006)*
[0.30]
-0.002
(0.001)**
[-0.47]
0.49
0.23
(0.08)***
[0.34]
0.50

576
0.12
(0.08)
[0.21]
1.84
(0.52)***
[0.51]
-0.20
(0.10)**
[-0.31]
0.06
(0.04)
[0.37]
0.02
(0.005)***
[0.42]
-0.001
(0.001)*
[-0.27]
0.65
0.15
(0.06)**
[0.27]
0.66

288
0.18
(0.12)
[0.22]
1.57
(0.68)**
[0.44]
-0.16
(0.15)
[-0.24]
0.03
(0.06)
[0.17]
0.02
(0.006)***
[0.45]
-0.002
(0.001)**
[-0.49]
0.54
0.31
(0.15)**
[0.38]
0.56

96
0.18
(0.15)
[0.31]
2.04
(0.99)**
[0.57]
0.04
(0.17)
[0.07]
0.13
(0.08)*
[0.78]
0.03
(0.01)***
[0.75]
-0.001
(0.001)
[-0.15]
0.39
0.31
(0.15)**
[0.54]
0.50

672
0.20
(0.07)***
[0.36]
2.11
(0.80)**
[0.59]
-0.32
(0.12)***
[-0.49]
0.11
(0.06)*
[0.62]
0.02
(0.01)***
[0.57]
-0.001
(0.001)
[-0.21]
0.68
0.31
(0.07)***
[0.54]
0.70

309
0.03
(0.05)
[0.05]
2.13
(0.70)***
[0.59]
-0.26
(0.13)**
[-0.40]
0.07
(0.06)
[0.44]
0.03
(0.01)***
[0.75]
-0.001
(0.001)
[-0.25]
0.65
0.05
(0.05)
[0.10]
0.66

Business climate indexes are standardized by year. Unit of observation is the state and year. All models include year fixed effects. The additional (“baseline”) controls are added in the second panel, and the Census region
dummy variables as well in the third panel. Standard errors clustered by state are used for statistical inference, and ***,**, and * indicate significance at the 1-percent, 5-percent or 10-percent level. The square brackets show
the estimated coefficients multiplied by the difference between the 10th and 40th state rankings for each variable. Hawaii and Alaska are excluded. Population density is entered in logs.
DEFINITIONS: PROD1: State New Economy Index; PROD2: Development Report Card for the States—Performance; PROD3: Development Report Card for the States—Development Capacity; PROD4: Development
Report Card for the States—Business Vitality; PROD5: State Competitiveness Index; TXCST1: State Business Tax Climate index; TXCST2: Small Business Survival Index; TXCST3: Cost of Doing Business Index;
TXCST4: Economic Freedom Index; TXCST5: Economic Freedom Index of North America; FISCPOL: Fiscal Policy Report Card.

TABLE 7: Regressions for Yearly QCEW Wage Growth 1992-2008, and GSP Growth, 1997-2008a
Controls

PROD1

PROD2

PROD3

PROD4

PROD5

TXCST1

TXCST2

TXCST3

TXCST4

TXCST5

FISCPOL

0.26
(0.14)*
[0.49]
0.53
0.52

-0.17
(0.11)*
[-0.31]
0.48
0.47

-0.25
(0.12)**
[-0.47]
0.48
0.47

-0.57
(0.16)***
[-1.03]
0.53
0.47

0.09
(0.16)
[0.16]
0.49
0.49

0.65
(0.22)***
[0.96]
0.37
0.29

0.29
(0.14)**
[0.51]
0.55
0.54

0.34
(0.13)**
[0.43]
0.39
0.37

0.24
(0.24)
[0.41]
0.18
0.17

0.42
(0.11)***
[0.74]
0.53
0.50

0.09
(0.09)
[0.20]
0.48
0.48

144
0.26
(0.16)
[0.50]
0.58
0.23
(0.16)
[0.43]
0.59

288
-0.15
(0.17)
[-0.28]
0.58
-0.17
(0.16)
[-0.33]
0.59

288
-0.21
(0.14)
[-0.40]
0.58
-0.24
(0.14)*
[-0.44]
0.59

288
-0.47
(0.14)***
[-0.85]
0.61
-0.54
(0.15)***
[-0.98]
0.62

336
-0.02
(0.14)
[-0.04]
0.61
-0.04
(0.13)
[-0.08]
0.62

192
0.28
(0.18)
[0.41]
0.47
0.30
(0.17)*
[0.44]
0.48

576
0.16
(0.11)
[0.29]
0.62
0.21
(0.10)**
[0.38]
0.63

288
0.12
(0.24)
[0.15]
0.54
0.30
(0.30)
[0.37]
0.55

96
0.19
(0.24)
[0.33]
0.49
0.47
(0.22)**
[0.81]
0.56

672
0.36
(0.08)***
[0.63]
0.61
0.49
(0.07)***
[0.86]
0.62

309
0.06
(0.09)
[0.13]
0.56
0.08
(0.10)
[0.16]
0.57

-0.06
(0.21)
[-0.12]
0.11
0.11

-0.27
(0.15)*
[-0.50]
0.23
0.21

-0.36
(0.16)**
[-0.68]
0.23
0.21

-0.69
(0.19)***
[-1.25]
0.29
0.21

0.08
(0.19)
[0.13]
0.19
0.19

0.78
(0.20)***
[1.15]
0.29
0.21

0.34
(0.16)**
[0.59]
0.19
0.17

0.47
(0.16)***
[0.58]
0.19
0.16

0.36
(0.27)
[0.62]
0.04
0.02

0.34
(0.13)**
[0.60]
0.19
0.17

0.17
(0.16)
[0.35]
0.13
0.12

144
-0.23
(0.24)
[-0.43]
0.26
-0.17
(0.27)
[-0.33]
0.28

288
-0.27
(0.20)
[-0.51]
0.37
-0.23
(0.19)
[-0.44]
0.38

288
-0.28
(0.16)*
[-0.52]
0.37
-0.34
(0.17)**
[-0.63]
0.38

288
-0.55
(0.15)***
[-0.99]
0.40
-0.59
(0.15)***
[-1.07]
0.41

336
0.01
(0.16)
[0.01]
0.34
0.001
(0.16)
[0.00]
0.35

192
0.27
(0.21)
[0.39]
0.40
0.25
(0.21)
[0.37]
0.41

528
0.18
(0.14)
[0.31]
0.28
0.21
(0.14)
[0.37]
0.29

288
0.33
(0.25)
[0.41]
0.36
0.43
(0.29)
[0.54]
0.37

96
0.18
(0.33)
[0.32]
0.36
0.34
(0.32)
[0.58]
0.39

432
0.19
(0.11)*
[0.34]
0.29
0.30
(0.11)**
[0.52]
0.31

218
0.13
(0.16)
[0.27]
0.28
0.11
(0.14)
[0.23]
0.31

A. QCEW Wage Growth
Business climate
index
R2
R2 (regression
on year
dummies only)
N
Business climate
index
R2
Business climate
index
R2
B. GSP Growth
Business climate
index
R2
R2 (regression
on year
dummies only)
N
Business climate
index
R2
Business climate
index
a

R2

Year
effects only

Baseline
controls
added
Census
region
added

Year
effects only

Baseline
controls
added
Census
region
added

See notes to Table 6. The estimated coefficients of the baseline controls are not reported.
DEFINITIONS: PROD1: State New Economy Index; PROD2: Development Report Card for the States—Performance; PROD3: Development Report Card for the States—Development Capacity; PROD4: Development
Report Card for the States—Business Vitality; PROD5: State Competitiveness Index; TXCST1: State Business Tax Climate index; TXCST2: Small Business Survival Index; TXCST3: Cost of Doing Business Index;
TXCST4: Economic Freedom Index; TXCST5: Economic Freedom Index of North America; FISCPOL: Fiscal Policy Report Card.

TABLE 8: Regressions for Employment Growth Due to Births, 1992-2006a
Business climate
index
R2
R2 (regression
on year
dummies only)
N
Business climate
index
R2
Business climate
index
a

R2

Controls
Year
effects only

Baseline
controls
added
Plus
Census
region

PROD1
0.15
(0.10)
[0.29]
0.79
0.78

PROD2
-0.09
(0.08)
[-0.18]
0.22
0.21

PROD3
-0.04
(0.09)
[-0.08]
0.21
0.21

PROD4
0.08
(0.09)
[0.14]
0.21
0.21

PROD5
-0.02
(0.09)
[-0.04]
0.29
0.29

TXCST1
0.33
(0.12)***
[0.47]
0.32
0.19

TXCST2
0.26
(0.12)**
[0.47]
0.69
0.67

TXCST3
0.05
(0.07)
[0.06]
0.33
0.33

TXCST4
0.37
(0.11)***
[0.63]
0.62
0.56

TXCST5
0.33
(0.09)***
[0.58]
0.69
0.65

FISCPOL
0.02
(0.09)
[0.05]
0.60
0.60

96
0.20
(0.09)**
[0.38]
0.88
0.22
(0.08)**
[0.41]
0.90

192
0.28
(0.08)***
[0.54]
0.57
0.27
(0.09)***
[0.52]
0.58

192
0.17
(0.08)**
[0.34]
0.54
0.15
(0.08)*
[0.29]
0.56

192
0.13
(0.07)*
[0.23]
0.53
0.10
(0.06)
[0.18]
0.55

240
0.13
(0.08)
[0.22]
0.59
0.09
(0.08)
[0.16]
0.61

96
0.16
(0.10)*
[0.23]
0.58
0.15
(0.10)
[0.21]
0.60

480
0.13
(0.09)
[0.24]
0.80
0.14
(0.08)*
[0.26]
0.81

192
-0.06
(0.08)
[-0.08]
0.66
-0.04
(0.10)
[-0.05]
0.68

96
0.37
(0.14)***
[0.64]
0.77
0.38
(0.13)***
[0.65]
0.80

672
0.14
(0.07)*
[0.25]
0.78
0.21
(0.08)***
[0.37]
0.80

264
-0.01
(0.07)
[-0.01]
0.74
0.02
(0.06)
[0.05]
0.75

See notes to Table 6. The estimated coefficients of the baseline controls are not reported.
Definitions: PROD1: State New Economy Index; PROD2: Development Report Card for the States—Performance; PROD3: Development Report Card for the States—Development Capacity; PROD4:
Development Report Card for the States—Business Vitality; PROD5: State Competitiveness Index; TXCST1: State Business Tax Climate index; TXCST2: Small Business Survival Index; TXCST3: Cost of
Doing Business Index; TXCST4: Economic Freedom Index; TXCST5: Economic Freedom Index of North America; FISCPOL: Fiscal Policy Report Card.

TABLE 9: Regressions for QCEW Employment and Wages in Manufacturing and Footloose Industries, 1992-2008a
Industry
A. Employment
Total private

PROD1

PROD2

PROD3

PROD4

PROD5

TXCST1

TXCST2

TXCST3

TXCST4

TXCST5

FISCPOL

0.06
(0.09)
[0.11]

-0.05
(0.10)
[-0.09]

-0.001
(0.09)
[-0.00]

-0.25
(0.11)**
[-0.457]

0.11
(0.11)
[0.19]

0.26
(0.10)**
[0.39]

0.13
(0.08)
[0.23]

0.22
(0.14)
[0.28]

0.17
(0.17)
[0.29]

0.22
(0.08)***
[0.38]

0.02
(0.06)
[0.04]

Manufacturing

-0.29
(0.22)
[-0.56]

-0.27
(0.27)
[-0.51]

-0.10
(0.24)
[-0.18]

-0.56
(0.18)***
[-1.01]

0.05
(0.23)
[0.09]

0.53
(0.21)**
[0.78]

0.33
(0.15)**
[0.58]

0.86
(0.26)***
[1.07]

-0.09
(0.36)
[-0.15]

0.28
(0.15)*
[0.49]

0.03
(0.11)
[0.07]

Footloose
industries

0.33
(0.19)*
[0.63]

-0.05
(0.20)
[-0.09]

0.002
(0.15)
[0.00]

-0.27
(0.16)*
[-0.49]

0.20
(0.14)
[0.34]

0.24
(0.15)
[0.35]

0.20
(0.12)
[0.34]

0.38
(0.14)**
[0.47]

0.05
(0.46)
[0.08]

0.25
(0.12)**
[0.44]

0.20
(0.15)
[0.41]

0.33
(0.18)*
[0.62]
0.19
(0.40)
[0.36]

-0.20
(0.19)
[-0.38]
-0.22
(0.36)
[-0.41]

-0.25
(0.15)*
[-0.46]
-0.18
(0.27)
[-0.33]

-0.56
(0.16)***
[-1.00]
-0.65
(0.22)***
[-1.17]

-0.08
(0.15)
[-0.13]
0.14
(0.26)
[0.25]

0.30
(0.21)
[0.45]
0.69
(0.26)**
[1.02]

0.19
(0.13)
[0.33]
0.34
(0.17)*
[0.59]

0.19
(0.28)
[0.23]
0.64
(0.35)*
[0.80]

0.21
(0.27)
[0.36]
-0.78
(0.70)
[-1.35]

0.40
(0.09)***
[0.70]
0.37
(0.16)**
[0.66]

0.08
(0.11)
[0.16]
0.23
(0.18)
[0.48]

0.81
(0.25)***
[1.54]
144

-0.18
(0.24)
[-0.33]
288

-0.23
(0.24)
[-0.42]
288

-0.39
(0.30)
[-0.70]
288

0.06
(0.25)
[0.10]
336

0.15
(0.25)
[0.22]
192

0.19
(0.18)
[0.34]
576

0.10
(0.24)
[0.13]
288

0.57
(0.48)
[0.98]
96

0.47
(0.15)***
[0.83]
672

0.13
(0.17)
[0.27]
309

B. Wages
Total private

Manufacturing

Footloose
industries

a

N

Employment and wages data cover private ownership sector only. The specifications correspond to the second ones (with “baseline controls”) in Tables 6-8. Manufacturing employment corresponds to NAICS codes
31-33, and footloose industries are information (51), finance and insurance (52), and professional and technical services (54).
Definitions: PROD1: State New Economy Index; PROD2: Development Report Card for the States—Performance; PROD3: Development Report Card for the States—Development Capacity; PROD4: Development
Report Card for the States—Business Vitality; PROD5: State Competitiveness Index; TXCST1: State Business Tax Climate index; TXCST2: Small Business Survival Index; TXCST3: Cost of Doing Business Index;
TXCST4: Economic Freedom Index; TXCST5: Economic Freedom Index of North America; FISCPOL: Fiscal Policy Report Card.

TABLE 10: Business Climate Sub-Indexes, 1992-2007a
Description / variables included
A. State Business Tax Climate Index (TXCST1)
Corporate tax sub-index
Tax rate sub-index: corporate income tax top rate; bracket structure; gross receipts rate
Tax base sub-index: availability of certain credits, deductions and exemptions; ability of taxpayers to
deduct net operating losses; smaller tax base issues (under gross receipts tax, the three tax base criteria
are replaced by availability of deductions from gross receipts for employee compensation costs and
cost of goods sold)
Individual income tax
Tax rate sub-index: top marginal tax rate and graduated rate structure (takes into account starting
sub-index
points of top brackets, number of brackets, and average width of brackets)
Tax base sub-index: marriage penalty; capital gains taxation; double taxation of capital income; minor
base issues
Sales tax sub-index
Tax rate sub-index: state-level rate and combined state-local rate
Tax base sub-index: whether base includes variety of business-to-business transactions such as
agricultural products, services, machinery, computer software, and leased or rented items; whether
base includes goods and services typically purchased by consumers; excise tax rate on products such
as gasoline, diesel fuel, tobacco, spirits, and beer
Property tax sub-index
Tax rate sub-index: property tax collection, measured both per capita and as percentage of personal
income; capital stock tax rates and maximum payments
Tax base sub-index: whether levies wealth taxes such as inheritance, estate, gift, inventory, and
intangible property
Unemployment insurance Tax rate sub-index: rates levied in the most recent year; statutory rate schedules that could be
tax sub-index
implemented depending on the state of the economy and the UI fund
Tax base sub-index: experience rating formulas; charging methods; and smaller factors
B. Economic Freedom Index of North America (TXCST5)
Size of government subGeneral consumption expenditures by government as a percent of GDP; transfers and subsidies as
index
percent of GDP; social security payments (includes unemployment insurance, disability, public
pensions) as percent of GDP
Labor market freedom
Minimum wage legislation; government employment as a percent of total state employment; union
sub-index
density
Takings and
Total tax revenue as percent of GDP; top marginal income tax rate and income threshold at which
discriminatory taxation
applies; indirect tax revenue as a percent of GDP; sales taxes collected as a percent of GDP
sub-index
C. Economic Freedom Index (TXCST4)
Fiscal sub-index
Average days required for work to cover taxes; per capita state tax revenue; per capita state and local
property tax revenue; tax burden on high income families; per capita state government death and gift
tax revenue; per capita state government severance tax revenue; personal income taxes; sales taxes;
excise taxes; license taxes; corporate taxes; state debt; tax exemptions
Regulatory sub-index
Licensing requirements for non-health professions; licensing requirements for health professions;
continuing education requirements for selected professions; percent land owned by federal
government; purchasing regulations; public school regulation; labor legislation; full-time-equivalent
employees of state public utilities commissions; corporate constituency statutes; property rights
legislation; strictness of state gun laws; state seat belt laws; state provisions for minimum age for
driver’s licenses; full-time-equivalent employees of insurance regulation organization; state legislation
regarding environmental health
Welfare spending subPer capita state and local welfare spending; percent of population receiving public aid; Medicare
index
benefit payments per enrollee; per capita Medicaid spending; average monthly Food Stamp benefit per
recipient; monthly TANF benefit for family of three; average monthly benefit per participant for
Women, Infants, and Children Special Nutrition Program; commodity costs of National School Lunch
Program per participant
Government size subState and local total expenditures as a percent of GSP; size of government workforce; citizen
index
representation (avg. of total number of government units, and legislators per million people)
Judicial
Number of resident active attorneys; Attorney General salary; judges’ compensation; judges’ terms;
judges’ selection method; state has Illinois Brick Repealer statutes (which restrict anti-trust suits); tort
reform; medical-liability reform
a

Sub-index
weight
19.4

29.2

21.5

15.7

14.2

33.3
33.3
33.3

34.9

34.2

37.3

6.3
-12.6

State Business Tax Climate sub-index weights described are for 2006 and 2007; sub-index weighting was different for 2003 and 2004. For the Economic Freedom
Index, sub-index weights described are for 2004; sub-index weighting was different in 1999. Note that variables in some sub-indexes are described relative to state
GSP, and others relative to GDP; these are interchangeable terms. Small Business Tax Climate sub-indexes are weighted in direct proportion with how much each subindex varies across states. The Economic Freedom Index sub-indexes are weighted according to a principal components analysis, and the negative weight on the judicial
sub-index presumably reflects a weak or negative correlation with other Economic Freedom Index sub-indexes.

TABLE 11: Regressions Including All Sub-Indexes within an Index, 1992-2008a
QCEW
Employment
A. State Business Tax Climate Index (TXCST1)
Corporate tax
0.21
sub-index
(0.13)
[0.22]
Individual income
0.08
tax sub-index
(0.14)
[0.10]
Sales tax sub-index
0.01
(0.08)
[0.01]
Property tax sub-index
0.13
(0.09)
[0.23]
Unemployment
0.05
Insurance tax sub-index
(0.07)
[0.09]
N
192
R2
0.50
0.03
Sub-index coefficients equal (p-value)
B. Economic Freedom Index of North America (TXCST5)
Size of
0.36
government sub-index
(0.12)***
[0.63]
Labor market
0.002
freedom sub-index
(0.12)
[0.003]
Takings and
-0.13
discriminatory taxation
(0.12)
sub-index
[-0.22]
N
672
R2
0.68
Sub-index coefficients equal (p-value)
0.02
C. Economic Freedom Index (TXCST4)
Fiscal sub-index

Regulatory sub-index

Welfare spending
sub-index
Government size
sub-index
Judicial sub-index

N
R2
Sub-index coefficients equal (p-value)
a

0.07
(0.17)
[0.13]
-0.16
(0.12)
[-0.25]
0.31
(0.15)**
[0.46]
0.10
(0.10)
[0.17]
-0.11
(0.11)
[-0.21]
96
0.43
0.02

QCEW Total
Wages

GSP

Employment change
due to births

0.47
(0.21)**
[0.49]
-0.03
(0.20)
[-0.04]
-0.10
(0.10)
[-0.09]
0.05
(0.14)
[0.08]
0.07
(0.12)
[0.13]
192
0.49
0.02

0.51
(0.23)**
[0.53]
-0.09
(0.25)
[-0.11]
-0.34
(0.15)**
[-0.30]
0.34
(0.19)*
[0.60]
0.13
(0.15)
[0.24]
192
0.44
0.00

0.07
(0.10)
[0.08]
0.11
(0.10)
[0.14]
0.09
(0.07)
[0.08]
0.01
(0.08)
[0.02]
-0.05
(0.08)
[-0.09]
96
0.59
0.35

0.47
(0.15)***
[0.83]
0.12
(0.14)
[0.17]
-0.15
(0.14)
[-0.26]
672
0.61
0.00

0.15
(0.15)
[0.26]
0.22
(0.16)
[0.32]
-0.06
(0.13)
[-0.11]
432
0.29
0.15

0.22
(0.10)**
[0.38]
-0.001
(0.10)
[-0.00]
-0.06
(0.10)
[-0.10]
672
0.79
0.08

-0.02
(0.25)
[-0.04]
-0.15
(0.20)
[-0.23]
0.37
(0.23)
[0.54]
0.33
(0.20)
[0.54]
-0.08
(0.23)
[-0.16]
96
0.52
0.12

-0.24
(0.28)
[-0.42]
-0.07
(0.29)
[-0.12]
0.53
(0.28)*
[0.79]
0.10
(0.19)
[0.16]
-0.12
(0.26)
[-0.23]
96
0.38
0.40

-0.08
(0.10)
[-0.13]
0.04
(0.10)
[0.06]
0.30
(0.14)**
[0.44]
0.16
(0.08)*
[0.26]
0.11
(0.08)
[0.21]
96
0.78
0.02

The dependent variable is 1-year changes of the variable in the first column, and all controls are included, so the specifications
correspond to the second ones in Tables 6-8. The sub-indexes are scaled so that positive values are intended to reflect a “better” business
climate; e.g., higher values of the sub-indexes correspond to lower taxes or lower welfare and transfer payments.

FIGURE 1: Contributions of Business Climate Index and Control Variables to Employment
Growth (QCEW), 1992-2008.a
a

Presents product of coefficients from Table 6 and states’ values for business climate index and control variables relative to mean. Units are
percentage points of annual employment growth. Estimates are averaged over values from TXCST1, TXCST4, and TXCST5 models.

2

All regions

1.5

NM
NV
AZ

1

CO

WY

MT
CA

UT

ID

.5

TX
ND
MD

FL

OK

0

LA
KS

SD

DE
MO
VA
VT OR NE
GA
NY
WV

-1

-.5

AR SC
IA IL
OH
NH
MA
MNMI
NJ PA MS
NC
WA
TN
WI KY
AL
ME
IN
CT
RI

-.5

0

.5

1

Contribution of business climate
Northeast

Midwest

South

West

