                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         VALUING MORTALITY RISK REDUCTIONS:
                             PROGRESS AND CHALLENGES

                                         Maureen L. Cropper
                                         James K. Hammitt
                                          Lisa A. Robinson

                                         Working Paper 16971
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16971


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2011




Hammitt thanks the Institut National de Recherche Agronomique and the European Research Council
(FP7/2007-2013 grant agreement no. 230589) for financial support. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Maureen L. Cropper, James K. Hammitt, and Lisa A. Robinson. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Valuing Mortality Risk Reductions: Progress and Challenges
Maureen L. Cropper, James K. Hammitt, and Lisa A. Robinson
NBER Working Paper No. 16971
April 2011
JEL No. Q50,Q51,Q58

                                                  ABSTRACT

The value of mortality risk reduction is an important component of the benefits of environmental policies.
In recent years, the number, scope, and quality of valuation studies have increased dramatically. Revealed-preference
studies of wage compensation for occupational risks, on which analysts have primarily relied, have
benefited from improved data and statistical methods. Stated-preference research has improved methodologically
and expanded dramatically. Studies are now available for several health conditions associated with
environmental causes and researchers have explored many issues concerning the validity of the estimates.
With the growing numbers of both types of studies, several meta-analyses have become available that
provide insight into the results of both methods. Challenges remain, including better understanding
of the persistently smaller estimates from stated-preference than from wage-differential studies and
of how valuation depends on the individual’s age, health status, and characteristics of the illnesses
most frequently associated with environmental causes.


Maureen L. Cropper                                        Lisa A. Robinson
Department of Economics                                   29 Caroline Park
University of Maryland                                    Waban, MA 02468
College Park, MD 20742                                    lisa.a.robinson@comcast.net
and NBER
cropper@econ.umd.edu

James K. Hammitt
Harvard Center for Risk Analysis
Harvard University
718 Huntington Avenue
Boston, MA 02115
jkh@harvard.edu
      Valuing Mortality Risk Reductions:Progress and Challenges
                 Maureen Cropper, James K. Hammitt, and Lisa A. Robinson

1. Introduction
        The value of mortality risk reductions is a major determinant of the benefits of
environmental policies. The quantified benefits of related regulations have long been dominated
by the effects of air pollution abatement (OMB 2010) and the effects of decreased air pollution
are in turn dominated by mortality risk reductions. For example, mortality risk reductions
account for more than 90 percent of quantified benefits of the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments
between 1990 and 2020; the estimated annual benefits total over $1.7 trillion in 2020 (U.S. EPA
2011). Mortality risk reductions also contribute significantly to the benefits of drinking water
regulations and many other environmental policies. The types of potentially-fatal illnesses
associated with these exposures are varied, including heart and lung disease and several types of
cancer. While environmental programs reduce mortality risks to persons of all ages, the largest
risk reductions are often enjoyed by older people, who face greater baseline risk: more than 80
percent of the life years gained as a result of the Clean Air Act Amendments accrued to
individuals age 70 and older (U.S. EPA 2011). Risk reductions accruing to infants and children
are generally smaller, but also of concern to decision makers.

        Over the past decade, controversies have erupted over the valuation of these risks that
reflect confusion about basic concepts (Robinson 2007, Viscusi 2009, Cameron 2010). The value
of the small risk reductions associated with environmental policies is often misinterpreted as
placing a value on a “life,” and information on individuals’ willingness to pay for their own risk
reductions is often misinterpreted as the value that “the government” places on their lives. These
issues have led to calls to clarify related terminology; for example, to reference the “value of risk
reduction” rather than the “value per statistical life.” In this article, however, we are concerned
with a somewhat different set of issues: the progress and challenges related to conducting



 Maureen Cropper is Professor of Economics at the University of Maryland and Senior Fellow at Resources for the
Future. James K. Hammitt is Professor of Economics and Decision Sciences at Harvard University (Center for Risk
Analysis) and the Toulouse School of Economics (LERNA-INRA). Lisa A. Robinson is an independent consultant.
Prepared for the Annual Review of Resource Economics. Hammitt thanks the Institut National de Recherche
Agronomique and the European Research Council (FP7/2007-2013 grant agreement no. 230589) for financial
support.




                                                       1
empirical research on these values, particularly on those that are applicable in the environmental
context.

        In recent years, the research available to support valuation of environmental risk
reductions has evolved significantly. This article discusses important methodological
improvements in both revealed- and stated-preference research, summarizes key findings, and
notes areas in need of additional work. It explores current standards of methodological
acceptance that reflect the evolution of this literature.

        Historically, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (U.S. EPA) and other agencies
have estimated the value of mortality risk reduction primarily using compensating wage
differentials—wage premia that workers receive for risks of fatal injuries in the workplace
(Robinson 2007, Robinson and Hammitt 2011). These estimates are based on actual transactions
that affect workers’ incomes and risks; however, they must be inferred from observational data
by holding other job and worker characteristics constant. For valuing environmental risks,
compensating wage differentials have two primary drawbacks: they are based on risk of
accidental death rather than environmentally-related chronic disease, and the workers whose
preferences are assessed are generally under 65 years of age. Moreover, valuation of
occupational and environmental risks may differ if occupational risks are perceived as more
voluntary and individually controllable.

       Interest in valuing mortality risks associated with illnesses rather than injuries, and with
non-occupational exposures, has led to growing use of stated preference studies. These studies
ask respondents about their willingness to pay for mortality risk reductions of various types and
can be tailored address specific diseases and populations not represented in hedonic wage
studies. However, respondents may have less incentive to consider their responses than in more
consequential settings. From the perspective of environmental risk valuation, the important
questions are the extent to which stated preference results are valid and reliable, and should
replace or supplement hedonic wage estimates.

        This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the concept of mortality risk
valuation—how much money an individual will substitute for a change in his risk of dying. This
is usually expressed as the value per statistical life (VSL)—that is, the rate of substitution
between wealth (or income) and risk. In Section 3, we discuss hedonic wage studies, outlining
the methods used and discussing what distinguishes a well-conducted study. We summarize
briefly the resulting empirical estimates. Section 4 describes stated preference studies. We
describe the methods used, discuss methodological improvements, and summarize empirical



                                                 2
findings. Section 5 concludes by evaluating the empirical literature, proposing criteria for
methodologically acceptable studies, and suggesting further research.

2. The Value per Statistical Life
       Analyses of the health benefits of environmental policies generally begin with a risk
assessment that estimates the change in mortality risks likely to be experienced by the affected
population. These assessments do not predict which individuals might die if pollution is not
abated; they estimate only the change in mortality risk over a defined period for members of the
affected population. These changes in mortality risk are often summarized as the expected
number of “lives saved” or “premature fatalities averted”—that is, the sum over affected
individuals of the risk change.

         By convention, the value of these risk changes is expressed as the value per statistical life
(VSL), which is defined as the marginal rate of substitution between money and mortality risk in
a defined time period. In other words, it is the local slope of an indifference curve between risk
and wealth, not the value of saving an individual’s life with certainty (see Hammitt 2000). This
means that if an individual is willing to pay $700 for a 1 in 10,000 decrease in his risk of dying
during the year, his VSL is $700 divided by the risk change, or $7 million. The VSL can also be
viewed as the sum of what a group of individuals would pay for risk reductions that sum to one
statistical life.1

        The VSL concept is illustrated in Figure 1. Wealth is plotted on the vertical axis and the
probability (p) of surviving a specified period is plotted on the horizontal axis. The curved line
represents an individual’s indifference curve. For each change in survival probability (Δp),
individual willingness to pay (WTP) or willingness to accept (WTA) compensation is measured
by the vertical distance between the two points on the indifference curve. The VSL can be
calculated as the individual’s WTP or WTA divided by Δp.2




1 Because the term is often misinterpreted (Cameron 2010), U.S. EPA is considering changing the terminology to
the value of mortality risk (VMR); another option is the value of risk reduction (VRR).
2Strictly   speaking, VSL is the limit of WTP/p and WTA/p as p tends to zero.




                                                         3
              Figure 1.The Trade-Off between Wealth and Survival Probability




                                                                          WTP WTA
                                                                 VSL         
                                                                           p   p
                                          Indifference curve




                                                                            WTP (for risk
                                                                            decrease)
                  Wealth
                                                                     Δp
                                WTA (for risk
                                                           Δp
                                increase)




                           0                    Survival probability ( = 1 - risk)          1




        Intuitively, one expects that individual WTP and WTA will increase as the size of the risk
reduction increases. For small risk changes, the relationship of WTP and WTA to the risk change
should be nearly proportional (i.e., the indifference curve is smooth). Proportionality is not
expected for large risk changes because wealth constrains the amount one could pay for a large
risk reduction (e.g., one could pay $7 to reduce risk by 1 in 1 million but not $700,000 to reduce
risk by 1 in 10). Under standard assumptions, economic theory suggests that individual WTP will
decrease (and WTA will increase) with each incremental increase in the risk reduction (see
Hammitt 2000; Hammitt and Treich 2007).

        The relationships illustrated in Figure 1 may be influenced by other factors, including
income, wealth, age, life expectancy, current and future mortality risk and health status. In
addition, individuals may place different values on risks with different characteristics. Some of
these characteristics are physical attributes (such as whether the risk is latent or involves
significant morbidity prior to death); others are psychological (such as whether the risk is
perceived as voluntarily incurred or under an individual’s control). There is no single VSL:
different people may have different preferences and, for an individual, the value of a 1 in 10,000
risk reduction may depend on whether death results immediately from injury or from a lingering


                                                         4
illness, whether it is caused by a hazard viewed as particularly fearsome, whether one is rich or
poor or old or young, and other factors. Given these differences, analysts are often faced with
challenges related to the match between the available research and the characteristics of the risks
and populations of concern in particular environmental contexts.

3. Hedonic Wage Studies
       Historically, the VSL literature has been dominated by revealed-preference studies that
estimate the trade-off between wages and job-related risks.3 In hedonic wage studies, researchers
compare wages of workers in different occupations or industries who face different levels of on-
the-job mortality risk, using statistical methodbs to control for other factors (such as education or
nonfatal job risks) that affect wages. Although these studies are often seen as more credible than
stated-preference studies, they have two weaknesses: compensating wage differentials must be
inferred statistically, rather than being observed directly, and estimates of VSL based on hedonic
wage equations assume that the measure of job risk used by the researcher matches workers’ risk
perceptions. In addition, hedonic-wage estimates are necessarily limited to studying preferences
of workers; individuals who are outside the labor market, whether because of illness, retirement,
child raising, or other reasons, are not represented. This selection effect could yield a downward
bias, as the workers who accept hazardous jobs are likely to be those who demand the least
compensation (i.e., have smaller VSLs). The premise underlying compensating wage
differentials is that jobs can be characterized by various attributes, including risk of accidental
death. The association between wages and occupational risks observed in the market is
determined jointly by workers’ preferences and firms’ costs of reducing job risks. If workers are
well informed about risks of fatal and nonfatal injuries, and if labor markets are competitive,
riskier jobs should pay more (holding worker and other job attributes constant). Empirically,
wages are described as a function of worker characteristics (age, education, human capital) and
job characteristics including risk of fatal and nonfatal injury (Viscusi 1993). In theory, the
difference in wage associated with a small change in risk equals the amount of compensation a
worker requires to accept the risk and the income he would forgo for a safer job.

3 Studies of risk-averting behavior (or demand for consumer-safety products) and residential-property values have
also been used to estimate VSL (see reviews by Viscusi and Aldy 2003 and Blomquist 2004). Researchers often
argue that these studies are less suitable for valuation than hedonic wage or stated-preference studies because of
difficulties in estimating actual or perceived risks, the need to make assumptions about key factors such as time
costs (in some product studies), whether cancers are likely to be fatal (in some hedonic property value studies), and
other factors.




                                                          5
        A few hedonic wage studies have used workers’ perceived risks (elicited by survey) in
place of conventional actuarial risk estimates (e.g., Gerking et al. 1988; Gegax et al. 1991;
Viscusi and Moore 1991; Liu and Hammitt 1999). These studies yield similar VSL estimates to
studies using actuarial risk estimates, as confirmed by meta-analysis (Mrozek and Taylor 2002).

       A typical hedonic wage equation is of the form (1), in which the log of the wage is
regressed on fatal and nonfatal job risk, worker characteristics (including age, race, education,
years of experience, and union status), and job characteristics (including industry and
occupation).4
                    ln wi      m xim   0 ri   1qi   2 qiWC i  ui (1)

           where
           wi :worker i’s wage rate

            :constant
           xim :personal and job characteristics, worker i
           ri :fatal job risk, worker i
           qi :nonfatal job risk, worker i
           WCi :worker's compensation
           ui :random error term

        Because γ0 represents the proportionate increase in the wage for a one-unit change in fatal
job risk, VSL is calculated by multiplying γ0 by the average wage and dividing by a one-unit
change in risk.5

3.1. Econometric Issues
       The econometric difficulties encountered in estimating the labor market price of risk
include obtaining accurate estimates of risk of death on the job; the sensitivity of estimates of γ
to what other variables are included in the equation—in particular, to the inclusion of industry


4 The extent to which industry and occupation dummy variables can be included is limited by the nature of the risk
data. If fatal job risk is estimated at the three-digit industry level, then two-digit industry dummy variables can be
included in the equation, but not three-digit dummies, to avoid exact collinearity among right-hand variables.
5   The change in wage and risk must be calculated for the same time period, usually annual.




                                                             6
and occupation dummies and a measure of nonfatal job risk; and correlation between job risk and
variables omitted from the equation. The last problem can take several forms. If higher-risk jobs
have undesirable characteristics not measured by the researcher, the risk variable will tend to
capture these characteristics, biasing γ0 upward. Unmeasured worker characteristics could bias
the coefficient of risk in either direction. If worker productivity is measured imperfectly and
more productive workers accept safer jobs, this will bias γ0 downward (Hwang et al. 1992).
Unmeasured differences in workers’ ability to reduce job risk will tend to bias γ0upward
(Shogren and Stamland 2002).

        The magnitude of the econometric difficulties associated with early wage-risk studies is
documented by Black et al. (2003) and by Black and Kniesner (2003). At the request of U.S.
EPA, Black et al. estimated hedonic wage equations using 10 combinations of worker and risk
datasets that are commonly used in hedonic wage studies.6Four specifications of equation (1)
were estimated for each dataset: (a) a basic set of covariates (model 1)7; (b) the basic set with
state dummies (model 2); (c) model 2 with occupation or industry dummies (model 3); and (d)
model 2 with both occupation and industry dummies. The authors found the estimated coefficient
on fatal risk varied widely; it was positive and significantly different from zero in only 16 (of 40)
cases for men and 14 (of 40) for women. They attribute the instability of estimated VSLs to
errors in measuring fatal job risk, which may be correlated with worker attributes, and to
collinearity between the risk measure and occupation and industry dummies. The authors
concluded, “Collectively, these findings lead us to have severe doubts about the usefulness of
existing estimates to guide public policy.”

       Over the past 10 years, the data and methods used in U.S. hedonic wage studies have
improved significantly. We discuss the availability of improved risk data, attempts to control for
confounding factors, and methods for dealing with the endogeneity of job risk. We document
progress in dealing with these econometric challenges and areas that remain open for future
research. Section 3.2 provides examples of recent studies and meta-analyses.


6The data sets are obtained by combining either the March Current Population Survey, the Outgoing Rotation
Groups of the Current Population Survey, or the National Longitudinal Survey of Youths with risks by industry or
by occupation from either the Bureau of Labor Statistics Survey of Working Conditions or the National Institute of
Occupational Safety and Health estimates from its National Traumatic Occupational Fatality survey.
7The basic set of covariates differs between data sets but includes a quartic function of age, education, union and
marital status, race, and ethnicity. Some data sets also include firm size, workers’ experience, tenure, score on the
Armed Forces Qualification Test.




                                                           7
Measurement of Job Risk
        Accurate measurement of fatal job risk requires estimates that vary by both occupation
and industry and, because of the infrequency of deaths on the job, are based on a large sample of
workers. Random errors in measuring fatal job risks tend to bias estimated coefficients toward
zero, understating compensating wage differentials. Most studies prior to 2000 used data from
either the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) Survey of Occupational Injuries, reporting deaths by
three-digit industry classification, or the National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health
(NIOSH), reporting risks by one-digit industry and state, resulting in significant measurement
problems.8 Clearly, workers in different occupations within the same industry are subject to
different risks—an office worker in a mining company faces less risk than a miner. There is also
evidence that the early BLS data understated fatal job risks.

        Recent studies (Aldy and Viscusi 2008; Kniesner et al. 2010; Viscusi 2004) have made
significant advances in the measurement of job risk by using the BLS Census of Fatal
Occupational Injuries (CFOI) and distinguishing risks by occupation and industry.9 The CFOI is
a census rather than a sample and is based on comprehensive review of multiple records,
including death certificates and workers’ compensation reports. These studies generally use risks
for 720 occupation-industry cells (10 occupations and 72 two-digit industries) based on three-
year averages of deaths.

Sensitivity to Equation Specification and Omitted Variables
        The sensitivity of estimates of the labor-market price of risk to equation specification has
been noted by many authors, including Black et al. (2003), Hintermann et al. (2010), Leigh
(1995), and Mrozek and Taylor (2002). Failure to control for either worker or job characteristics
that are correlated with job risk will render estimates of the coefficient γ0 biased and inconsistent.
Estimates are especially sensitive to inclusion of dummy variables for occupation and industry
and to inclusion of nonfatal job risk and replacement of wages through workers’ compensation
programs (e.g., Viscusi 2004). Occupation dummies are often included in equation (1) to proxy
job characteristics, which, apart from injury risk, are seldom included in compensating wage


8 Some studies from the 1970s and 1980s (e.g., Thaler and Rosen 1976, Brown 1980) used data from the Society of
Actuaries, which measured total death rate by occupation including non-occupational deaths (that would not attract a
wage premium). Dillingham (1985) is a notable exception of an early study that measured risks by occupation and
industry.
9Available   at http://www.bls.gov/iif/home.htm.




                                                         8
studies.10 Interindustry wage differentials may occur for reasons unrelated to job risk—for
example, because of differences in capital-labor ratios (Krueger and Summers 1988)—
suggesting that industry dummies should be included in hedonic wage equations.

        Correlations between fatal job risk and industry or occupation make estimates of the price
of risk sensitive to their inclusion. Leigh (1995) and Dorman and Hagstrom (1998) argue that the
estimated price of risk actually captures interindustry wage differentials, since the coefficient on
risk often becomes insignificant when industry dummies are included. In their meta-analysis,
Mrozek and Taylor (2002) find that studies that include industry dummies obtain significantly
lower estimates of the price of risk than studies that exclude them. Viscusi (2004) finds that
controlling for both industry and occupation risk reduces the estimated VSL by half compared
with controlling only for industry.

        Correlation between industry and occupation and fatal job risk is a problem of
collinearity. A similar problem arises when including risk of nonfatal injury in the hedonic wage
equation. Nonfatal job risk is generally correlated with fatal job risk, making it difficult to
disentangle the effects of the two variables. A possible solution is to find data sets that exhibit
less collinearity between these variables.

Endogeneity of Risk
        The level of occupational fatality risk a worker faces results not from random assignment
of workers to jobs but from a sorting process in which workers choose among jobs for which
they are qualified. Moreover, workers may differ in their ability to manage occupational risks,
such that even workers in the same job face different risks (Shogren and Stamland 2002).

        Correlation between risk and unobserved job or worker characteristics can be handled
using instrumental variables or panel data. Finding a good instrumental variable for job risk has
proved difficult. Arabsheibani and Marin (2000, 2001) attempt to treat risk as endogenous but
find that collinearity between their instrument and other covariates makes precise estimation
difficult. Kniesner et al. (2010) and Hintermann et al. (2010) use past risk levels as instruments




10 Some studies distinguish or include only blue-collar jobs, or include measures of physical exertion and other
working conditions. Deliere et al. (2009) use detailed occupation characteristics from the Dictionary of Occupational
Titles to characterize jobs.




                                                         9
for the change in worker risk in their studies.11 Another possibility is to find a natural
experiment, such as that resulting from a government program to reduce traffic fatalities, that
causes variation in fatal job risk and is exogenous to both unmeasured job and worker
characteristics.

        When panel data are available, estimation of equation (1) using first differences or
worker fixed effects will eliminate worker characteristics that change slowly over time from the
error term.12 Kniesner et al. (2011) and Hintermann et al. (2010) use panel data sets to estimate
compensating wage differentials for the United States and the United Kingdom, respectively.
Kniesner et al. note that most of the variation in risks over time comes from job changes rather
than changes in risk, holding job constant. There is sufficient within-worker variation in risk in
the Panel Study of Income Dynamics to obtain precise estimates of VSL.13 The authors also note
that controlling for unobserved worker heterogeneity reduces VSL estimates by about 50 percent
from estimates obtained using a single cross-section of data. In contrast, Hintermann et al. do not
find statistically significant estimates of VSL when using panel data, although they do find
significant results when estimating equation (1) by ordinary least squares.

        The econometric issues discussed here suggest that one must be careful in interpreting
published studies—especially those conducted prior to 2000—as providing unbiased estimates of
the price of risk in the labor market. Although more sophisticated econometric methods are now
being used, estimates currently applied in policy analysis are based primarily on earlier literature.
With this caveat, we briefly summarize the findings of the empirical literature.




11The use of first differences in risk helps to attenuate measurement error in the risk variables, as does the use of
instrumental variables for risk. Black and Kniesner (2003) note that instruments are useful in addressing classical
measurement error, but that improved methods are needed to address the non-classical error found in the older
hedonic wage studies.
12These characteristics may include risk preferences, unmeasured job productivity, and unmeasured safety-related
productivity. An alternate approach to dealing with unmeasured worker productivity is to estimate a Roy sorting
model (see Deliere et al. 2009).
13   These estimates are obtained omitting industry dummies.




                                                          10
3.2.Empirical Estimates of the Price of Risk in the Labor Market

Meta-Analyses of Hedonic Wage Studies
        The hedonic wage literature includes several dozen studies that have been summarized in
a series of meta-analyses, of which the four listed in Table 1 provide U.S. estimates.14 Each of
these meta-analyses constructs a “best estimate” of VSL. The first three use meta-regression to
see how VSL estimates from individual studies vary with study and respondent characteristics.
The fourth, Kochi et al., uses a Bayesian approach to adjust estimates for within and between
study variability. Though all four meta-analyses include VSL studies of non-U.S. populations
(almost entirely populations in high-income countries), we focus on the authors’ preferred
estimates for the United States. About 30 to 40 U.S. hedonic wage studies are included in each
meta-analysis (the exact number varies across model specifications). The resulting U.S. estimates
range from $2.0 million to $11.1 million (2009 USD).15




14Several  other meta-analyses focus on estimating VSL for countries other than the United States. Liu et al. (1997)
and Bowland and Beghin (2001) include only hedonic wage estimates; Kluve and Schaffner (2008) and De Blaeij et
al. (2003) include both revealed and statedpreference studies; the latter is a meta-analysis of road safety studies.
15A  more recent meta-analysis of both revealed and stated preference studies from around the world, Bellavance et
al. (2009), includes U.S. hedonic wage studies published between 1974 and 2004 along with other studies and uses a
mixed-effect regression model. The weighted average of their estimated VSLs is $5.9 million (with a 95 percent
confidence interval of $4.7 million to $7.1 million) in 2000 USD, or $7.3 million in 2009 USD.




                                                         11
                Table 1. U.S. Estimates from Recent Hedonic WageMeta-Analysesa

                                                            Highlighted VSL estimate
                            Publication
                             dates of
                            underlying             As reported
      Meta-analysis          studiesb              (dollar year)c           Inflated to 2009 USDd

Miller (2000)              1974–1990      $3.7 million(1995 USD)         $5.2 million
Mrozek and Taylor (2002) 1974–1995        $1.5 million to $2.5           $2.0 million to $3.3 million
                                          million(1998 USD)
Viscusi and Aldy (2003)    1974–2000      $5.5 million to $7.6           $6.9 million to $9.5 million
                                          million(2000 USD)
Kochi et al. (2006)        1974–2002      $8.9 million(2000 USD)         $11.1 million
a. These meta-analyses also provide estimates that include other countries. Miller and Kochi et
al. also consider statedpreference studies.
b. U.S. hedonic wage studies only.
c. Mean or median estimate(s) for the United States, highlighted by the authors in their abstracts
or discussions of alternative models.
d. Adjusted for inflation using the Consumer Price Index, All Urban Consumers. Not adjusted
for income growth over time.

        The best estimates obtained by each meta-analysis vary because of the choice of studies
and estimates to include in the meta-analysis, as well as the modeling approaches and covariates
included. The meta-regressions conducted by Miller (2000), Mrozek and Taylor (2002), and
Viscusi and Aldy (2003) explain variation in VSL estimates across studies as a function of study
and population characteristics. These include variables such as mean worker income, mean
occupational risk, the proportion of workers unionized, and whether the study included controls
for interindustry wage differentials or nonfatal job risk. All the meta-analyses find that VSL
increases with the average income of workers in the study, although the rate of increase varies.
Mrozek and Taylor (2002) find that studies that fail to control for interindustry wage differentials
report larger VSLs.

      Unfortunately, almost all the hedonic wage studies included in these meta-analyses were
completed before the improved CFOI data became available and do not reflect recent advances




                                                  12
in econometric modeling. There is no published meta-analysis that covers the newer hedonic
wage literature; the most current (Bellavance et al. 2009) includes studies published only through
2004, while the first study to use the CFOI data was Viscusi (2003).16

Effects of Worker Age and Risk Characteristics17
        Most hedonic wage studies estimate an average price of risk in the job market and do not
measure how compensating wage differentials vary by risk or worker characteristics. Some
studies have examined how the price of risk varies with worker age and cause of death.18 We
summarize examples of recent results here, focusing on attributes that are most relevant to
valuing environmental risks.

        Age. Aldy and Viscusi (2008) examine the effect of age on VSL using CFOI risk data
that vary by worker age and industry and a minimum-distance estimator that controls for cohort
effects (younger workers were born later and have greater lifetime income). They find that VSL
follows an inverted-U pattern with age, peaking at approximately $8 million (2000 USD) at age
46thendeclining to $5 million by age 62. This inverted-U relationship has also been found in
other hedonic wage studies (Aldy and Viscusi 2007).In contrast, a series of studies by Evans and
Smith find somewhat differing results, focusing on workers aged 51 to 65 and using panel data
from the Health and Retirement Survey. Smith et al. (2004) find that estimated VSL increases
with age; Evans and Smith (2006) find that quality of life and background risks complicate this
relationship, and Evans and Smith (2008) note that estimated age effects may be confounded by
health. For their sample of workers, they find that VSL is larger for workers with better current
health and those who face larger near-term risk.19

         Risk characteristics. Nearly all hedonic wage studies estimate compensation for risk of
fatal injury and exclude risks of fatal disease (which are much more uncertain). An exception is
Lott and Manning (2000), who estimate compensation for risk of fatal cancer. The authors use

16U.S. EPA (2010) identified 15 studies that use the CFOI data, of which 8 use the data in original hedonicwage
analyses.
17VSL  increases with income, though the rate of increase is uncertain. See Hammitt and Robinson (2011) for a
review.
18A few studies have estimated how compensation varies with other worker characteristics.For example, Viscusi
and Hersch (2001) find that smokers receive smaller compensation for nonfatal injury risk than do nonsmokers and
Viscusi (2003) finds that blacks receive less compensation for risk than whites.
19Smith et al. (2004) and Evans and Smith (2006) use BLS industry-level risk but Evans and Smith (2008) use
CFOI data that vary by industry and worker age.




                                                        13
several indicators of worker exposure to carcinogens at the two-digit SIC level in place of a
standard fatality risk measure and estimate the corresponding wage premium. They provide
“rough” estimates of VSL, using a range of assumptions about the fatality risk of occupational
exposure, that range from $1.2 million to $12 million (1984 USD), or $2.5 million to $24.8
million in 2009 dollars.

         Recent work by Scotton and Taylor (2011) suggests that hedonic wage estimates may
mask significant heterogeneity in the value of different types of risks. Using risk rates that vary
by cause of injury, they find that wage premia are much higher for workplace homicides than for
other job-related risks. Although their results are not directly applicable to illness-related risks
from environmental causes, they suggest that more work is needed to understand how different
fatality risks are valued.

4. Stated-Preference Studies
         Stated-preference studies, which survey respondents about how they would act in
hypothetical situations, have become increasingly common as a means of valuing mortality risk
reductions. The scenario presented to respondents can be tailored to specific environmental risks
(e.g., pesticide residues or air pollution) and causes of death (e.g., cancer or heart disease). It can
provide detailed information about latency and the time path of any illness preceding death
(Cameron et al. 2010). Risks may affect persons of all ages, including children and the elderly,
and the researcher is at liberty to specify the size of the risk reduction. The disadvantage of
stated-preference studies is that individuals may give spurious answers because they face no real
consequences. An indication of problematic responses is that estimated WTP often fails to
increase in proportion to the size of the risk reduction valued, and thus estimates of VSL
decrease sharply as the stated risk reduction increases. Furthermore, estimates from stated-
preference studies are sensitive to assumptions made in the econometric analysis.

       Most stated-preference studies are either contingent valuation (CV) studies or choice
experiments. In both cases, the respondent is presented with a scenario (often a product or
program) that would reduce his mortality risk, and information about his baseline risk (without
the program). The researcher must define the magnitude of the risk reduction delivered by the
program, the time period over which it will be delivered, the amount and form of payment (e.g.,
product price or additional taxes), and other relevant information. The respondent is asked to




                                                  14
make a choice: in the case of CV, whether he would choose the program and pay the stated cost;
in a choice experiment, which of several programs he would choose.20 Studies usually include
multiple valuation questions plus debriefing questions to determine whether the respondent
understood and accepted the choices offered.

4.1. Choices in Study Design

Nature of the Risk Valued
        An important issue in survey design is whether respondents should value reductions in
risk of death due to a specific cause (e.g., heart disease or cancer) independently of its link to the
environment, or whether the risk of death should be linked to an environmental concern, such as
air pollution or hazardous waste sites. The danger with the latter approach is that respondents
may not accept the scenario: they may not believe that the environmental problem could result in
the stated health effect, they may be unwilling to pay to reduce the risk because they did not
cause it, they may not believe the described program would be effective, or their values may
reflect a desire to modify some other feature of the problem.21 A danger associated with asking
about a more abstract risk reduction that is not linked to a specific hazard and program for
amelioration is that the respondents may not find the scenario credible and would reject it out of
hand. Because environmental programs often benefit the community at large rather than solely
the respondents, it is important to understand whether the respondents are valuing only their own
risk reduction or the reductions provided to the larger community.

        A recent Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) review of
the international stated-preference literature (Lindhjem et al. 2010) identified 75 VSL surveys, of
which 18 focused on environmental causes, 28 on health risks from unspecified causes, and 29
on traffic safety. Examples of environmental and health-related studies include those focused on
the risk of cancer from pesticide residues (Hammitt and Haninger 2010),the risk of death from
exposure to hazardous waste (Alberini et al. 2007), and the risk of death due to chronic heart and
lung disease (Krupnick et al. 2002).


20 For example, Cameron and DeShazo (2008) present respondents with scenarios that represent different lifetime
illness profiles, including twelve types of health risks (cancers, cardiovascular and respiratory disesases, other
illnesses, and traffic accidents) that vary in the timing of the risk reduction andits magnitude.
21Ina study of pesticide residues on foods, Hammitt and Haninger (2010) found that 32 percent of respondents
thought their personal risk was overstated in the survey and 12 percent thought it was understated.




                                                         15
How Risks Are Communicated
        A critical component of any mortality-risk survey is how baseline risks and risk changes
are communicated. Baseline risk is the respondent’s risk of dying without the program or
product, usually from all causes. The risk changes are typically on the order of 1 in 10,000 or 1
in 100,000 per year. Lay people have difficulty comprehending small probabilities, which may
lead them to report values that are not logically related to the size of the risk reduction (Hammitt
and Graham 1999).22

         Methods for communicating risk changes depend on survey mode. For in-person, mail,
and internet surveys, risks are often communicated by coloring squares on a grid, a method that
has been found to yield responses to valuation questions that are more consistent with theory
(Corso et al. 2001). Other devices used to communicate small probabilities include risk ladders,
which compare the risk in question with other risks using a linear or logarithmic scale. In
telephone surveys, individuals are sometimes told that without a program “x people will die out
of 10,000”; with the program “y people will die out of 10,000.” A disadvantage of this approach
is that it focuses attention on the change in risk to a population rather than to the individual
respondent (who may perceive that he will not benefit). Lindhjelm et al. (2010) describe trends
in survey mode, reporting that the use of internet and computer-based surveys is increasing
rapidly and that most surveys now use some sort of visual aid.

Elicitation of WTP
       How respondents are asked to value a risk reduction affects the quality of the data
obtained and how responses are analyzed. Before the mid 1990s, most mortality risk valuation
surveys used open-ended valuation questions. Respondents were asked, “What is the most you
would pay for the risk change?” This has the advantage of providing a point estimate of each
person’s WTP but is a difficult question to answer and may elicit a strategic response (e.g.,
because people are conditioned not to report their maximum WTP in negotiations).

       In the majority of contingent-valuation studies conducted since the mid-1990s,
dichotomous-choice methods are used, following the recommendation of the U.S. National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) expert panel on contingent valuation (NOAA
1993).Respondents are asked a neutral question about whether they would pay a stated amount


22Hammitt   and Graham (1999) found that 39 percent of telephone-survey respondents did not correctly answer
which is the larger number: 1 in 10,000 or 5 in 100,000.




                                                       16
for the risk reduction (“If the risk reduction cost $z, would you purchase it or not?”) and the “bid
amount” z is varied randomly across respondents. The question is often followed by a second
question to more closely bind the respondent’s WTP. For example, if the respondent accepts the
program when the bid is $100, he is asked whether he would accept or reject it if the bid were
$200. If he rejects $200, his WTP is assumed to be between $100 and $200; if he accepts $200, it
is assumed to be greater than $200 with no explicit upper bound.23Although dichotomous choice
questions do not invite strategic response, they provide only interval estimates of each
respondent’s WTP. The precision of the final estimate is sensitive to the bids chosen.24

        For benefit-cost analysis, analysts usually seek to measure mean WTP because
population benefits can be calculated as the product of mean WTP and the number of people
affected. Mean WTP for a risk change can be calculated easily from open-ended responses but
may be sensitive to outliers, some of which may be invalid “protest responses” in which the
respondent reports zero or a very large number as a way of rejecting the premise of the question.
In the case of a single dichotomous-choice question, the proportion of people willing to pay $z
provides a point estimate of the cumulative distribution of WTP. Plotting raw responses against
bid amounts provides an estimate of the distribution of sample WTP. A lower-bound estimate of
mean WTP may be obtained from these responses using a Turnbull estimator, which assumes
each individual’s WTP is equal to the largest bid he accepts (Turnbull 1974).

      In practice, mean WTP is estimated from dichotomous-choice data by assuming that
WTP is a function of covariates (i.e., WTPi = Xiβ + εi, where εi is an error term) and estimating
the parameter vector β making assumptions about the distribution of {εi}.For example, in the
case of a single dichotomous-choice question, if {εi} are independently and identically normally
distributed with zero mean and standard deviation σ, the probability that the respondent will not
pay more than zi is Φ(zi/σ - Xiβ/σ) where Φ is the standard normal distribution function. By
estimating a probit model with z and X as independent variables (Cameron and James 1987), one
obtains estimates of 1/σ and β/σ. Mean WTP (conditional on X) is computed as Xβ.25This


23 Payment cards that list alternative WTP amounts are sometimes used. Respondents are asked to circle the amount
that most closely matches their WTP or to circle the two numbers that bracket their WTP. A disadvantage is that
responses are sensitive to the range of values displayed on the card (a result that is well known to charities that
suggest specific donations).
24See   Alberini (1995) for more discussion of optimal bid design.
25Maximum   likelihood techniques can likewise be used to estimate the parameter vector β in the case of double-
bounded dichotomous-choice questions, given assumptions about the distribution of the error term.




                                                          17
approach also makes it possible to estimate the relationship between covariates (such as age and
income) and WTP. Because WTP is usually assumed to be non-negative and the distribution is
often skewed, with a long right tail, asymmetric distributions like the lognormal and Weibull are
frequently used. With these distributions, the mean is sensitive to the weight of the right tail,
which is not well estimated (because few respondents are in the tail) yet hypothetical bias may
induce some respondents to overstate their WTP, yielding too heavy a tail. As a result, median
WTP is often reported even though the mean is more relevant for benefit-cost analysis.

4.2. Issues with Responses and Data Analysis

Hypothetical Nature of Responses
        A major concern with stated-preference studies is that respondents may give different
answers than they would if facing real consequences. They may not take questions seriously (i.e.,
they may not give thoughtful responses), or they may say “yes” to payment questions to please
the interviewer (yea-saying) or say “no” to protest the scenario offered (nay-saying). If
respondents do not have to pay, they may not seriously consider their budget constraints.

        One method of addressing these concerns is to compare actual with stated WTP for
identical risk changes. There is a large literature comparing actual with stated WTP for other
commodities. For example, several experiments comparing hypothetical and actual WTP for
hunting permits have found no statistically significant difference (Dickie et al. 1987; Mitchell
and Carson 1989). Few such studies address mortality risks. Lanoie et al. (1995) conducted a CV
survey in Montreal and collected the information needed to develop hedonic wage estimates.
They found that the two approaches yielded different results but suggest that their sample may be
too limited to permit general conclusions. Hakes and Viscusi (2007) compared the VSL implied
by seatbelt use data with the VSL from a stated-preference study and found no statistically
significant difference.

        Tests of internal validity, which are now a standard part of most CV studies, are another
way of addressing concerns about the hypothetical nature of stated-preference surveys, as are
debriefing questions asked at the end of the survey.26 Internal validity can be evaluated by testing
whether estimated WTP is sensitive to factors that should affect it (such as the magnitude of the
risk change that is valued and the respondent’s income) and insensitive to factors that should not


26It   is possible to test for “yea” and “nay” saying (Alberini 2005), although this is rarely done.




                                                             18
affect it (such as small differences in baseline risk). WTP should increase with income. Indeed,
the income elasticity of WTP should exceed the coefficient of relative risk aversion (Eeckhoudt
and Hammitt 2001; Kaplow 2005). In most stated-preference studies, WTP increases with
income but the income elasticity is less than one (Hammitt and Robinson 2011).

        It is standard practice to debrief respondents at the end of a survey to see whether they
interpreted the questions as the researcher intended. For example, respondents in a mortality risk
survey may consider the morbidity that precedes death as well as mortality per se, even if no
mention was made of morbidity. Or they may believe that the risks associated with an
environmental contaminant are higher or lower than stated in the survey. Respondents are often
asked how confident they are in their responses. This information can be used to adjust WTP
either by removing some respondents from the sample or by statistically controlling for
respondent reactions.

Failure of WTP to Increase with the Size of the Risk Reduction
        Mortality risk survey designers often include scope tests to determine whether WTP to
reduce risk increases with the magnitude of the risk reduction. External scope tests compare
WTP between subsamples of respondents presented with different risk changes. These are
preferred to internal scope tests that compare WTP by the same respondents, as internal tests can
be influenced by respondents’ efforts to provide self-consistent responses. As described in
Section 2, WTP should increase approximately in proportion to the size of the risk reduction,
implying that VSL remains constant. External scope tests are usually interpreted as testing both
whether risk changes are interpreted by respondents in an objective fashion and whether
responses accord with theory.27
        Although many studies find that WTP increases with the size of the risk reduction, WTP
often fails to increase proportionately. Hammitt and Graham (1999) identified 25 studies that
estimated WTP for numerically specified health risk reductions published between 1980 and
1998. Of the nine studies that included external scope tests, WTP was significantly associated
with risk change in six but was never proportional to risk change. In a more recent review of
studies that examined the effect of age on VSL, Krupnick (2007) reports that 20 of the 28 studies


27Note that similar tests are not conducted in hedonicwage studies. To identify how respondents’ preferences vary
with the size of the risk change would requiring estimating workers’ bid functions (as in Biddle and Zarkin 1988)
but without imposing assumptions that restrict their shape.




                                                        19
that conducted scope tests show sensitivity to the size of the risk change but does not discuss the
extent to which the changes were proportional. Corso et al. (2001) tested the sensitivity of WTP
to risk change using several visual aids and external scope tests. They found that WTP was
proportional to the risk change using one visual aid and nearly so using another. However, even
in studies using these techniques, WTP often fails to increase in proportion to the size of the risk
reduction. For example, Alberini et al. (2004) found that mean WTP of U.S. respondents for a
reduction in risk of death of 5 in 1,000 over 10 years was about 1.6 times the WTP for a risk
reduction of 1 in 1,000.

        We believe that it is important for stated-preference studies to test for sensitivity to the
size of the risk reduction, both within and between groups of respondents. Passing at least a weak
form of the external scope test, in which WTP increases with risk reduction, should be a criterion
for an acceptable study. We note that in a recent dataset of stated-preference studies compiled by
U.S. EPA (2010a), only about half the estimates were subject to a scope test; of these, 90 percent
of the VSL estimates passed a weak external scope test but only 15 percent passed a strong form
of the test (which requires that WTP be nearly proportional to the risk reduction).

Sensitivity of Results to Econometric Analysis
        Although it is always possible to report the distribution of WTP responses based on raw
data, most articles report WTP estimates based on distributional assumptions. The nature of these
assumptions can have profound effects on estimates of mean WTP and on estimates of the
association of covariates with WTP (Alberini 2005). When WTP is assumed to have a normal or
logistic distribution, predicted WTP may be negative for a significant fraction of the sample and
can result in a mean WTP that is negative. This is sometimes handled by computing WTP based
on the positive portion of the WTP distribution (Johannesson et al. 1997) but more often by
assuming that WTP has a lognormal or Weibull distribution. Alberini (2005) illustrates the effect
of alternative distributional assumptions on estimates of mean WTP. For example, mean WTP
based on data from Johannesson et al. (1997) ranges from –2100 Swedish krona (SEK) using a
normal distribution to 2.9 million SEK using a Weibull distribution. The sensitivity of WTP to
distributional assumptions should be tested in all studies.

4.3. Empirical Estimates of VSL from Stated Preference Studies
       Over the past 10 years, the number of stated-preference studies estimating VSL has
increased significantly. The 26 VSL estimates that the U.S. EPA has used in its analyses for
many years (USEPA 2010b) include only 5 from stated-preference studies, based on reviews



                                                 20
published almost 20 years ago (Viscusi 1992, Viscusi 1993.). In contrast, the recent OECD
review (Lindhjem et al. 2010) identified 68 stated-preference VSL studies (incorporating 75
surveys) that have been conducted since 1970. More than half of these studies were completed in
2000 or later.

Meta-Analysis of Stated Preference Studies
       With the increase in stated-preference research, new meta-analyses are emerging that
separately consider these studies. In Table 2, we summarize the meta-analyses that include only
stated-preference studies or provide results separately for stated- and revealed-preference studies.
As noted earlier, Kochi et al. use a Bayesian approach, as do Dekker et al.; the Lindhjem et al.
OECD study is based on meta-regression. These meta-analyses do not provide estimates solely
for the United States, although most of the studies included were conducted in high-income
countries. Each meta-analysis combines studies that address environmental, health, and traffic
risks; although traffic risks dominate the older studies, an increasing number of studies now
address other causes of death.28 The resulting VSL estimates range from about $2 million to $8
million (2009 USD).




28We  exclude the de Blaeij et al. (2003) meta-analysis from this discussion because it focuses exclusively on traffic
safety.




                                                          21
                                Table 2. Stated Preference Meta-Analyses

                                                                         Highlighted VSL estimates
                                Publication dates of
                                 underlying studies                 As reported               Inflated to 2009
                                                      a
        Meta-analysis           (number of studies)                (dollar year)b                   USDc

                              1988–2002                   $2.8 million
Kochi et al. (2006)                                                                        $3.5 million
                              (14)                        (2000)
                              1983–2008                   $2.4 million–$7.5 milliond       $2.7 million–$8.5
Dekker et al. (2011)
                              (26)                        (2004)                           million
                              1982–2007                   $2.9 million
Lindhjem et al.(2010)e                                                                     $3.2 million
                              (26)e                       (2005)
a. Stated-preference studies only. Kochi et al. also consider revealed-preference studies.
b. Dekker et al. and Lindhjem et al. estimates are taken from the discussion of values for benefit
transfer.
c. Adjusted for inflation using the Consumer Price Index, All Urban Consumers. Not adjusted for
income growth over time.
d. Range reflects mean estimates for road safety ($2.4 million), air pollution ($4.4 million), and
general health ($7.5 million) scenarios (2004 USD).
e. Based on personal communication with Henrik Lindhjem, March 2011. Dates reflect when the
data were collected rather than when the study was published; count reflects number of surveys
used to develop the estimate in the next column rather than the number of studies. The
highlighted estimate is the median for OECD countries.

        In contrast to results valuing environmental quality, stated-preference studies of the value
of mortality risk reduction tend to yield smaller estimates than hedonic wage studies. For
example, in the Kochi et al. (2006) meta-analysis, the authors use Bayesian methods to compare
the distributions of estimates from hedonic wage and CV studies. They estimate the mean value
of the hedonic wage distribution as $9.6 million, significantly larger than the $2.8 million mean
for the CV studies (2000 USD).

        Lindhjem et al., as well as a European study by Kluve and Schaffner (2008),29 find that
studies focused on traffic and environmental risks tend to yield higher VSLs than studies focused


29   Kluve and Schaffner (2008) are excluded from Table 2 because they include only European studies.




                                                          22
on health risks. In contrast, Dekker et al. find similar results for air pollution and unspecified
causes and lower values for road safety. Although these diverse findings result in part from
differences in the underlying studies as well as differences in statistical approach, they also
suggest substantial VSL heterogeneity.

         These meta-analyses, as well as the hedonic wage meta-analyses discussed earlier, differ
in the universe of studies they consider and in the criteria they apply to select studies and
estimates for their analyses. Kochi et al. and the older hedonic wage meta-analyses build on
criteria originally developed by Viscusi (1992); some of the newer studies apply more restrictive
criteria. Lindhjem et al. include the largest number of estimates and test the effects of different
exclusion criteria as well as different model specifications.

The Impact of Age and Cause of Death on VSL
        Age and cause of death are two important features of mortality risk whose effect on VSL
can, in principle, be studied using stated-preference methods. Such studies can measure the effect
of respondent characteristics on WTP, assuming there is sufficient variation in these
characteristics in the sample. To measure the effect of age independently of income or wealth,
these variables must be measured in the survey and included in the final model. A good study
allows age to enter the WTP function in a flexible form and demonstrates that results are robust
to alternative specifications of the error term.

        Age. Based on a review of 26 studies, Krupnick (2007) concludes that stated-preference
studies provide little evidence of a substantial decline in VSL with age; however, few studies
provide clear tests of the effect of age on VSL. Ideally, the effect of age would be tested by using
a series of dummy variables or other flexible specification rather than by imposing a linear or
quadratic form on age. Few studies report results using a flexible functional form. Moreover, to
measure the effect of age per se, studies should control for variables that may affect WTP and are
likely to be correlated with age, such as income and wealth. No studies of which we are aware
control for respondent wealth because these data are difficult to collect.

       Stated-preference studies that address risks to children suggest that reducing these risks
may be valued more highly than reductions for adults (e.g., Hammitt and Haninger 2010).
However, Blomquist et al. (2011), in a stated-preference study that considers drugs which control
asthma symptoms but also increase fatality risks, find that the relationship of VSL to age is
complex, declining from age 4 to 30, increasing from 30 to 66, and declining for older ages.




                                                  23
        Cause of death. An important issue in valuing environmental risks is whether a different
VSL should be used when valuing risk of death from different causes (e.g., different diseases).
European Union and United Kingdom guidance for impact assessment prescribe using a larger
VSL for cancer because of the dreaded nature of the disease (European Commission 2000; H.M.
Treasury 2003). In stated-preference studies, the effect of cancer is studied by varying the cause
of death across valuation questions, holding other aspects of the risk constant. Risk-risk trade-off
studies, in which the respondent chooses between options offering different changes in risk of
death from various causes, also provide relevant information.30 A salient issue in valuing the
effect of cancer is the timing of the risk. If a latency period precedes the development of cancer,
then any discounting may be confounded with the cause of death. The survey must also make
clear whether the respondent should consider the morbidity that precedes death.

        The empirical evidence on the effect of cancer on VSL is mixed. In a telephone survey in
Taiwan, Hammitt and Liu (2004) elicited WTP to reduce risk of a fatal cancer or noncancer
disease presenting the same symptoms and prognosis. The authors found that respondents were
willing to pay 30 percent more, on average, to reduce the risk of cancer than of the noncancer
disease. Van Houtven et al. (2008) conducted a risk trade-off study in which respondents were
asked to choose among residential locations presenting different risks of several types of latent
cancer and motor vehicle fatality. They found that respondents valued the cancer risks more than
the motor vehicle risk with a differential that decreased with latency of the cancer from a factor
of 3 for a 5-year latency to a factor of 1.5 for a 25-year latency.

        In contrast, neither Hammitt and Haninger (2010) nor Adamowicz et al. (2009) find a
cancer risk premium in recent stated-preference studies. Hammitt and Haninger (2010) find
similar values for mortality risks from cancers, other diseases, and auto accidents. Adamowicz et
al. (2009) find that the value of reducing cancer risks is slightly smaller than that for microbial
risks (although the differences are often statistically insignificant).




30 In a typical risk-risk study, respondents are asked whether they would prefer to live in a city with a risk of death
from cancer of x and a risk of death in a traffic accident of y, or in an otherwise identical city with a risk of death
from cancer of w and a risk of death in a traffic accident of v. The rate of substitution between the two risks can be
estimated by varying the risk levels across respondents or by adjusting the risks until a respondent is indifferent
between the two cities.




                                                           24
5. Conclusions
        For many years, mortality risk reductions associated with environmental policies have
been valued based on research conducted over 20 years ago, as reviewed in Viscusi (1992, 1993)
and incorporated into current EPA guidance (U.S. EPA 2010b). These values are derived
primarily from hedonic wage studies, which do not address the types of illnesses and
subpopulations most likely to be affected by environmental exposures. In addition, the data and
methods used in these studies have improved substantially in recent years, and a number of new
stated-preference studies now provide estimates for different types of risks and affected
populations. In past analyses (e.g., U.S. EPA 2011), analysts have tested the sensitivity of the
results to different VSL estimates and/or to adjustments in the VSL to better fit the policy
scenario. Our review suggests that it is time to replace the older set of studies with newer results.

        Substantial improvements have been made in the conduct of hedonic wage studies. Over
the past 35 years, dozens of these studies have been conducted in the United States and other
high-income countries; however, many of the older studies suffer from both data and
econometric problems. Chief among these are reliance on older and less accurate sources of risk
data, the sensitivity of the coefficient on risk to inclusion and omission of other variables, and the
endogeneity of job risk. For the United States, the first problem has been effectively addressed
by creation of the Census of Fatal Occupational Injuries, which is a census rather than a sample
and includes substantially improved confirmation of the data. The first hedonic wage study
relying on these data was published in 2003.

        Progress has also been made on the second and third issues. Newer studies often control
for both occupation and industry, as well as for nonfatal job risk and worker’s compensation.
However, collinearity continues to be a challenge, motivating a continuing search for datasets
where this is less problematic. The emergence of studies that use panel rather than cross-
sectional data is an important advance. Use of instrumental variables and data from natural
experiments may also aid in addressing the endogeneity of occupational risk.

       The newer hedonic wage literature has not yet been synthesized in a meta-analysis. The
meta-analyses available generally include studies that date back to the early 1970s; they have not
analyzed the more recent and methodologically superior studies. At minimum, such studies
should use CFOI risk data and control for industry and occupation as well as nonfatal risks.

       Although hedonic wage studies are limited in the types of risk and populations included,
they provide insight into the magnitude of VSL and its variation with age. Some recent studies
suggest an inverted-U relationship between VSL and age for working-age adults, while others


                                                 25
suggest that this relationship may be more complex. In addition, some newer studies attempt to
distinguish different types of job-related risks, suggesting heterogeneous values. However,
irresolvable differences remain between the populations and risks addressed by hedonic wage
studies and those affected by environmental programs. The importance of these differences, as
well as possible adjustments, cannot be determined without turning to the stated-preference
literature.

        The stated-preference literature now includes many studies that address deaths associated
with environmental hazards (cancers, heart disease, and respiratory disease), supplementing
earlier studies that often focused on traffic safety. An increasing number of studies addresses
populations older and younger (and potentially in poorer health) than the working-age
individuals included in hedonic wage studies. While respondents’ difficulty in comprehending
small risks continues to pose challenges, researchers have developed a better understanding of
how to present risk concepts and elicit WTP. In addition, increased emphasis on validity tests is
improving interpretation of the results.

        The growing number of stated-preference studies has allowed the increased use of meta-
analysis. However, meta-analyses of stated-preference studies to date vary in the extent to which
they exclude methodologically-deficient studies and lead to conflicting findings on how the
value of environmental risk reductions compare to the value of risk reductions from other causes.
The set of studies that satisfy reasonable criteria for relevance and quality remains small. At
minimum, stated-preference studies should demonstrate that WTP is sensitive to the size of the
risk change as an indicator that respondents understand what they are being asked to value.

         While focusing on newer studies that meet these types of basic criteria for quality will
improve the values used in environmental policy analysis, a number of issues continue to need
further exploration. Overall, VSL estimates from stated-preference studies appear consistently
smaller than those estimated from hedonic wage studies. To some extent, these differences may
result from the populations and types of risks each addresses. However, these differences may
also reflect the strengths and weaknesses of each methodology and require more exploration.

        Despite many recent studies of the effects of age on VSL, significant uncertainty remains,
particularly for the very old and the very young. Given that older populations are often
disproportionately affected by mortality risks from environmental causes and that children are
often of significant concern for policymaking, greater focus on the values appropriate for these
age groups is needed.




                                                26
        An increasing number of stated-preference studies focus on fatal illness such as cancers,
heart disease, and respiratory conditions. Yet the variation of VSL by cause of death remains
unclear. More attention should be directed to how these illnesses are defined and compared, as
well as to addressing other challenges faced in stated preference research.

       Finally, structural models that combine information about risk, income, leisure, savings,
and other behaviors can provide a unified framework for characterizing preferences and may
yield more consistent estimates of how VSL varies among individuals. However, more work is
needed to refine these models and to determine the most useful data sources (Smith et al., 2002,
2006, USEPA 2010a).

        Research on VSL has come a long way in recent years. Revealed-preference research has
exploited new data sets and new statistical methods, and stated-preference research has expanded
its coverage to different populations and types of risks. However, these types of research remain
challenging. Given the importance of the value of mortality risk reductions to understanding the
benefits of environmental policies, further research is warranted.

References
Adamowicz, W., D. Dupont, A. Krupnick, and J. Zhang. 2009. “Valuation of Cancer and
     Microbial Disease Risk Reductions in Municipal Drinking Water: An Analysis of Risk
     Context Using Multiple Valuation Methods.” Unpublished manuscript.

Alberini, A. 1995. “Optimal Designs for Discrete Choice Contingent Valuation Surveys: Single-
       Bound, Double-Bound and Bivariate Models.” Journal of Environmental Economics and
       Management28: 187–306.

———. 2005. “What Is a Life Worth? Robustness of VSL Values from Contingent Valuation
   Surveys.” Risk Analysis 25(4).

Alberini, A., M. Cropper, A. Krupnick, and N. Simon. 2004. “Does the Value of a Statistical Life
       Vary with Age and Health Status? Evidence from the US and Canada.” Journal of
       Environmental Economics and Management 48:769–92.

Alberini, A.,S.Tonin, M.Turvani, and A.Chiabai. 2007. “Paying for Permanence: Public
       Preferences for Contaminated Site Cleanup.” The Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 34:
       155–78.

Aldy, J.E., and W.K. Viscusi. 2007. “Age Differences in the Value of Statistical Life: Revealed
       Preference Evidence.” Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 1(2): 241–60.


                                                27
———. 2008. “Adjusting the Value of a Statistical Life for Age and Cohort Effects.” Review of
   Economics and Statistics 90(3): 573–81.

Arabsheibani, G.R., and A. Marin. 2000. “Stability of Estimates of the Compensation for
      Danger.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 20(3): 247–69.

———. 2001. “Union Membership and the Union Wage Gap in the UK.” Labour: Review of
   Labour Economics & Industrial Relations 15(2): 221–36.

Bellavance, F., G. Dionne, and M. Lebeau. 2009. “The Value of a Statistical Life: A Meta-
       Analysis with a Mixed Effects Regression Model.” Journal of Health Economics 28:
       444–64.

Biddle, J.E., and G.A. Zarkin. 1988. “Worker Preference and Market Compensation for Job
       Risk.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 70(4): 660–67.

Black, D.A., and T.J. Kniesner. 2003. “On the Measurement of Job Risk in Hedonic Wage
       Models.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 27(3): 205–20.

Black, D.A., J. Galdo, and L. Liu 2003. “How Robust are Hedonic Wage Estimates of the Price
       of Risk?” Prepared for the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.

Blomquist, G. 2004. “Self-Protection and Averting Behavior, Values of Statistical Lives, and
      Benefit Cost Analysis of Environmental Policy.” Review of the Economics of the
      Household 2: 89–110.

Blomquist, G.C., M. Dickie, and R. M. O’Conor. 2011. “Willingness to Pay for Improving
      Fatality Risks and Asthma Symptoms: Values for Children and Adults of All Ages.”
       Resource and Energy Economics.
Bowland, B.J., and J.C. Beghin. 2001. “Robust Estimates of Value of a Statistical Life for
      Developing Economies.” Journal of Policy Modeling 23(4): 385–96.

Brown, C. 1980. “Equalizing Differences in the Labor Market.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
      94(1): 113–34.

Cameron, T.A., and M. D. James. 1987. “Efficient Estimation Methods for Closed-Ended
      Contingent Valuation Surveys.” Review of Economics and Statistics 69(2): 269–76.

Cameron, T.A. and J.R. DeShazo. 2008. “Demand for Health Risk Reductions.” Unpublished
      manuscript.




                                               28
Cameron. T.A. 2010. “Euthanizing the Value of a Statistical Life.” Review of Environmental
      Economics and Policy, 4(2): 161–78.

Cameron. T.A., J.R. DeShazo, and P. Stiffler. 2010. “Demand for Health Risk Reductions: A
      Cross-national Comparison Between the U.S. and Canada.” Journal of Risk and
      Uncertainty, 41:245–273.

Corso, P.S., J.K. Hammitt, and J.D. Graham. 2001. “Valuing Mortality-Risk Reduction: Using
       Visual Aids to Improve the Validity of Contingent Valuation.” Journal of Risk and
       Uncertainty 23(2): 165–84.

De Blaeij, A., J.G. Raymond, M. Florax, P.Rietveld, and E.Verhoef. 2003. “The Value of
      Statistical Life in Road Safety: A Meta-Analysis.” Accident Analysis &Prevention 35(6):
      973–86.

Dekker, T., R. Brouwer, M. Hofkes, and K. Moeltner. 2011. “The Effect of Risk Context on the
      Value of a Statistical Life: A Bayesian Meta-Model.” Environmental and Resource
      Economics. forthcoming.

Deliere, T., S. Khan and C. Timmins. 2009. “Roy Model Sorting and Non-Random Selection in
       the Valuation of a Statistical Life.” Unpublished manuscript.

Dickie, M., A. Fisher and S. Gerking. 1987. “Market Transactions and Hypothetical Demand
       Data: A Comparative Study.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 82(397):
       69–75.

Dillingham, A. 1985. “The Influence of Risk Variable Definition on Value of Life Estimates.”
       Economic Inquiry 23(2): 277–94.
Dorman, P., and P. Hagstrom. 1998. “Wage Compensation for Dangerous Work
     Revisited.”Industrial and Labor Relations Review 52(1):116–135.

Eeckhoudt, L.R., and J.K. Hammitt. 2001. “Background Risks and the Value of Statistical Life.”
      Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 23(3): 261–79.

European Commission. 2000. Recommended Interim Values for the Value of Preventing a
      Fatality in DG Environment Cost Benefit Analysis.

Evans, M.F. and V.K. Smith. 2006. “Do We Really Understand the Age-VSL Relationship?”
       Resource and Energy Economics. 28, 242-261.




                                              29
Evans, M.F., and V.K. Smith. 2008. “Complementarity and the Measurement of Individual Risk
       Tradeoffs: Accounting for Quantity and Quality of Life Effects.” Environmental and
       Resource Economics. 41(3), 381-400.

Gegax, D., S. Gerking, and W. Schulze. 1991. “Perceived Risk and the Marginal Value of
       Safety.” Review of Economics and Statistics 73, 4: 589–96.

Gerking, S., M. DeHaan, M., and W. Schulze. 1988. “The Marginal Value of Job Safety: A
      Contingent Valuation Study.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 1: 185–200.

Hakes, J.J., and W.K. Viscusi. 2007. “Automobile Seatbelt Usage and the Value of Statistical
       Life.” Southern Economic Journal 73(3): 659–76.

Hammitt, J.K. 2000. “Valuing Mortality Risk: Theory and Practice.” Environmental Science and
     Technology 34: 1396–400.

Hammitt, J.K., and J.D. Graham. 1999. “Willingness to Pay for Health Protection: Inadequate
     Sensitivity to Probability?” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 18(1): 33–62.

Hammitt, J.K., and K. Haninger. 2010. “Valuing Fatal Risks to Children and Adults: Effects of
     Disease, Latency, and Risk Aversion.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 40: 57–83.

Hammitt, J.K. and J-T. Liu. 2004. “Effects of Disease Type and Latency on the Value of
     Mortality Risk.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty. 28(1), 73–95.

Hammitt, J.K., and L.A. Robinson. 2011. “The Income Elasticity of the Value per Statistical
     Life: Transferring Estimates between High and Low Income Populations.” Journal of
     Benefit-Cost Analysis 2(1): Art. 1.

Hammitt, J.K., and N. Treich. 2007. “Statistical vs. Identified Lives in Benefit-Cost Analysis.”
     Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 35: 45–66.

Hintermann, B., A. Alberini, and A. Markandya. 2010. “Estimating the Value of Safety with
       Labour Market Data: Are the Results Trustworthy?” Applied Economics 42(7–9): 1085–
       100.

H.M. Treasury. 2003. The Green Book: Appraisal and Evaluation in Central Government.

Hwang, H.-S., W.R. Reed, and C. Hubbard. 1992. “Compensating Wage Differentials and
     Unobserved Productivity.” The Journal of Political Economy 100(4): 835–58.




                                                30
Johannesson, M., P-O. Johansson, and K-G. Lofgren. 1997. “On the Value of Changes in Life
      Expectancy: Blips Versus Parametric Changes.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty. 15,
      221-239.

Kaplow, L. 2005. “The Value of a Statistical Life and the Coefficient of Relative Risk
      Aversion.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty. 31(1): 23–34.

Kluve, J., and S. Schaffner. 2008. “The Value of Life in Europe—A Meta-Analysis.” Sozialer
       Fortschritt 10–11: 279–87.

Kniesner, T.J., W.K. Viscusi, C. Woock, and J.P. Ziliak. 2011. “The Value of Statistical Life:
      Evidence from Panel Data.” Working Paper 11-02. Vanderbilt University Law School,
      Law and Economics (forthcoming in the Review of Economics and Statistics).

Kniesner, T.J., W.K. Viscusi, and J.P. Ziliak. 2010. “Policy Relevant Heterogeneity in the Value
      of Statistical Life: New Evidence from Panel Data Quantile Regressions.”Journal of Risk
      and Uncertainty 40(1): 15–31.

Kochi, I., B. Hubbell, and R. Kramer. 2006. “An Empirical Bayes Approach to Combining and
       Comparing Estimates of the Value of a Statistical Life for Environmental Policy
       Analysis.” Environmental and Resource Economics 34: 385–406.

Krueger, A.B., and L.H. Summers. 1988. “Efficiency Wages and the Inter-Industry Wage
      Structure.” Econometrica 56(2): 259–93.

Krupnick, A. 2007. “Mortality-risk Valuation and Age: Stated Preference Evidence.” Review of
      Environmental Economics and Policy 1(2): 261–82.

Krupnick, A., M. Cropper, A. Alberini, N. Simon, B. O’Brien, and R. Goeree. 2002. “Age,
      Health and the Willingness to Pay for Mortality Risk Reductions: A Contingent
      Valuation Survey of Ontario Residents.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 24(2): 161–75.

Lanoie, P., C. Pedro, and R. Latour. 1995. “The Value of a Statistical Life: A Comparison of
       Two Approaches.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty10: 235–57.

Leigh, J. 1995. “Compensating Wages, Value of a Statistical Life, and Inter-Industry
       Differentials.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 28(1): 83–97.

Lindhjem, H., S. Navrud, and N.A. Braathen. 2010. Valuing Lives Saved from Environmental,
       Transport, and Health Policies: A Meta-Analysis of Stated Preference Studies. Prepared
       for the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development.
       ENV/EPOC/WPNEP(2008)10/FINAL.


                                               31
Liu, J-T., and J.K. Hammitt. 1999. “Perceived Risk and the Value of Workplace Safety in a
        Developing Country.” Journal of Risk Research 2(3): 263–75.

Liu, J-T., J.K. Hammitt, and J.-L.Liu. 1997. “Estimated Hedonic Wage Function and Value of
        Life in a Developing Country.” Economic Letters 57(3): 353–58.

Lott, John R., Jr., and R.L. Manning. 2000. “Have Changing Liability Rules Compensated
        Workers Twice for Occupational Hazards?”The Journal of Legal Studies 29(1): 99–130.

Miller, T.R. 2000. “Variations between Countries in Values of Statistical Life.” Journal of
        Transport Economics and Safety 34(2): 169–88.

Mitchell, R.C., and R.T. Carson. 1989. Using Surveys to Value Public Goods: The Contingent
       Valuation Method. Washington, DC: Resources for the Future.

Mrozek, J.R., and L.O. Taylor. 2002. “What Determines the Value of Life? A Meta-Analysis.”
      Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 21(2): 253–70.

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. 1993. “Natural Resource Damage
       Assessments under the Oil Pollution Act of 1990.” Federal Register 58(10): 4601–14.

Robinson, L.A. 2007. “How U.S. Government Agencies Value Mortality Risk Reductions.”
      Review of Environmental Economics and Policy. 1(2), 283-299.

Robinson, L.A., and J.K. Hammitt. 2011. “Valuing Health and Longevity in Regulatory
      Analysis: Current Issues and Challenges.” In D. Levi-Faur (ed.), Handbook on the
      Politics of Regulation. Cheltenham, UK, and Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar.

Scotton, C.R., and L.O. Taylor. 2011. “Valuing Risk Reductions: Incorporating Risk
       Heterogeneity into a Revealed Preference Framework.” Resource and Energy Economics.
       In press.

Shogren, J.F., and T. Stamland. 2002. “Skill and the Value of Life.” Journal of Political
      Economy 110(5): 1168–73.

Smith, V.K., G.L.VanHoutven, and S.K. Pattanayak, 2002. “Benefit Transfer via Preference
       Calibration: Prudential Algebra for Policy.” Land Economics 78(1): 132-152.

Smith, V.K., M.F. Evans, H. Kim, and D.H. Taylor Jr. 2004. “Do the Near-Elderly Value
       Mortality Risks Differently?” Review of Economics and Statistics 86(1): 423-429.

Smith, V.K., S.K. Pattanayak, and G.L.VanHoutven, 2006. “Structural Benefit Transfer: An
       Example Using VSL Estimates.” Ecological Economics 60: 361-371.



                                                32
Thaler, R., and S. Rosen. 1976. “The Value of Saving a Life: Evidence from the Labor Market.”
        In N. Terleckyz (ed.), Household Production and Consumption. New York: Columbia
        University Press.

Turnbull, B.W. 1974. Nonparametric estimation of a survivorship function with doubly censored
      data. Journal of the American Statistical Association 69: 169–73.

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 2010a. Valuing Mortality Risk Reductions for
       Environmental Policy: A White Paper. Prepared for consultation with the Science
       Advisory Board–Environmental Economics Advisory Committee.

———. 2010b. Guidelines for Preparing Economic Analysis. EPA 240-R-10-001.

———. 2011. The Benefits and Costs of the Clean Air Act: 1990 to 2020.Washington, DC.

U.S. Office of Management and Budget. 2010. 2010 Report to Congress on the Benefits and
       Costs of Federal Regulations and Unfunded Mandates on State, Local, and Tribal
       Entities.
Van Houtven, G., M.B. Sullivan, and C. Dockins. 2008. Cancer Premiums and Latency Effects:
      A Risk Tradeoff Approach for Valuing Reductions in Fatal Cancer Risks. Journal of Risk
      and Uncertainty, 36, 179-199.

Viscusi, W.K. 1992. Fatal Trade-Offs: Public and Private Responsibilities for Risk. New York:
       Oxford University Press.

———.1993. “The Value of Risks to Life and Health.” Journal of Economic Literature.31:
   1912–46.
———. 2003. “Racial Differences in Labor Market Values of a Statistical Life.” Journal of Risk
       and Uncertainty 27(3): 239–56.

———. 2004. “The Value of Life: Estimates with Risks by Occupation and Industry.” Economic
   Inquiry 42(1): 29–48.

———. 2009. “The Devaluation of Life.” Regulation & Governance 3, 103-127.

Viscusi, W.K., and J.E. Aldy. 2003. “The Value of a Statistical Life: A Critical Review of
       Market Estimates Throughout the World.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 27(1): 5–76.

Viscusi, W.K., and J. Hersch. 2001. “Cigarette Smokers as Job Risk Takers.” Review of
       Economics and Statistics 83(2): 269–80.




                                              33
Viscusi, W.K., and M.J. Moore. 1991. “Worker Learning and Compensating Differentials.”
       Industrial and Labor Relations Review 45(1): 80–96.




                                            34
