                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          BANK FINANCE VERSUS BOND FINANCE

                                           Fiorella De Fiore
                                             Harald Uhlig

                                         Working Paper 16979
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16979


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2011




This research has been supported by the NSF grant SES-0922550. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Fiorella De Fiore and Harald Uhlig. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Bank Finance Versus Bond Finance
Fiorella De Fiore and Harald Uhlig
NBER Working Paper No. 16979
April 2011, Revised April 2011
JEL No. C68,E20,E44

                                             ABSTRACT

We present a dynamic general equilibrium model with agency costs where: i) firms are heterogeneous
in the risk of default; ii) they can choose to raise finance through bank loans or corporate bonds; and
iii) banks are more efficient than the market in resolving informational problems. The model is used
to analyze some major long-run differences in corporate finance between the US and the euro area.
We suggest an explanation of those differences based on information availability. Our model replicates
the data when the euro area is characterized by limited availability of public information about corporate
credit risk relative to the US, and when european firms value more than US firms the flexibility and
information acquisition role provided by banks.


Fiorella De Fiore
European Central Bank
Postfach 160319
D-60066 Frankfurt am Main, GERMANY
fiorella.De_fiore@ecb.int

Harald Uhlig
Dept. of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 E 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
huhlig@uchicago.edu
1    Introduction

Is there a special role of banks in lending? How do bank loans relate to non-intermediated
corporate finance raised directly from the financial market? A strikingly robust message from
contemporaneous theories of financial intermediation is that banks are more eﬃcient than the
market in resolving informational problems through screening and monitoring. Several reasons
have been put forward: banks have scale economies and comparative advantages in the pro-
duction of information and in debt-related monitoring (Diamond (1984)); they have access to
inside information, whereas debt holders in capital markets have to rely on publicy available
information (Fama (1985)); and banks have better incentives to invest in information acquisi-
tion because of their relatively large stake in the funding of the borrower (Boot and Thakor
(2009)). Empirical studies have confirmed the special role of banks in resolving informational
asymmetries. They have also shown that this role has survived the steady reduction of banks’
lending exposure to a single borrower over the recent decade, through the development of
securitization and a secondary market for loans (Gande and Saunders (2006)).
    In this paper, we ask whether a theory that recognizes a special informational role for banks
can account for the behaviour of standard macroeconomic variables as well as the structure of
corporate finance. In particular, we aim at replicating some diﬀerences between the US and
the euro area in key facts such as the composition of debt finance, the debt to equity ratio,
the cost of bank finance relative to the cost of bond finance, the corporate default rate, and
the return to the accumulation of firm capital.
    We cast the informational role of banks into a dynamic general equilibrium model, where
firms can choose among diﬀerent debt instruments. The model is characterized by three fea-
tures. First, firms need to raise external finance in order to finance production but they have
private information about a productivity factor (as in Carlstrom and Fuerst (1997, 1998), and
Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (1999), among others). Second, firms experience a sequence
of three idiosyncratic productivity shocks, the first being realized before firms take financing
decisions, and the third determining the default decision. Third, we introduce two types of
financial intermediaries — commercial banks, oﬀering bank financing, and capital mutual funds
(CMFs), oﬀering bond financing.      We assume that banks are institutions which have close
relationships with entrepreneurs, acquiring costly additional information about their second
productivity shock and adapting the terms of the debt financing arrangements accordingly,


                                                2
while market bond financing relies on publicly available information about the first productiv-
ity shock only. Because banks spend resources to acquire information and arrange financing
accordingly, the bond financing choice is less costly but also riskier for a firm than bank finance.
Our distinction raises the rather fundamental and well-known question of where to draw the
line between a firm and the market, see Williamson (2002), i.e. what is the diﬀerence between
transactions carried out on the market rather than inside a firm called a bank? We do not
oﬀer a fundamental resolution.      Indeed, if a reader wishes to rather interpret our banks as
rating agencies, to which entrepreneurs pay a fee for a public report before obtaining tailor-
made market bond financing based on the reports of the agencies, she could.           However, we
interpret these institutions as banks, as the line between markets and banks has to be drawn
somewhere, and as we find it reasonable to draw the line here.
   We show that, in our model, firms experiencing high risk of default choose to abstain from
production, while firms with relatively low risk choose to raise external finance through bonds.
Only firms with intermediate degrees of risk choose to sign a contract with banks, because
they value the option of getting further information before deciding whether or not to produce.
This equilibrium feature of our model is in line with theories of corporate finance arguing that,
because bank loans are easier to renegotiate than corporate bonds, firms with relatively higher
ex-ante credit risk find the option oﬀered by banks to renegotiate more valuable (Berlin and
Mester (1992)). It is also in line with existing empirical evidence showing that firms with
relatively higher credit quality (as measured by higher ratio of fixed assets to total assets,
credit rating, and profitability) choose to finance through public debt, while firms with lower
credit quality choose to finance through bank loans (Denis and Mihov (2003)).
   Our modelling assumptions also find support in the existing literature. The distinction we
introduce between banks and CMFs is consistent with recent theories of financial intermedia-
tion. Banks treat diﬀerently firms in situations of financial distress because they are long-term
players in the debt market, while bondholders are not. By acquiring information about firms,
banks minimize the probability of ineﬃcient liquidation, build a reputation for financial flexi-
bility and attract firms that are likely to face temporary situations of distress (Chemmanur and
Fulghieri (1994)). Our modelling of banks also reflects the idea that information acquisition
during the relationship with a firm leads to greater contractual flexibility relative to the one
oﬀered by financial markets (Boot, Greenbaum and Thakor (1993)).



                                                 3
   The contribution of our paper is twofold. First, we embed firms’ heterogeneity in a dynamic
general equilibrium model where financial contracts are optimal, without giving up analytical
tractability. Firms’ financing decisions are a function only of the distributional assumptions
about the idiosyncratic shocks and of an aggregate markup variable, which acts as a summary
statistic of the economy. Linearity in the firm’s net worth allows to aggregate easily across
firms, so the economy can be described by a system of aggregate conditions similar to those
arising in models without heterogeneity.
   Second, we calibrate the model to replicate some key facts about corporate finance in the
US and the euro area. Some ingredients of our model, such as the degree of heterogeneity
of firms in the risk of default or the uncertainty that banks are able to disclose about firms’
productivity, cannot be confronted directly with the data because of limited empirical evidence.
Our calibration procedure oﬀers an indirect estimation of those unobserved characteristics. We
can thus oﬀer an explanation of the documented diﬀerences based on a structural model.
   A broad literature claims that corporate finance diﬀerences are largely explained by legal
systems and institutional settings (see e.g. La Porta et al. (1997)). It is argued that countries
with more eﬀective legal protection of shareholders and creditors (e.g. common law countries
such as the UK and the US) are those where entrepreneurs have higher valuation of securities
and broader access to capital markets relative to countries with lower legal protection (e.g.
civil law countries such as France, Germany and most countries whose legal system is based
on Roman law). Thus, theories of legal determinants would predict - everything else equal -
a larger role of market finance relative to intermediated finance, and easier access to equity
finance, for firms in the US than in the euro area. These theories also predict that better legal
protection enables financiers to oﬀer entrepreneurs external finance at better terms in the US
rather than Europe.
   The empirical evidence - such as the lower share of bank finance in total debt finance and
debt to equity ratio in the US relative to the euro area - indeed provides support to the idea that
legal and institutional factors are a major determinant of firms’ financial structure. However,
the data also show that the interest rate spreads on bank loans are higher in the US than in
the euro area, while there is no significant diﬀerences in spreads on bond finance. This is at
odds with the lower-cost implication of higher legal protection in the US, but we show it to be
consistent with our model, which emphasizes diﬀerences in fundamentals. Our model explains
these diﬀerences as due to relatively lower availability of public information about firms’ credit

                                                4
worthiness and higher need for the flexibility and information acquisition role oﬀered by banks
in the euro area. We therefore view our model as providing an important complement and
addition to an explanation which is based entirely on legal determinants. In this paper, we use
the model to explain the entire US-euro area diﬀerences for several key statistics. While the
truth may lie in between, our exercise shows that a legal determinants theory is not needed to
explain the diﬀerences, and therefore provides an alternative explanation.
        The paper proceeds as follows. In section 2, we describe the environment. In section 3, we
present the analysis. In section 4, we illustrate the main qualitative properties of the model. In
section 5, we use the model to provide an explanation of corporate finance diﬀerences between
the US and the euro area based on fundamentals. In section 6, we conclude.


2        The Model

We cast the diﬀerent role of corporate bonds and bank loans into a dynamic general equilibrium
model with credit market frictions, where we maintain the assumption of one-period maturity
of the debt.
        The economy is inhabited by identical infinitely-lived households, a continuum of heteroge-
neous firms owned by infinitely lived risk-neutral entrepreneurs, and two types of zero-profits
financial intermediaries (here onwards FIs). Each firm, indexed by  ∈ [0 1]  starts the period
with some physical capital. It hires additional capital as well as labor, financed externally.
        Two key ingredients allow to introduce a non-trivial choice of firms among alternative
instruments of external finance. The first is the existence of two distinct types of FIs, where
banks are willing to spend resources to acquire information about an unobserved productivity
factor, while CMFs are not. The second key ingredient is a sequence of three idiosyncratic
productivity shocks hitting each firm. The first shock, 1  is publicly observed and realizes
before firms take financial and production decisions. The second shock, 2  is not observed
by anyone. Information on the realization of this shock can be acquired by the bank at a
cost, in exchange of an up-front fee paid by the firm1 . The third shock, 3  realizes after
borrowing occurs and is observable to the entrepreneur only. It can be monitored at a cost
    1
        An alternative interpretation is to view “banks” in this model as “consultants”, examining the business
plans of firms, or to view them as originators of asset-backed securities, by providing screening and monitoring
of applicants. Indeed, the banking sector has moved towards that role in recent years: we view this as consistent
with our model, if enlarged with a market for asset-backed securities.


                                                        5
by FIs at the end of the period. The first shock generates observable heterogeneity among
firms in the risk of default. The second shock, in combination with the information acquisition
role of banks, provides the rationale for choosing bank finance for firms facing high risk of
default. The combination of these two shocks is crucial to generate cross-sectional variation in
firms’ financing choices. Finally, the third shock rationalizes the existence of risky debt as the
optimal contract between lenders and borrowers.


2.1       Households

Households maximize the expected value of the discounted stream of future utilities,
                                         ∞
                                         X
                                    0           [ln  +  (1 −  )]      0    1                           (1)
                                         =0

where  is the households’ discount rate,  is consumption,  denotes working hours and  is
a preference parameter. The households are also the owners of the FIs, to which they lend on a
trade credit account to be settled at the end of each period. They face the budget constraints

                                          + +1 − (1 − ) ≤   +                                       (2)

where  denotes the real wage and  the rental rate on capital.


2.2       Entrepreneurs

Each entrepreneur  enters the period holding capital   The firm operates a CRS technology

                                                = 1 2 3  1−                                 (3)

where  and  denote the firm-level capital and labor, respectively. The productivity
shocks 1  2 and 3 are random iid disturbances2 , which occur at diﬀerent times during
the period. They have mean unity, are mutually independent and have aggregate distribution
functions denoted by Φ1  Φ2 and Φ3 respectively. Per independence assumption, these are also
the marginal distributions. The entrepreneur faces the constraint that the available funds,  ,
need to equal the costs of renting the factors of production

                                                    =   +                                             (4)
   2
       Alternatively, one can allow for 1 to be persistent over time, 1 = 1−1 for some ||  1. This would
aﬀect the analysis via the intertemporal condition (25), since the expectation there would now be conditional on
1 . One resolution to this issue is to posit an alternative model of the entrepreneur as dying and consuming
his entire wealth with some constant probability each period, and otherwise saving everything.

                                                                6
   Entrepreneurs are infinitely lived, risk-neutral and more impatient than households. They
discount the future at a rate , where  is the discount factor of households and 0    1.
Their problem is to maximize the expected value of the discounted stream of future utilities,
                                        ∞
                                        X
                                   0         ()     0    1                       (5)
                                        =0

subject to the budget constraint
                                                             
                                               + +1 =                              (6)

Here  denotes entrepreneurial consumption, +1 investment in physical capital to be used
                       entrepreneurs’ profits in units of output. Because entrepreneurs are
in period  + 1 and 
more impatient than households, they demand a higher internal rate of return to investment.
This opens the room for trade between households and entrepreneurs despite the agency costs
of external finance.
   For the purpose of matching the model to data, we interpret the entrepreneurs as the firm
owners or stock holders. What is crucial here is that entrepreneurs are more informed about
all that is going on inside the firm than the financial intermediaries: an assumption which we
do not find entirely unreasonable.


2.3   Agency costs and financial intermediation

Entrepreneurs obtain labor and capital inputs from the households against the promise to
deliver the factor payments at the end of the period. Because of default risk, this promise
needs to be backed up by a contractual arrangement with a FI (a bank or a CMF). The
competitive FIs are able to ensure repayment of the factors because they diversify the risk
among the continuum of firms facing idiosyncratic risk. Since credit arrangements are settled
at the end of the same period, the intermediaries break exactly even on average.
   Let   be the uncertain productivity factor at contracting time, when firms approach FIs,
                                    ⎧
                                    ⎨ 2 3 for CMF finance
                               =
                                    ⎩            for bank finance
                                          3

Firms that decide to raise finance from banks pay an up-front fee that covers the bank’s cost
of information acquisition about the signal 2  The fee is a fixed proportion  of the firm’s
value   This cost is not faced by firms that sign a contract with CMFs, as these FIs do not


                                                      7
acquire information about the unobserved shock. Hence, the disposable net worth of a firm at
the time of the contract is given by ̃  where
                                    ⎧
                                    ⎨           for CMF finance
                             ̃ =
                                    ⎩ (1 −  ) for bank finance
                                                

       Conditional on 1 and possibly 2  each entrepreneur chooses to invest an amount 0 ≤
b ≤ ̃ of internal finance and  − 
                                        b of external finance, for total funds at hand of  .
       Each FI finances a project whose size is a fixed proportion of the internal funds invested,

                                               = b
                                                           ≥ 1                                         (7)

This assumption captures the idea that entrepreneurs diﬀer in their ability: the maximal
project size which an entrepreneur is capable of running is proportional to his net worth.
       After the realization of the uncertain productivity factor,    the entrepreneur observes
the actual production in units of goods,   and announces to the FI repayment of the debt or
default. The realization of  is only known to the firm unless there is costly monitoring, which
requires paying a fraction  of the firm’s output. After the announcement of the entrepreneur,
the FI decides whether or not to monitor. The informational structure at contracting time
corresponds to the costly state verification (CSV) framework of Townsend (1979). Restriction
(7) is usually not imposed in the costly state verification literature. It is necessary in our model
to ensure that all firms raise finite amounts of external finance despite the presence of ex-ante
heterogeneity: otherwise, only the top firms would receive financing, creating a homogenous
pool of firms with a potentially high leverage ratio.3


2.4       The timing of events

Entrepreneurs and households enter the period holding respectively capital  and  . House-
holds plan, how much labor to supply, and how much consumption and investment goods to
purchase. They also supply labor and rent out their capital stock. Entrepreneurs calculate
the end-of-period value  of their capital holdings  , which is publicly observable. Financial
decisions unfold over three stages.
       In the first stage, the shock 1 is realized and publicly observed. Conditional on its
realization, entrepreneurs decide whether to:
   3
       This restriction is consistent with the observation of reasonably similar and modest leverage ratios among
rather diﬀerent firms (see Kurshev-Strebulaev (2006), Table 1).

                                                         8
       a. Abstain from production. Entrepreneurs facing a low 1 decide not to borrow and not
                             b = 0. They rent out capital on the market, thus retaining their
to produce, i.e. they choose 
initial net worth,   until the end of the period.
       b. Possibly borrow from banks and produce. Entrepreneurs facing an intermediate realiza-
tion of 1 decide to approach a bank and to postpone their production decision after the
realization of 2 4
       c. Borrow from CMFs and produce. Entrepreneurs facing a high realization of 1 raise
external finance from CMFs and decide not to acquire information on 2 
       In the second stage, the shock 2 is realized and not observed by anyone. Information

on its realization is acquired by banks at a cost   and communicated to entrepreneurs.
Conditional on 2  entrepreneurs choose their investment level, i.e. whether to:
                                                 b = 0. These entrepreneurs rent out capital,
       d. Abstain from production, in which case 
retaining their remaining net worth, (1 −  )  until the end of the period.
       e. Borrow from banks and produce.
       Entrepreneurs that have chosen to produce hire labor  and rent capital  from the
households against the promise to deliver the factor payments at the end of the period. This
promise is backed up by the value of their own capital holdings plus the value of the additional
trade credit obtained from the FI (either a bank or a CMF).
       In the third stage, the shock 3 is realized and observed by the entrepreneur only. The
                                                      for own consumption and investment,
entrepreneurs produces   keeps part of output, 
and sells the rest to households to settle trade credit. Entrepreneurs announce the outcome of
production and repay loans or default on loans, if they cannot repay the agreed-upon amount.
Conditional on the announcement, the FI decides whether or not to monitor.
       At the end of the period, entrepreneurs consume  and accumulate capital +1 . House-
holds use the goods purchased for consumption  and investment in capital +1 
   4
       At this point, we could introduce the possibilities for entrepeneurs to enter actuarily fair gambles or,
equivalently, assume that banks are allowed to cross-subsidize projects. As common in the literature, we outlaw
gambling and cross-subsidization. An assumption which can rule out the benefits of such gambles is suﬃcient
risk aversion for the entrepreneurs. This, however, would substantially increase the complexity of the model.




                                                        9
3        Analysis

3.1        Factor prices and the markup

Each entrepreneur’s net worth is given by the market value of the accumulated capital stock,

                                                      = (1 −  +  )                                  (8)

Firms that produce need to sign a contract with the FIs to raise external finance for total
funds at hand  . Normalizing goods prices, the firm’s demand for labor and capital is derived
by maximizing expected profits subject to the financing constraint (4). Denote with E[·] the
expectation taken with respect to the variables yet unknown at the time of the factor hiring
decision. More precisely,
                                                       ⎧
                                                       ⎨ 1        for CMF financed firms,
                               E[1 2 3 ] =
                                                       ⎩            for bank financed firms.
                                                          1 2

Also, denote the Lagrange multiplier on (4) as  − 1 Optimality implies that
                                                                           
                                                       = (1 − )            
                                                                           
                                                                 
                                                       =         
                                                                 
                                                    E [ ] =   

where                                             ⎧
                                                  ⎨ 1      for CMF finance,
                                             =                                                             (9)
                                                  ⎩    for bank finance,
                                                     1 2 
              ³        ´ ³         ´1−
                             1−
and  =                                We can interpret  as an aggregate distortion in production arising
from the presence of agency costs, and  as a firm-specific markup which firms need to charge
in order to cover the costs of financial intermediation.                   5



3.2        Financial structure

In our model, the financial contract is intra-period but the game between firms and FIs unfolds
over three stages, each one corresponding to one idiosyncratic productivity shock. We solve
the model using backward induction. In an appendix available from the authors upon request
(henceforth appendix NFP), we provide proofs of the propositions stated in this section.
    5
        In Carlstrom and Fuerst (1998), as in most of the literature, nothing is known before firms produce, i.e.,
E[1 2 3 ] = 1 and  =  .

                                                                 10
       In stage III, firms and FIs stipulate a debt contract conditional on the available information.
Let Φ and  be respectively the distribution and density function of  and define
                                       Z ∞
                               ¡ ¢         ¡       ¢
                               =            −   Φ ()                                                   (10)
                                                        
                                        Z                             £      ¡ ¢¤
                             ( ) =             (1 − ) Φ () +   1 − Φ                              (11)
                                         0

as the expected shares of final output accruing respectively to an entrepreneur and to a lender,
after stipulating a contract that sets the fixed repayment at     units of output for
 =  . The index  denotes the type of FI, where  indicates banks and  indicates CMFs.
The optimal contract solves the following CSV problem:

                                                     max   (  )                                      (12)

subject to constraint (7) and

                                         ( ) ≥  − 
                                                                b                                             (13)
                                  ³ ´          ³ ´                ³ ´
                                    +         ≤ 1 −                                             (14)

                                                      b ≥ 0   (  ) ≥ 
                                                                                  b                         (15)
        ¡ ¢     R 
where    =  0   Φ ()  Equation (7) restricts the project size,6 (13) requires the
FI’s expected return to exceed the repayment to the household, (14) ensures feasibility, and (15)
guarantees that the entrepreneur is willing to sign the contract. Since loans are intra-period,
the opportunity cost of lending for the intermediary is one.

                                                                                   b = 0
Proposition 1 Under the optimal contract, the entrepreneur either invests nothing, 
                                b = ̃  requiring an amount ( − 1) ̃ of external finance.
or invest his entire net worth, 
The optimal contract is characterized by a threshold    =  , such that, if  ≥   no
monitoring occurs. If    , the FI monitors at a cost and completely seizes the resources in
the hands of the entrepreneur. The threshold is given by the solution to

                                                                      −1
                                                     (  ) =                                            (16)
                                                                       
   6
       It is standard in this literature to have the project size (and leverage) optimally chosen by the contract. In
our environment, instead, firm-level leverage is fixed by equation (7). The reason is that firms diﬀer in terms
of credit-worthiness. If the distribution of 1 is unbounded, the optimal project size for firms experiencing
extremely large values of that shock is unbounded. If the distribution is bounded, one typically obtains a corner
solution, with all financing going to the best firms.

                                                              11
   At the beginning of stage II, 2 is realized and not observed. Information on this shock
is acquired by banks and communicated to the entrepreneur, who then chooses whether to
abstain from production or to obtain trade credit and produce.

Proposition 2 A threshold for  = 1 2   below which the entrepreneur does not proceed
with the bank loan, exists and is unique. It is given by a constant  that satisfies

                                            ( ( )) = 1                                (17)

   Condition (17) also determines a threshold for the second firm-specific shock. The entre-
preneur does not proceed with the bank loan if 2   ( 1 )
   In stage I, after 1 realizes, the entrepreneur chooses whether or not to produce and,
if he does, how to finance production. For notational simplicity, we drop the subscripts.
The expected profits of an entrepreneur, who proceeds with bank finance conditional on the
realization of 1  is   (), where  = 1  and
                                       ÃZ                                         !
                                                                             
                     () = (1 −  )          2  ( (2 ))Φ2 (2 ) + Φ2 ( )             (18)
                                                                             
                                          


The expected profits of an entrepreneur, who proceeds with CMF finance conditional on the
realization of 1  is   (), where  = 1  and

                                          () =  (  ())                               (19)

Finally, the expected profits of an entrepreneur, who abstains from production, is simply .
Note that all payoﬀ functions are linear in net worth . Knowing its own mark-up  = 1 ,
each entrepreneur chooses the best option, leading to the overall payoﬀ  (), where

                                    () = max{1;   ();   ()}                           (20)

   In the analysis below, we make the following assumptions: (1)  0 () ≥ 0; and (2)
 0 ()   0 () for all  = 1  These conditions impose mild restrictions on the parameters
of the model and ensure uniqueness of the thresholds  and  

Proposition 3 Under (A1), a threshold for  = 1 , below which the entrepreneur decides not
to raise external finance, exists and is unique. It is given by a constant  that satisfies

                                                 ( ) = 1                                  (21)

                                                    12
Under (A1) and (A2), a threshold for  = 1  above which entrepreneurs sign a contract with
the CMF, exists and is unique. It is given by a constant  that satisfies

                                            ( ) =   ( )                                  (22)

   Conditional on  ,  and  , and depending on 1  entrepreneurs split into three sets: Ω ,
the set of entrepreneurs that abstain from raising external finance; Ω  the set of entrepreneurs
that sign a contract with banks, and Ω  the set of CMF-financed entrepreneurs,

                              Ω = {1 | 1    }

                              Ω = {1 |   ≤ 1 ≤   }

                              Ω = {1 | 1    } 

The firm’s production decision can be characterized by the dummy variable   where
               ⎧
               ⎨ 1 if 1    or if   ≤ 1 ≤   and 2   1  
          =                                                                                
               ⎩                                   0 else.

3.3    Consumption and investment decisions

Households maximize (1) subject to (2). Optimality requires that

                                =                                                            (23)
                                         ½                     ¾
                                1            1
                                   =         (1 −  + +1 )                                  (24)
                                         +1

    Entrepreneurs maximize (5) subject to (6), where      = ̃                        
                                                                   if firm  abstains,  =
   ³           ´
   −  ̃ if firm  borrows and repays, and 
                                                          = 0 if firm  borrows and default.


Their optimality condition is given by

                             1 =  {(1 −  + +1 ) (1+1 +1 )}                         (25)


3.4    Aggregation

Aggregate variables can be computed by integrating across firms. Aggregate labor and capital
are given by

                                         =                                                (26)

                                          = (1 − )                                        (27)

                                                   13
        Aggregate demand for funds,   output  , output lost to monitoring costs  , output lost
to banks’ information acquisition   and agency costs can be computed as

                                              =   ( )                                            (28)

                                              =   ( )                                          (29)

                                             =   ( )                                         (30)

                                                =   ( )                                          (31)

                                              =  +                                              (32)

        Aggregate entrepreneurial consumption and investment have to satisfy the constraint

                                               + +1 =  ( )                                      (33)

where  ( )  denote aggregate profits of the entrepreneurial sector.
        Notice that   (·)    (·)    (·)    (·) and  (·) are functions that aggregate across firms.
For instance,   () aggregates the costs of information acquisition per unit of net worth across
all firms that sign a contract with a bank, implying that
                                               Z 
                                                 
                                      () ≡   Φ1 (1 )
                                                           
                                                          


The other functions are defined in appendix NFP, where we also derive condition (32).


3.5        Market clearing

Market clearing for capital, labor and output requires that

                                   =  +                                                            (34)

                                   =                                                                 (35)

                                    =  +  +  + +1 − (1 − )                                 (36)

Market clearing for loans is ensured by condition (4).


4        Equilibrium properties of the model

We parameterize the model at the stochastic steady state.7 To discuss equilibrium properties,
we use the parameterization of the model calibrated on US data reported in section 5.2.
    7
        The stochastic steady state and the numerical procedure for computing it are described in appendix NFP.

                                                        14
   In Figure 1, we show expected profits for entrepreneurs. Panel (a) plots expected profits
from abstaining, from signing a contract with a bank and from signing a contract with a CMF,
as a function of the firm’s mark-up, . The intersection points of the three curves provide the
cutoﬀ points,  and  . When     the firm abstains because this provides highest expected
profits. When       the best option is oﬀered by bank finance, while when   
the firm chooses CMF finance. The panel also shows the mean of the firm-specific mark-up
 plus/minus two standard deviations. After the realization of 1  95% of the firms’ markups
lie within this region. Panel (b) shows how expected profits from bank finance move with the
information acquisition fee   When  = 001 information acquisition is so cheap that expected
profits from bank finance generally exceed those from abstaining or from CMF finance. The
share of firms that raises external finance through banks approaches one. When  is large (04
in the figure), the option value of acquiring more information is not large enough to oﬀset the
cost. All firms either abstain or use CMF finance. Only for intermediate values of  (02 in the
figure) firms that decide to produce diﬀerentiate in terms of their financing choice depending
on the realization of their markup.
   Figure 2, panel (a), illustrates how firms allocate among financial instruments. Firms
experiencing a productivity shock 1 ≤   decide to abstain from production. Firms with
  ≤ 1 ≤   sign a contract with banks Firms with 1 ≥   sign a contract with CMFs.
Among firms that sign a contract with banks, those experiencing a productivity shock below
the threshold for 2 , i.e. 2 ≤  1  decide not to proceed to the production stage. Panel (b)
plots the threshold  1  over the range of mark-ups (   ), as a function of 1 
   Figure 3 plots the steady state distribution of firms among production activities. Firms
that do not produce are those that decide not to raise external finance because 1 ≤  , and
those that sign a contract with the bank but, after the realization of 2 , decide to drop out of
production. For these firms,   ≤ 1 ≤   and 2 ≤  1 
   In our model, key parameters for the determination of the financial structure are the
standard deviations of the diﬀerent idiosyncratic productivity shocks, and banks’ information
acquisition costs. For instance, a higher 1 generates thicker tails in the distribution. Firms
experience with lower probability intermediate realizations of the productivity shock 1 before
taking their financing decisions. Therefore a lower share of firms raises bank finance. Similarly,
a higher variance of the signal  2 implies that firms value more the possibility of acquiring
additional information through banks. A larger share of firms raises bank finance. Notice

                                                 15
that in our model, a reduction in  acts as an increase in  2  Both a reduction in the cost of
information acquisition and an increase in the dispersion of the private information signal lead
to a larger share of bank finance.


5        Corporate finance in the US and the euro area

5.1        Evidence on the financial structure

In our numerical analysis, we aim at replicating six stylized facts: i) the ratio of bank loans to
debt securities, as an indicator of the composition of firms’ debt finance; ii) the debt to equity
ratio, as a proxy of the reliance on debt versus equity finance; iii) the risk premium on loans
and iv) the risk premium on bonds, both reflecting the severity of the asymmetric informa-
tion problem in financial markets; v) the default rate on bonds, which determines the loss of
resources due to bankruptcy for CMF financed firms; and vi) the expected return on capital,
which restricts in our model entrepreneurs’ profits and their choice between consumption and
capital accumulation.
        In table 1, columns 2 and 4 summarize the evidence on the financial structure of the EA
and the US, for the period 1999-2007.8 The table shows several diﬀerences. First, bank loans
account for a much larger fraction of debt finance in the EA than in the US. The ratio of
bank loans to debt securities is approximately eight times larger in the EA (5.48) than in the
US (.66). Second, the debt to equity ratio is higher in the EA (.64) than in the US (.43),
reflecting a larger reliance of US firms on financing through equity rather than debt. Third,
corresponding measures of the risk premium on bank loans are higher for the US (170 bps) than
for the EA (119 bps). Fourth, no significant diﬀerences can be observed in the risk premium on
bond finance (143 bps in both the US and the EA). Finally, both the default rate on corporate
bonds and the return to capital are higher for the US (5.37% and 10.9% respectively) than for
the EA (4.96% and 9.30% respectively).
        The first two facts documented in table 1 are consistent with theories that explain the
composition of external finance with institutional and legal factors. For instance, La Porta et
al. (1997) analyze the choice between debt and equity finance, and argue that countries with
legal environments that oﬀer more eﬀective protection of shareholders and creditors are those
    8
        In appendix NFP, we describe the data used to provide evidence on the financial structure of the corporate
sector. We also provide analytical expressions for the financial variables used in the numerical application.


                                                         16
where entrepreneurs have higher valuation of securities and broader access to capital markets,
and where financiers oﬀer entrepreneurs external finance (both through debt and equity) at
better terms. They also show that common law countries (such as the UK and the US) protect
both shareholders and creditors more than civil law countries (such as France, Germany and
other european countries whose legal system is based on Roman law).
   Thus, theories of legal determinants would predict a larger role of market finance in the US
than in the EA, in line with the reported evidence on the ratio of bank loans to debt securities.
They would also predict easier access to equity finance for firms in common law countries than
in civil law countries, in line with a lower debt to equity ratio in the US relative to the EA. On
the contrary, our findings on the cost of bank finance relative to bond finance in the two blocks
pose a challenge to those theories. Indeed, the average risk premium on bank loans is higher
in the US than in the EA, and no significant diﬀerences arise in the average risk premium
on bonds. These findings are in line with existing studies. On the one hand, Carey and
Nini (2007) documents that interest rate spreads on syndicated loans to corporate borrowers
are significantly smaller in Europe than in the United States (by about 30 bps), other things
equal. Moreover, they argue that diﬀerences in borrower, loan, and lender characteristics do
not appear to explain this phenomenon. On the other hand, Mahajan and Fraser (1986), and
Carey and Nini (2007) provide evidence that no significant diﬀerences exist in yields between
bonds issued by firms with similar characteristics in the US and in Europe. We interpret this
evidence as suggesting that theories of institutional and legal determinants are not suﬃcient
to explain the composition of corporate debt finance.
   In the rest of this section, we use our model to sheed light on whether diﬀerences in
fundamentals can oﬀer a complementary explanation.


5.2   Numerical analysis

We search for parameterizations of the model that deliver the best fit with US and EA data.
The period is a year. The iid productivity shocks  = 1  2  3 are lognormally distributed, i.e.
log() is normally distributed with variance  2 and mean − 2 2. Both for the US and the EA
models, we fix some parameters to standard values. We set the depreciation rate at  = 07
and the discount factor at  = 96 implying a real interest rate of around 4%. We choose
 = 64 in the production function, and a coeﬃcient in preferences  so that labor equal 3 in



                                                17
steady state. We also set monitoring costs at  = 15 a value in the middle of the range of
the available estimates (see e.g. Carlstrom and Fuerst (1998)).
       For the calibration exercise, it is convenient to specify one of the endogenous variables, , as
exogenous and to treat  as unobservable. Thus, we choose six free parameters,      1  2
and  3  to minimize the squared log-deviation of the model-based predictions on the six
financial facts documented in table 1 from their empirical counterparts.9 The parameter values
selected from our benchmark calibration procedure are reported in table 2, columns 3 and 4.
The table also reports some focal statistics (shown in the last four rows), which we use below
to interprete the diﬀerent predictions generated by the US and EA models. The implied
model-based predictions are listed in table 1, columns 3 and 5.
       The focal statistics reported in table 2 shed light on the diﬀerences in the financial struc-
ture, as interpreted by our model. The overall uncertainty about the a priori unobserved
                     P
productivity shocks, 3=2  2 , is higher in the US (.238) than in the EA (.117).10 The share
of available information due to the additional information acquisition in a bank contract,
       ¡             ¢
 22   21 +  22  is considerably higher in the EA (0.958) than in the US (0.294), giving banks
and their information acquisition a larger role in the EA. The demand of banking services in
the EA is dampened, however, by a relatively low eﬃciency of european banks. Indeed, the
overall measure of eﬃciency of banks in acquiring information about firms,  22   is higher for
the US (.590) than for the EA (.168). Finally, the volatility of the public signal relative to the
                           P
overall uncertainty, 21  3=1  2  is lower in the EA (.002) than in the US (.006). The larger
availability of public information in the US allows firms to better assess their own default risk
and to reduce the output loss induced by agency costs.11
   9
       As a robustness check, we have also run our calibration exercise by using as a target the average default
rate or the default rate on loans instead of the default rate on bonds. In both cases, the match of the model
with the data deteriorates but the results on model predictions and the interpretation of the corporate finance
diﬀerences suggested by our statistics remain qualitatively unchanged.
  10
     Recent empirical evidence supports this finding. Using a large panel of firms over the period 1991-2006,
Bartram et al (2009) show that foreign firms face lower idiosyncratic risk than comparable US firms, after
controlling for industry, assets, age, and market-to-book ratio.
  11
     This finding is also in line with available empirical evidence. Indeed, market-based countries such as the US
have been shown to have higher standards than bank-based countries for information disclosure about firms,
such as accounting information, income statements, balance sheets, funds flow statements, and stock data (see
e.g. Demirgüc-Kunt and Levine (2001)).




                                                        18
   In table 3, we compare some predictions of the model on variables that were not used as
targets of our calibration procedure to their empirical counterparts. The model generates a
                                                        +
reasonable ratio of aggregate consumption to GDP,         ,   and of investment to GDP,   Both
for the US and the EA, the prediction on the average default rate is not far from the oberved
value. The model also predicts that default rates on loans are lower than default rates on
bonds for the EA, in line with the empirical evidence.
   The model has two main shortcomings. First, the predicted ratio of the default rate on
loans to the default rate on bonds is higher than one for the US, while it is lower than one
                                                                                                 
in the data. Second, the model delivers a ratio of entrepreneurial wealth to total wealth,       ,

which is remarkably lower (.25) than in US data (.46).
   Predictions of the model on some unobservable characteristics are documented in table 4.
One distinguishing feature is that both in the US and EA models, almost all firms approach a
financial intermediary ("share abstain" is very low or zero), since the share of publicly available
                   P
information  21  3=1  2 is low, see table 2. The share of firms that drop-out from production
conditional on having approached a bank ("drop-out if banking") is larger for the EA than for
the US, reflecting a higher standard deviation of the relevant uncertain productivity factor ( 2 )
and therefore a higher occurrence of low realizations of 2 . The value of the aggregate markup,
 is larger in the US. This is needed to replicate the observed diﬀerence in the expected return
to capital in the US and in the EA. A higher financial markup increases the expected profits
of entrepreneurs per unit of accumulated capital stock, because it increases the price charged
by firms. Finally, agency costs as a share of GDP (  ) are higher in the EA relative to the
US, due to the large use of bank finance and the consequent impact of information acquisition
costs.
   Table 2 shows that the model requires large diﬀerences in information acquisition costs, in
order to replicate the data. One striking diﬀerence arises in the parameter   which is .001 for
the US and .028 for the EA. This should be understood as the diﬀerence between bank and
bond financing costs: even the EA parameter is small, so that in absolute terms, the US and
EA are fairly similar. However, it is possible that such diﬀerence is needed for the model to
capture the data, because monitoring costs are assumed to be identical despite diﬀerences in
bankruptcy laws and procedures. To verify this conjecture, we checked the robustness of our
results by restricting  in the EA model to take progressively closer values to the one obtained
for the US, and instead endogenizing the monitoring costs . Indeed, the best fit is found for

                                                19
a lower level of monitoring costs in the EA,  = 124 and for an information acquisition cost
parameter,  = 005, that is much closer to the one selected for the US While it is diﬃcult to
obtain evidence on monitoring costs in the EA, due to the high heterogeneity in legal systems
and bankruptcy law across european countries, these results are consistent with the perception
that bankruptcy procedures oﬀer higher protection for business debtors in the US (chapter
11 of the Bankruptcy Code) than in the EA, implying that US banks overall recover a lower
fraction of output. A more detailed discussion of the robustness analysis and of the results
is available in appendix NFP. What matters here is that the model predictions and the focal
statistics turn out to be qualitatively similar for a decently fitting alternative specification, and
therefore our interpretation of the corporate finance diﬀerences remains unaﬀected.


6    Conclusions

This paper presents a model where firms are heterogeneous in the risk of default and banks
have a special role in resolving informational problems. The model can be used to sheed light
on the determinants of key diﬀerences in corporate finance between the US and the euro area.
    Some of the diﬀerences that we document are consistent with theories that point to legal and
institutional factors as major determinant of firms’ financing choices. Some others - such as a
higher average risk premium on bank loans in the US relative to the euro area, and the absence
of significant diﬀerences in the average risk premium on bonds - provide a challenge for these
theories. Our model provides a complementary explanation that is based on fundamentals.
    We argue that information availability might help to explain the composition of firms’ debt.
Our calibrated model suggests that diﬀerences in the financial structure of US and euro area
firms can be explained by: i) a relatively low level of disclosure of information about firms’
credit risk in the euro area relative to the US; ii) a higher need of european firms for the
flexibility and information acquisition role provided by banks.




                                                 20
                             Table 1: Financial facts
                                               US                       EA
        Variable                          data        mod        data      mod
        Bank to bond finance ratio        0.66        0.67       5.48      5.48
        Debt to equity ratio              0.43        0.43       0.64      0.64
        Risk premium on loans (bps)       170         169        119       119
        Risk premium on bonds (bps)       143         143        143       147
        Default rate on bonds (pp)        5.37        5.36       4.96      4.79
        Return to entr capital (pp)       10.90       10.93      9.30      9.29



                            Table 2: Parameter values
Parameters                                         Symbols                       Model
                                                                           US       EA
Information acquisition                                                   0.001    0.028
Coeﬀ. discount rate entr.                                                 0.939    0.953
Project size to net worth                                                 1.551    2.102
Standard dev. 1                                   1                     0.037    0.014
Standard dev. 2                                   2                     0.024    0.069
Standard dev. 3                                   3                     0.488    0.335
                                                  P3        2
Overall variance unobserved shocks                    =2               0.238    0.117
                                                         ¡             ¢
Precision avail info to precision private info     22  21 +  22     0.294    0.958
                                                         P
Precision total info to precision public info      21  3=1  2       0.006    0.002
Variance private info to info acquisition cost     22                  0.590    0.168




                                        21
           Table 3: Additional model predictions and data
                                                  US                  EA
Variable                                   data     mod        data    mod
Consumption to GDP ratio                   0.85     0.78       0.77    0.76
Investment to GDP ratio                    0.19     0.21       0.21    0.21
Average default rate                       4.74     5.63       4.25    4.08
Def. rate loans to def. rate bonds ratio   0.80     1.12       0.73    0.82
Share abstain overall                      n.a.     0.22       0.37    0.40
Entrepr. capital to aggr. capital ratio    0.46     0.25       n.a.    0.24


                Table 4: Additional model predictions
                                                  Model
             Variable                       US         EA
             Share abstain                  0.028      0.000
             Share bank                     0.503      0.910
             Share CMF                      0.469      0.090
             Drop-out if banking            0.376      0.444
             Aggr. markup                   1.041      1.021
             Agency costs to GDP ratio      0.004      0.024




                                   22
                                                                                       (a)
                       1.14

                       1.12          from abstaining
                        1.1                                   from CMF finance
Expected profits


                       1.08                      from bank finance
                                   −2SD                                                                         +2SD
                       1.06

                       1.04

                       1.02

                         1

                       0.98

                       0.96                                                                   s
                              sb     0.98              1             1.02    1.03             c   1.06   1.08      1.1
                                                                                     Markup


                                                                                       (b)
                       1.14

                       1.12

                        1.1                    τ = .001                             τ = .04
    Expected profits




                                                           τ = .02
                       1.08

                       1.06
                               −2SD                                                                             +2SD
                       1.04

                       1.02

                          1

                       0.98

                       0.96
                                     0.98              1             1.02              1.04       1.06   1.08      1.1
                                                                                     Markup




                                            Figure1. Expected profits and financing choices




                                                                            23
                                                                                         (a)
                          15



                                                  bank finance                                            CMF finance
                          10
                Density




                            5
                                        abstain



                            0                     s                                       s
                                  0.9             b          0.95          0.98               c          1.05                  1.1
                                                                                    Markup

                                                                                         (b)
                           1.1
                 2
       Threshold for ε




                          1.05




                            1




                          0.95
                                 0.93                 0.94          0.95          0.96            0.97     0.98         0.99         1
                                                                                         ε1




Figure 2. Distribution of financing choices and threshold for continuing with bank-financing.




                                                                           24
     1.2




     1.0

                                                            production


     0.8
ε2




     0.6




                        no production
     0.4




     0.2




      0
           0.88   0.9     0.92               0.96    0.98                1.02   1.04
                             s /q            ε                s /q
                                 b                             c
                                               1




Figure 3. Financing choices as a function of observable shocks (1 and 2 ).




                                        25
References

 [1] Bartram, Söhnke, Gregory Brown, and René Stulz. "Why Do Foreign Firms Have Less
    Idiosyncratic Risk than US Firms?". NBER Working Paper n. 14931, April 2009.

 [2] Berlin, Mitchell and Loretta Mester. "Debt Covenants and Renegotiation." Journal of
    Financial Intermediation, 1992, 2, pp. 95-133.

 [3] Bernanke, Ben S., Gertler, Mark and Gilchrist, Simon. ”The Financial Accelerator in a
    Quantitative Business Cycle Framework.” In: Taylor, John B. and Woodford, Michael,
    eds. Handbook of macroeconomics. Volume 1C. Handbooks in Economics, vol. 15. Ams-
    terdam; New York and Oxford: Elsevier Science, North-Holland, 1999, pp. 1341-93.

 [4] Boot, Arnoud and Anjan, Thakor. "The Accelerating Integration of Banks and Markets
    and its Implications for Regulation." Forthcoming in The Oxford Handbook of Banking,
    Eds. Allen Berger, Phil Molyneux and John Wilson, Oxford University Press, 2009.

 [5] Boot, Arnoud, Greenbaum, Stuart, and Anjan Thakor. "Reputation and Discretion in
    Financial Contracting." American Economic Review, 1993, 83(5), pp. 1165-83.

 [6] Carey, Mark and Nini, Greg. ”Is the corporate loan market globally integrated? A pricing
    puzzle.” The Journal of Finance, 2007, LXII, No. 6, pp 2969-3007.

 [7] Carlstrom, Charles T., and Fuerst, Timothy. ”Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business
    Cycle Fluctuations: A Computable General Equilibrium Analysis.” American Economic
    Review, 1997, 87(5), pp. 893-910.

 [8] Carlstrom, Charles T., and Fuerst, Timothy. ”Agency Costs and Business Cycles.” Eco-
    nomic Theory, 1998, 12, pp. 583-597.

 [9] Chemmanur, Thomas J. and Fulghieri, Paolo. ”Reputation, Renegotiation, and the Choice
    between Bank Loans and Publicly Traded Debt.” Review of Financial Studies, 1994, 7(3),
    pp. 475-506.

[10] Demirgüc-Kunt, Asli and Levine, Ross (eds). "Financial structure and economic growth:
    a cross-country comparison of banks, markets and development." The MIT Press, Cam-
    bridge, Massachusetts, 2001.


                                             26
[11] Denis, David and Vassil Mihov. "The Choice Among Bank Debt, Non-Bank Private Debt
    and Pulic Debt: Evidence From New Corporate Borrowigs." Journal of Financial Eco-
    nomics, 2003, 70, pp. 3-28.

[12] Diamond, Douglas. "Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring." The Review of
    Economic Studies, 1984, 51, pp. 393-414.

[13] Emery, Kenneth M. and Richard Cantor. "Relative Default Rates on Corporate Loans
    and Bonds." Journal of Banking and Finance, 2005, 29, pp. 1575-1584.

[14] Fama, Eugene. "What’s Diﬀerent about Banks?" Journal of Monetary Economics, 1985,
    15, pp. 29-39.

[15] Gande, Amar and Anthony Saunders. "Are Banks Still Special when there is a Secondary
    Market for Loans?", manuscript, October 2006.

[16] Gilchrist, Simon, Yankov, Vladimir, and Egon Zakrajšek. "Credit Market Shocks and
    Economic Fluctuations: Evidence from Corporate Bond and Stock Markets." Journal of
    Monetary Economics, forthcoming, 2009.

[17] Kurshev, Alexander and Ilya A. Strebulaev, “Firm Size and Capital Structure,” mimeo,
    Stanford University (2006).

[18] La Porta, Rafael, Lopez-de-Silanes, Florencio, Schleifer, Andreas, and Vishny, Robert.
    "Legal determinants of external finance." Journal of Finance, 1997, 52(3), p. 1131-1150.

[19] Mahajan, Arvind, and Fraser, Donald. ”Dollar Eurobond pricing and US bond pricing.”
    Journal of International Business Studies, 1986, 17, pp. 21-37.

[20] Quadrini, Vincenzo. "Entrepreneurship, Saving, and Social Mobility." Review of Economic
    Dynamics, Volume 3, Issue 1, January 2000, Pages 1-40.

[21] Williamson, Oliver E., "The Theory of the Firm as Governance Structure: From Choice
    to Contract". Journal of Economic Perspectives 16(3), 2002, pp. 171—195

[22] Townsend, Robert M. ”Optimal Contracts and Competitive Markets with Costly State
    Verification.” Journal of Economic Theory, 1979, 21(2), pp. 265-93.



                                               27
                          Bank Finance versus Bond Finance.
                                                Appendix

                      Fiorella De Fiore∗                          Harald Uhlig†
                  European Central Bank               University of Chicago and CEPR

                                               April 25, 2011




1        Proofs

1.1        Proposition 1

Conditions (7) and (15) imply that the expected profits of entrepreneurs willing to produce are
not lower than the utility from disposing of the net worth initially invested. Notice that the
                     b  Thus, the solution is such that the entrepreneur either invest nothing
problem is linear in 
                      b = 0 or invest everything and produce, 
and does not produce,                                           b = ̃  Entrepreneurs
that produce only raise costly external finance to cover what is needed in excess of the internal
funds,  − ̃ = ( − 1) ̃  To realize that equation (16) delivers a unique interior solution to
                                                                       ³ ´
the CSV problem, notice that  (0) = 1  (0) = 0,  0 ( ) = Φ   − 1  0 and  0 (  )  0
                                                                        ³ ´
This latter property can be shown by contradiction. Suppose  0    0 Then, it would be
possible to increase expected profits of the firm,   ( )̃  by reducing   while increasing
expected profits of the FI,  (  )̃  Hence,   could not be a solution to the contract. It
follows that the unique interior solution to the problem is given by (16).


1.2        Proposition 2

An entrepreneur that, upon payment of the information acquisition fee    observes 1 and
2 , proceeds with the bank loan if and only if his expected profits exceeds the opportunity
    ∗
        Directorate General Research, European Central Bank, Postfach 160319, D-60066 Frankfurt am Main. Ph:
+49-69-13446330. fiorella.de_fiore@ecb.int.
  †
    Dept. of Economics, 1126 East 59th Street, Chicago, IL 60637. Ph: +1-773-702-8191. huhlig@uchicago.edu.

                                                       28
costs of renting his capital to others, i.e. if   (  ( )) ≥ 1 where  = 1 2   Notice
that expected profits from proceeding with the bank are zero for  = 0 and strictly increasing
                  ¡ ¢            
in   since  0    0 and   0 Hence, a solution to condition (17) exists and is unique.
Moreover, it is constant across firms and time.


1.3    Proposition 3

Notice that   (0) = 1−    (0) Under (A1), there is a unique cutoﬀ point   which satisfies
the condition   () = 1 A suﬃcient condition for existence and uniqueness of  is provided
by (1) and (2). Both thresholds are constant across firms and time.


2     Aggregation

Define  ( ) ≡  ( ) +  ( )  where
                                          Z  Z
                                            
                               
                              ( ) ≡                                 
                                                                                (1 −  )Φ2 (2 )Φ1 (1 )
                                                                
                                                                      1 
                                                           Z
                                      ( ) ≡                    Φ1 (1 )
                                                               
                                                               

and
                            Z           Z                                                                 Z
                                 
                ( ) ≡                    
                                                      (1 −  )1 2 Φ2 (2 )Φ1 (1 ) +                             1 Φ1 (1 )
                                                                                                                
                                            1                                                              
                                               Z         Z                    Z    (1 2  )
                                                      
               ( ) ≡ (1 −  )                         
                                                                       1 2                         3 Φ3 (3 ) Φ2 (2 )Φ1 (1 )
                                                        1 
                            Z              Z       (1  )
                       +             1                             2 ∗ 3 Φ2∗3 ( (2 ∗ 3 )) Φ1 (1 )
                                
                                
                                Z     
                                      
                 () ≡            
                                              Φ1 (1 )
                                     

where Φ2∗3 denotes the distribution function for the product  = 2 3 .
    Now let  (1   ;  ) be the average profits per unit of net worth of the bank-financed
entrepreneurs, given 1  aggregate information   and the threshold  :
                                        "Z                                                       #
                                                        ³              ´                   
           (1   ;  ) = (1 −  )       1 2    (1 2  ) Φ2 (2 ) + Φ2 (       ) 
                                                                                        1 
                                                               1 

Also, let  (1   ) be the average profits per unit of net worth of the CMF-financed entrepre-
neurs, given 1 and  
                                                       (1   ) = 1   (  (1  )) 
                                                                                    29
and let  ( )  be the aggregate profits of the entrepreneurial sector, where
                                         Z                                   Z
                                            
                 ( ) = Φ1 (      )+              (1   ) Φ1 (1 ) +             (1   ) Φ1 (1 )
                                                                               
                                                                                 


The aggregate budget constraints for the entrepreneurs can then be written as equation (33).


3    Agency costs

We show that the resource loss due to the presence of agency costs in the economy,   corre-
sponds to the sum of the monitoring costs faced by banks and CMFs, and of the information
acquisition costs incurred by banks. For simplicity, we focus on the steady state of the model
and denote steady state variables by dropping the time subscript.
                                                                                                                               
    First, devide the resource constraint of the economy by  and notice that                                        = 
                                                                                                                                 =
                            
 ()  (1 −  + ) and        =  () (1 −  + ) − 1 Combining the budget constraint of the
household,
                                                     =  + ( − ) 

with conditions  =  +   =  +  and  =  ()  (1 −  + )  we obtain

                                                             
                                    =  ()  (1 −  + ) −  −  + 
                                                             

    From the resource constraint, we can write agency costs as

                                                    =  −  −  − 

implying that
                           
                               = (1 −  + ) [ ()  + 1 −  () −  () ]
                            
                  ¡ ¢           ¡ ¢      R 
Recall that    = 1 −    −  0   Φ (). Use this condition together with equation
                   R            R
(16), Φ1 (  ) +  Φ1 (1 ) +  Φ1 (1 ) = 1 and the definitions of  ( ) and  () given
                                    

in section 2 of this appendix. After rearranging terms, we obtain

                                    
                                       = (1 −  + ) [ () +  ()]
                                    

implying that   =  +  




                                                              30
4    The stochastic steady state

The unique steady state can be obtained as follows. First, we specify one of the endogenous
variables, , as exogenous and we treat  as endogenous. For each value of  we can then
compute    and  by solving the equations

                                    1 =  (1 −  + )
                                        ³  ´ µ 1 −  ¶1−
                                    =
                                                  
                                    1 =  {(1 −  + ) (1 )}

                                    = 

To compute the overall expected profits  (1 ) given by the steady state version of equation
(25), we use the following procedure. First, under our distributional assumptions about the
productivity shocks 1  2 and 3 , we can use some results from the optimal contract literature
(see the appendix of Bernanke et al (1999)),
                                         ¡ ¢         1
                                         =  () 
                                                     

                                 ( ) = Φ ( − ) +   [1 − Φ ()]

                            (  ) = (1 − ) Φ ( − ) +  [1 − Φ ()] 
                                                          log   +052
where  and Φ denote the standard normal,  ≡                             and  =   Second, we solve
                                           −1
numerically the condition (  ()) =         to obtain the function   (). The function   ()
for bank-financed firms is derived by defining  = 1 2  and by using the variance 23 of
the log-normal distribution. The function   () for CMF-financed firms is derived by defining
 = 1  and by using the variance 22 +23 . The cutoﬀ value for proceeding with the bank loan
is found by solving numerically the condition   (  ( )) = 1 Using   it is then possible to
compute the expected profits for the bank-financed entrepreneur,   (), where  = 1 . The
expected profits for the CMF-financed entrepreneur can be computed as   () =  (  ())
With this, it is possible to calculate the overall return  () to entrepreneurial investment, the
thresholds  and   and the ratios        
                                            and   as given by

                                 
                                   =  (;      )  (1 −  + )
                                 
                                                 1−
                                               =
                                                   
                                                 31
                                                           
                                                           = 
                                                           
where the function  (·) is the steady state version of the function defined in section 2 of this
appendix. Now write the budget constraint of the household as

                                                                
                                                     =  + ( − ) 
                                                                
                                                                 
where      =       and      =     −1.   Then, compute  as  =      and use it to compute the aggregate
                                                                       

variables      and  Finally, use the steady state version of equations (29) and (33) to
compute  and  and of the resource constraint (36) to compute   


5    Evidence on the financial structure

We document diﬀerences in corporate finance among the US and the EA. The series used for
the EA refer to a changing composition, i.e. they are based on the euro area composition at
the time to which the statistics relate. Our focus is on the EMU period but we only consider
data up to 2007 in order to exclude the major eﬀects of the financial turmoil, which resulted
in a sudden drying up of the market for corporate bonds in both the US and the EA.
    Ratio of bank finance to bond finance. For the US, the average value of loans to
securities over the period 1999-2007 is 0.66. For the EA, the ratio is 5.48, approximately
eight times higher. Data are from Flow of Funds Accounts, Table B.102 on the balance sheet
of nonfarm nonfinancial corporations. Securities are the sum of commercial paper, municipal
securities and corporate bonds. Loans are the sum of bank loans, mortgages and other loans and
advances. For the EA, data are from the Euro Area Flow of Funds. Loans are those extended by
monetary financial institutions to non-financial corporations. Securities are defined as securities
other than shares, excluding financial derivatives, issued by non-financial corporations.
    Debt to equity ratio.                     The debt to equity ratio for the US non-farm, non-financial
corporate business sector is 0.43 over the period 1999-2007. For the EA, the ratio is 0.64 over
the same period. For the US, data are from the Flow of Funds Accounts. Debt is defined as
credit market instruments (sum of commercial paper, municipal securities, corporate bonds,
bank loans, other loans and advances, mortgages). Equity is defined as market value of equities
outstanding (including corporate farm equities). For the EA, data are from the Quarterly Euro
Area Accounts. Debt includes loans, debt securities issued and pension fund reserves of non-
financial corporations. Equity includes shares and other equity.

                                                           32
   Risk premium on bank loans. For the US, the mean spread between the loan rate and
the Federal Fund rate over the period Jan1999-Dec2007 is 170 bps. For the EA, over the same
period, the spread between the average loan rate and the EONIA is 119 bps. To obtain a
comparable measure of the cost of loans for the US and EA, and because the time period in
our model is a year, we consider loans to non-financial corporations (new businesses) with a
maturity interval of below 1 year and with floating rates. In 2007, these loans accounted for
approximately 86% of total loans to new businesses in the EA and to 92% in the US. For the
US, we use data from the Survey of Terms of Business Lending. For the EA, we use ECB
data from MFI Interest Rate Statistics. Since the series for the EA distinguish amounts of
up to and including EUR 1 million amount, and amounts above EUR 1 million, we compute
average loan rates using relative amounts to build weights. The series on amounts is available
only since Jan 2003. We use the actual weight when available and the average weight over the
whole period otherwise.
   Risk premium on corporate bonds. Comparable series for the US and the EA are only
available for the mean diﬀerence between 7 to 10 years corporate bond yields and government
bond yields with a corresponding maturity (ECB data on Financial Market Indicators). Over
the period Jan1999-Dec2007, the mean diﬀerence is 143 bps for the US. Due to the changing
composition of the euro area and the thin market for corporate bonds in the early sample,
reliable data for the EA start in 2002. Over the period Jan 2002-Dec 2007, the mean diﬀerence
is approximately the same in the EA and the US (128 and 126 bps respectively). Therefore,
in table 1 we attribute to the euro area the same mean diﬀerence observed in the US. Existing
studies confirm that no significant diﬀerences exist among bond spreads in the US and the EA.
Mahajan and Fraser (1986) find no diﬀerences in yields between dollar denominated Eurobonds
and US bonds with similar characteristics over the period 1975-1983. Using more recent data,
Carey and Nini (2007) show that mean diﬀerences for A- and BBB-rated firms among US and
EA remain small even after accounting for duration and currency eﬀects. Gilchrist, Yankov and
Zakrajšek (2009) report mean credit spreads for corporate bonds of short maturity (remain-
ing term-to-maturity of less than 3 years) after grouping them in five quantiles according to
their expected default frequencies. Although the mean spreads vary substantially with deafult
probabilities, the levels (0.79, 1.03, 1.21, 1.84, and 5.28 percent, respectively) are distributed
around our chosen value.



                                                33
   Default rate on corporate bonds. Using data from Moody’s, we compute the average
12-months default rate on speculative-grade bonds for non-financial corporations. For the
period Jan1999-Dec2007, the average figure for the US is 5.37%. For the EA, the average
figure over the same period is 4.96%.
   Expected rate of return on capital. We compute the net rate of return of capital as
the gross operating surplus net of depreciation capital as a percentage of total net capital.
This measure of the value of capital service flows for corporations is a broad indicator of profit
developments. In our model, it captures the average expected net return from accumulating
one unit of entrepreneurial capital. Using data from the EU Commission’s Ameco database, we
compute its average value at 10.9% for the US and 9.3% for the EA, over the period 1997-2005.

   The model oﬀers some additional model predictions (not used as targets in the estimation
procedure) that can be compared with the data. We document here the evidence presented in
tables 3 and 4.
   Ratio of aggregate consumption to GDP. The ratio is 0.85 for the US and 0.77 for
the EA. Data are for the period 1999-2007 from ESA95 national accounts.
   Ratio of aggregate investment to GDP. The ratio is 0.19 for the US and 0.21 for the
EA. Data are for the period 1999-2007 from ESA95 national accounts.
   Average default rate. The annual rate is 4.74 percent for the US and 4.25 percent
for the EA. We measure the average default rate with Moody’s 12-months default rate by
speculative-grade rated non-financial corporations, over the period January 1999 to December
2007.
   Ratio of default on loans to default on bonds. It is 0.80 for the US and 0.73 for
the EA. The numbers are taken from Emery and Cantor (2005). Based on an analysis of 582
non-financial corporates between Jan1995 and Jun2003, they find that in the US the default
rate on loans is lower than the default rate on bonds by approximately 20%. Similar results
are found for european firms. Using data on 29 european non-financial corporate issuers, the
approximate reduction in the loan default rate relative to the bond default rate is 27%.
   Share abstain overall. We use data from the ENSR Entreprise Survey 2002 to sheed
light on the share of firms that do not raise external finance. The ENSR survey collects data
on small and medium size european entreprises (representing 99.8% of total entreprises in the
EA). It is documented that, during the three years previous to the survey, 37 percent of the
firms considered did not request a bank loan. Given the size of these firms, it is unlikely

                                                34
that they would finance themselves on the market if they do not do so through banks. We
therefore take this number as providing indirect evidence on the share of firms that does not
raise external finance.
    Firms’ capital as a share of aggregate capital. Based on US data from the 2004
Survey of Consumer Finances, Sandri (2009) documents that entrepreneurs own around 46%
of total wealth.


6    Financial variables

We provide analytical expressions for the financial variables used in the numerical application.
    The ratio of bank finance to bond finance, Υ is defined as the ratio of the funds raised
by bank-financed firms to the funds raised by CMF-financed firms. The amount of external
                                              b = ( − 1) 
finance raised by a producing firm  is  −              b . It follows that

                                                                              ( )
                                                                  Υ =                 
                                                                              ( )

    The average risk premia for bank-financed firms and CMF-financed firms are denoted re-
spectively as  and   Given the solution to the contract,   ( ) the risk premium for a
firm  that chooses to raise external finance from intermediary    is implicitly given by
the condition
                                      (1 +  ) ( − 
                                                          b ) =      =  

The average risk premia for bank-financed firms and for CMF-financed firms are then given by
                            R    
                                       R           h³         ´                               i
                                                       
                                          
                                                        −1        1 2   (1 2  ) − 1 Φ2 (2 )Φ1 (1 )
                                           1 
                    ≡
                                
                                                          R  R
                                                               Φ2 (2 )Φ1 (1 )
                                                                      
                                                                   1 
                            R         h³     ´                       i
                                                        (  ) − 1 Φ ( )
                                
                                         −1     1      1          1    1
                    ≡
                                
                                                 R                             
                                                    Φ1 (1 )
                                                         


    The aggregate debt to equity ratio   is defined as the ratio of all debt instruments used
by producing firms to the aggregate net worth of existing firms,
                                                           h                     i
                                                = ( − 1)  ( ) +  ( ) 




                                                                             35
    The default rate on bank loans, ∆  is defined as the share of firms which approaches banks
but cannot repay the debt,
                                R    
                                          R             ¡              ¢
                                     
                                                  Φ3  (1 2  ) Φ2 (2 )Φ1 (1 )
                                              1 
                        ∆ =
                                    
                                                         R                               
                                                                Φ2 (2 )Φ1 (1 )
                                                           


Similarly, the default rate on bonds, ∆  is given by the share of firms which borrow from
CMFs but cannot repay the debt,
                                                R
                                                       Φ2∗3 (  (1  )) Φ1 (1 )
                                ∆
                                                    
                                          =                 R                          
                                                               Φ1 (1 )
                                                                   


Average default amounts to the share of firms which sign a contract with either a bank or a
CMF but cannot repay the debt.
                                                                                                  1
    The gross expected return on equity is measured by (1 −  + ) (1 ) =                         Our target for
a net expected return on equity,   is then given by

                                                                     1
                                                           =        − 1
                                                                    


7    Robustness analysis: an alternative choice for  and .

The results reported in the paper (table 2, column labelled “mod”) show that the model
requires diﬀerent information acquisition costs, in order to replicate US and EA data. The
parameter  is .001 for the US and .028 for the EA. In the paper, we argue that such diﬀerence
may be needed for the model to capture the data, because monitoring costs are assumed to be
identical despite diﬀerences in bankruptcy laws and procedures.
    In order to check the robustness of our results, we have investigated alternative parameters.
More specifically, we have maintained the monitoring costs  for the US at .15 (in line with
available empirical evidence), while allowing the calibration procedure for the EA to select the
monitoring parameter, using the parameters of the US model as initial values, and restricting
 to take progressively closer values to the one obtained for the US.
    The columns labelled “data”and “model EA” in tables A1 to A4 coincide with the results
presented in the paper, whereas the columns labelled “model EA1” provide the alternative
calibration. Indeed, the best fit is found for a lower level of monitoring costs,  = 124 and for
an information acquisition cost parameter that is much closer to the one selected for the US,

                                                                    36
i.e.  = 005 Nonetheless, the fit of “model EA1” with the data is worse than the one oﬀered
by the benchmark EA model: numerically, it appeared to be very diﬃcult to get closer to the
data, when restricting  to values similar to those selected by the numerical procedure for the
US. Note, though, that the model predictions and the focal statistics are qualitatively similar:
we interpret this is as a sign of robustness of our results. Therefore, our interpretation of the
corporate finance diﬀerences remains valid under this alternative parameterization.
   As a further robustness check, we also attempted to solve for the model by equating the
value of  in the EA to the value of 0.001 in the US, and solve for . We then had considerably
greater numerical diﬃculty to match the observed facts than already emanate from the column
labeled “model EA1”. We suspect that the rather intricate nonlinearities in these six equations
may prevent the system to have a solution at all: there obviously is no reason to expect a
nonlinear system of six equations in six unknowns to have a solution. The same problem may
be the reason underlying the apparent worsening fit in the column “model EA1”. While this
may be an interesting issue that could be explored further, it is an issue that leads us rather
far astray from the main focus of the paper.

                                   Table A1: Financial facts

 Variable                         data US       mod US       data EA      mod EA       mod EA1
 Bank to bond finance ratio       0.66          0.67         5.48         5.48         5.48
 Debt to equity ratio             0.43          0.43         0.64         0.64         0.63
 Risk premium on loans (bps)      170           169          119          119          126
 Risk premium on bonds (bps)      143           143          143          147          132
 Default rate on bonds (pp)       5.37          5.36         4.96         4.79         5.01
 Return to entr capital (pp)      10.90         10.93        9.30         9.29         9.28




                                               37
                               Table A2: Financial predictions

  Parameters                                             Symbols                    Model
                                                                            US      EA       EA1
  Monitoring costs                                                         0.150   0.150    0.124
  Information acquisition                                                  0.001   0.028    0.005
  Coeﬀ. discount rate entr.                                                0.939   0.953    0.953
  Project size to net worth                                                1.551   2.102    1.784
  Standard dev. 1                                 1                      0.037   0.014    0.003
  Standard dev. 2                                 2                      0.024   0.069    0.031
  Standard dev. 3                                 3                      0.488   0.335    0.405
                                                   P3       2
  Overall variance unobserved shocks                   =2               0.238   0.117    0.165
                                                         ¡            ¢
  Precision avail info to precision private info   22  21 + 22       0.294   0.958    0.991
                                                         P
  Precision total info to precision public info    21  3=1 2         0.006   0.002    0.000
  Variance private info to info acquisition cost   22                   0.590   0.168    0.190


                       Table A3: Additional model predictions and data

Variable                                   data US        mod US          data EA     mod EA         mod EA1
Consumption to GDP ratio                   0.85           0.78            0.77        0.76           0.78
Investment to GDP ratio                    0.19           0.21            0.21        0.21           0.22
Average default rate                       4.74           5.63            4.25        4.08           4.87
Def. rate loans to def. rate bonds ratio   0.80           1.12            0.73        0.82           0.97
Share abstain overall                      n.a.           0.22            0.37        0.40           0.19
Entrepr. capital to aggr. capital ratio    0.46           0.25            n.a.        0.24           0.21




                                              38
    Table A4: Additional model predictions

                                    Model
Variable                    US      EA      EA1
Share abstain               0.028   0.000   0.000
Share bank                  0.503   0.910   0.875
Share CMF                   0.469   0.090   0.125
Drop-out if banking         0.376   0.444   0.216
Aggr. markup                1.041   1.021   1.031
Agency costs to GDP ratio   0.004   0.024   0.006




                      39
