                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       CROSS-BORDER MEDIA AND NATIONALISM:
                      EVIDENCE FROM SERBIAN RADIO IN CROATIA

                                        Stefano DellaVigna
                                        Ruben Enikolopov
                                          Vera Mironova
                                           Maria Petrova
                                       Ekaterina Zhuravskaya

                                        Working Paper 16989
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16989


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2011




Our special thanks go to Kristina Gulmac, Tihomir Zivic and to the University of Vukovar for the
invaluable help with the organization of the lab experiment. We are very grateful to Ben Olken for
providing the software necessary for ITM calculation. We also thank Bulat Gafarov, Roman Istomin,
Blazo Kazanegra, Andrey Korolev, Gleb Romanyuk, and Ruslan Sverchkov for excellent research
assistance. We thank Matthew Gentzkow, Irena Grosfeld, Ethan Kaplan, Fernanda Leite Lopez de
Leon, John Londregan, Tom Romer, John Schiemann, David Strömberg, and audiences at Columbia,
Harvard, IIES at the University of Stockholm, IMT Lucca, Princeton, Zurich, Paris School of Economics,
Stanford GSB, London School of Economics, UPF, Bocconi, the 8th Workshop on Media Economics,
the NBER Summer Institute in Political Economics, University of Maryland, and Hebrew University
for useful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Stefano DellaVigna, Ruben Enikolopov, Vera Mironova, Maria Petrova, and Ekaterina
Zhuravskaya. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Cross-border media and nationalism: Evidence from Serbian radio in Croatia
Stefano DellaVigna, Ruben Enikolopov, Vera Mironova, Maria Petrova, and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya
NBER Working Paper No. 16989
May 2011, Revised August 2013
JEL No. H41,H56,H77

                                              ABSTRACT

How do nationalistic media affect animosity between ethnic groups? We consider one of Europe’s
deadliest conflicts since WWII: the Serbo-Croatian conflict. We show that, after a decade of peace,
cross-border nationalistic Serbian radio triggers ethnic hatred towards Serbs in Croatia. Mostly attracted
by non-political content, many Croats listen to Serbian public radio (intended for Serbs in Serbia)
whenever signal is available. As a result, the vote for extreme nationalist parties is higher, and ethnically
offensive graffiti are more common, in Croatian villages with Serbian radio reception. A laboratory
experiment confirms that Serbian radio exposure causes anti-Serbian sentiment among Croats.


Stefano DellaVigna                                    Maria Petrova
University of California, Berkeley                    New Economic School
Department of Economics                               and Princeton University
549 Evans Hall #3880                                  petrova.ma@gmail.com
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER                                              Ekaterina Zhuravskaya
sdellavi@econ.berkeley.edu                            Paris School of Economics
                                                      48 Bd Jourdan
Ruben Enikolopov                                      75014 Paris
Institute for Advanced Study                          France
and New Economic School                               ezhuravskaya@gmail.com
renikolopov@gmail.com

Vera Mironova
Department of Political Science
University of Maryland
vera-ge0@mail.ru
          1. Introduction
       Which factors fuel animosity between ethnic groups? What stands in the way of a
durable peace and cooperation between groups that were formerly at war? A substantial
literature has considered the importance of differences in income and resources, political
institutions, aid, and the history of relationships between ethnic groups, among other factors, as
reviewed in Blattman and Miguel (2010) and Jackson and Morelli (2011).
         In this paper, we consider the impact of an understudied factor: how the exposure to
media intended to strengthen nationalistic identification of a particular ethnic group affects
nationalistic feelings of a rival group. As radio and television waves travel across political and
ethnic boundaries, ethnic groups often get exposed to nationalistic media of their rivals.
Oftentimes, such exposure occurs across borders, when neighboring ethnic groups share a
language, as is common for countries that formerly belonged to one larger entity, i.e., the
U.S.S.R, Yugoslavia, or Sudan. Such exposure also often occurs within countries when rival
ethnic and religious groups speak the same language. Examples range from Muslims and Hindus
in India to Basques and Spanish in Spain.
        The effect of exposure to nationalistic content of a rival’s media is not a priori obvious.
On the one hand, it may trigger ethnic animosity, increasing the polarization of political views
(Glaeser and Sunstein 2008), and thus making future conflict more likely. An alternate
possibility is that such exposure may instead reduce informational asymmetries between groups
and alleviate ethnic tensions (Allport 1954). Finally, the cross-group impact of media may be
negligible, if people mostly consume media that support their own views (Sunstein, 2001;
Durante and Knight, 2012).
       This paper examines the impact of cross-border media exposure on nationalistic behavior
in the aftermath of one of Europe’s deadliest conflicts since WWII, namely, the Serbo-Croatian
conflict in the 1991-95 Yugoslavian wars. The region of Croatia near the Serbian-Croatian
border was the site of a full-scale armed conflict between Serbs and Croats in 1991 and was
under Serbian occupation till 1995. The military operations of the Serbian-Croatian conflict
ended in 1995, and Slobodan Milošević—the former president of Serbia—was overthrown in
2000 and handed to the Hague International Criminal Tribunal. Still, in the following decade the
public media in Serbia has continued to promote Serbian nationalism. In particular, public radio
stations (i.e., radios of the Radio-Television of Serbia group, RTS, also known as Serbian
Broadcasting Corporation) operate with the official mission to strengthen Serbian national
identity (IREX 2010). This raises the question of the impact of the Serbian nationalistic radio on
nationalistic sentiment in Croatia, which we address in this paper.
        The Serb-Croat case is a nearly ideal setting to study cross-group effects of media. The
signal of Serbian public radio intended for internal consumption inside Serbia reaches several,
but not all, villages in this region of Croatia. As Serbs and Croats speak the same language,
despite using different alphabets, Croats can fully understand the Serbian radio.1 We are able to

1
    According to Greenberg (2004), the difference between Serbian and Croatian spoken language is similar in
                                                      1
narrow down the analysis of cross-group effects of media exposure to radio because it is the
primary media source in this area.
       We focus on the region in Croatia neighboring the border with Serbia. We use detailed
village-level information on media reception, voting, and other nationalistic behavior to answer
two key questions: Do Croats actually listen to Serbian radio when it is available? If so, does
Serbian radio have any effect on nationalistic political views and attitudes towards Serbs?
        Using a street survey of residents of Croatian villages located close to the Serbian border,
we find that the answer to the first question is positive. In areas where Serbian radio signal is
available for representative radio sets, 78% of respondents acknowledge that they listen to
Serbian radio occasionally. The high percentage of listeners of Serbian radio among Croats
stands in contrast with an extreme view of political polarization -- that consumers only listen to
media outlets that conform to their political beliefs -- and is consistent with more moderate
evidence of polarization in the US media (Gentzkow and Shapiro 2011). Both survey and
anecdotal evidence suggests that, in addition to a desire for alternative information, Croats tune
in to Serbian radio to listen to its non-political content, such as popular Serbian singers from the
times of Socialist Yugoslavia whose music is restricted in public spaces in Croatia, and in doing
so encounter also political content.2 This is consistent with the social psychology literature
suggesting that people choose media outlets broadcasting messages that disagree with their
priors either because of strong interest in a particular sub-set of a broadcasted content (Iyengar,
et al. 2008). It is also possible that Croatian listeners tune in to the Serbian radio to learn about
rival’s point of view to be able to defend better their own view point (Valentino et al. 2009).
        Does Serbian radio trigger ethnic animosity and nationalistic behavior among Croats
who get exposed to it? We estimate the effect of Serbian radio on the propensity to vote for
extremist nationalistic parties as well as expressions of ethnic hatred, namely anti-Serbian
graffiti. Our identification strategy relies on variation in the availability of Serbian radio among
different villages in the border region.
         We use two measures of availability of Serbian radio. As the first measure, we use hand-
collected data on actual availability of Serbian radios in 139 villages in the region adjacent to
Serbian border (our baseline sample), measured using an ordinary receiver. As the second
measure, we compute signal strength of Serbian radios using information on Serbian transmitters
and the topography of the region for all 417 villages in Croatia within 75 kilometers of the
Croatian-Serbian border (our extended sample). The two measures, which are positively
correlated, are complementary: the hand-collected measure captures fine variation in radio
reception which the signal strength calculations do not, but is affected by unavoidable errors in
hand measurement; the signal strength is available for a larger sample, but does not measure the
impact of non-topographic obstacles such as forests.


magnitude to the difference between British and American English.
2
  A number of former Socialist Yugoslavian singers, popular among Croats, are banned from Croatia for political
reasons.
                                                       2
       In both samples, the availability of Serbian radio significantly increased the votes for
extremist nationalist political parties during the Parliamentary election of 2007. The estimates
imply that a substantial part of the vote for ultra-nationalist parties in the border region of
Croatia is explained by the reception of Serbian radio. The exposure to Serbian radio also
reduces the vote share for the moderate nationalistic party and, in some specifications, increases
the vote share for the social-democratic party, suggesting an increased polarization of the
electorate. To quantify the main effect, we combine election and street survey results to compute
a persuasion rate, i.e., the fraction of Croats who changed their voting behavior in response to
Serbian radio among those who were exposed (DellaVigna and Kaplan 2007; DellaVigna and
Gentzkow 2010). The implied persuasion rate of 3% to 4% is on the lower end of the
distribution of the estimates of persuasion rates of media on their intended recipients obtained by
the literature on political effects of media.
         As a measure of non-political expression of nationalistic sentiment, we consider the
presence of graffiti offensive to Serbs in the open spaces in the village. We find that Serbian
radio availability is associated with a significantly higher likelihood of having ethnically-
offensive graffiti in the village center. Hence, the impact of radio exposure on nationalistic
feelings extends beyond political choices.
        As the measures of availability of Serbian radio may correlate with other determinants of
nationalistic sentiment and generate spurious results, we document what determines the
variation in radio availability. The hand-collected radio reception measure is orthogonal to a
large set of all available observables. This result is consistent with the variation in reception
being idiosyncratic. The signal strength measure, in contrast, is correlated with distance from the
border and with the percentage of disabled after the war. We show, however, that adding extra
geographic and demographic controls to the specification estimating the effect of signal strength
leaves point estimates essentially unaffected. As the size and direction of a potential bias due to
omitted confounds depends on their effect on dependent variable, we use an index of control
variables to show that the observables are mostly negatively correlated (though insignificantly
so) with nationalistic voting. In the spirit of the Altonji, Elder, and Taber (2005), we conclude
that, to the extent that the unobservables are positively correlated with the observables, our
estimates are likely to be biased towards zero, i.e., against finding the results.
        In addition, as a quasi-placebo experiment, we examine the impact of radios that are not
expected to affect nationalistic feelings. In particular, we show that cross-border exposure to
Hungarian radio, which broadcasts in a language understood by very few Croats, does not have
any impact. We also find no evidence that villages with exposure to popular Croatian radios vote
more for nationalistic parties. Hence, the estimated effect of Serbian radio is unlikely to be due
to omitted geographic features associated with better radio signal reception in general.
        We also consider a number of robustness checks to address possible alternative
explanations. The main results are robust to controlling for driving time and distance to the
border, and war experience. The results are also unaffected by a correction for spatial

                                                3
correlation, using alternative measures of nationalistic voting, or using a matching estimator
instead of OLS. The effects are smaller but qualitatively consistent when controlling for free-
space signal strength, which addresses the possibility that the location of Serbian radio
transmitters was endogenous to spatial variation in Croatian nationalism. Finally, additional
controls for the signal strength of major Croatian radios do not eliminate the impact of Serbian
radio, suggesting that substitution away from Croatian radio is not the main channel of influence
of Serbian radio.
        We also consider the impact on election results in 2011 and 2003. The results for the
2011 elections are largely consistent with the 2007 results: exposure to Serbian radio is
associated with an increase in voting for the extremely nationalistic party. In contrast to the
results for 2007 and 2011, there is only limited evidence of an effect of Serbian radio exposure
measured in 2009 on the election results in 2003. The data quality for 2003, however, is lower.
       Overall, these results suggest that Serbian public radio hostile to Croats appears to have
an important effect working across the border resulting in a substantial increase in extremist
nationalistic sentiment among the Croatian population. We also conduct a laboratory
experiment, which confirms that Serbian public radio has content offensive to Croats, as they
express higher anti-Serbian sentiment after being exposed to this radio as opposed to other radio
stations. The experimental results also suggest that it is the nationalistic content of Serbian radio
that triggers ethnic animosity among Croats, since the exposure to non-nationalistic Serbian
radio has a smaller effect on nationalistic sentiment in the laboratory.
        This paper contributes to several literatures. First, it speaks to the literature on the effect
of media on political behavior.3 Within this literature, our paper is related to work examining the
effect of media on ethnic conflict, including Yanagizawa (2009) who investigates the effect of
“hate speech” on casualties from the genocide in Rwanda in 1994 and Gentzkow and Shapiro
(2004) who argue that media in Arabic countries reinforces anti-American sentiment in the
population. In contrast to these papers, which largely focused on the effects of propaganda in
fueling ethnic animosity on the intended on-target audiences, we identify what is likely to be an
unintended media effect on an off-target audience as a catalyst of ethnic hatred.4 A
complementary angle is taken by Paluck and Green (2009) who study the impact of an
appeasing educational broadcast via radio in post-conflict Rwanda with a field experiment.5 Our
paper also contributes to the broader literature on the determinants of conflict and ethnic hatred.6
3
  Important contributions include, but not limited to Strömberg 2004; Gentzkow 2006; DellaVigna and Kaplan
2007; Gerber, Karlan, and Bergan 2009; Snyder and Strömberg 2010; Knight and Chiang 2011 for United States,
and Lawson and McCann 2005; Olken 2009; Enikolopov, Petrova, and Zhuravskaya 2011 for other countries.
4
  While we cannot completely rule out the possibility that the Serbian radios have the intent to trigger animosity
among Croats, it is unlikely since the vast majority of listeners to these radios are Serbs in Serbia. If these radios
were targeted at Croats, the transmitters would have been placed closer to the Croatian border to increase the
penetration into the Croatian territory.
5 Our findings are also related to the papers on cross-border effects of the media, e.g., Hainmueller and Kern
(2009), Bursztyn and Cantoni (2011), or Butler and De La O (2011).
6 See, e.g., Hess and Orphanides (1995), Glaeser (2005), Jackson and Morelli (2007), Chassang and Padró i Miquel
(2010), Dube and Vargas (2011), Caselli et al. (2012), Dube and Naidu (2012), Jha (2013), Voigtländer and Voth
(2012), Grosfeld et al. (2013).
                                                          4
This paper is the first one to consider cross-group media exposure. Our work is also related to
the literature on attitudes in post-conflict societies (e.g., Acemoglu and Wolitsky 2012, Rohner
et al. 2012, Bellows and Miguel 2009, Blattman 2009, and Voors et al. 2012).
       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides background information
as well as a description of the data. Section 3 presents the empirical results of the survey, the
laboratory experiment, and the village-level nationalistic choices. Section 4 presents a battery of
robustness checks. Section 5 concludes.


         2. Background and the data
      2.1. Conflict. The Croatian-Serbian conflict (1991-1995) was one of several major open-
armed conflicts in the former Socialist Yugoslavia, known as Yugoslavian wars. Croatians are
predominantly Catholic Christians, whereas Serbians are predominantly Orthodox Christians.
Ethnic animosity between the two groups goes back at least to the beginning of the 20th century
and had been escalating since the 1980s. The armed conflict started in 1991. The Croatian side
aimed at establishing a sovereign state independent of Yugoslavia, while the Serbian minority,
which quickly got military support from Serbia, opposed the secession and wanted Croatia to
remain a part of Yugoslavia (with the center in Belgrade, Serbian capital city). Subsequently
there was a series of deadly military operations, which included massacres of civilians and
ethnic cleansing on both sides. The conflict ended in 1995 with Croatia achieving the goal of
becoming an independent country within the borders that it claimed in 1991. Estimates of the
number of victims for the Croatian-Serbian conflict alone amount to roughly 250,000 displaced
civilians and 20,000 casualties (the vast majority of which were civilians).7 Some episodes of
the Yugoslavian wars were formally characterized as genocide. To investigate and prosecute
Yugoslavian war crimes, the UN established the International Criminal Tribunal.
        The mass media played a crucial role in fueling ethnic animosity and escalating the
conflict before and during disintegration of Socialist Yugoslavia. In particular, the RTS media
group actively supported the Milošević regime, denied Serbian aggression, and selectively
covered information on victims of war from the Serbian side.8
       The border region of Croatia that we focus on is called Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and
Western Srijem (it is indicated on the map on Figure 1a). This region was particularly affected
by the war. It consists of areas occupied by Serbs during the war and adjacent communities.9
There are two counties in this region, which differ in political and war history (see the Online

7
    "Presidents apologize over Croatian war". BBC News Online. BBC. September 10, 2003.
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/europe/3095774.stm
8
  See, for instance, Thompson (1994); Smajlović (1997), Skiljan (2000), Hockenos (2003), Kurspahić (2003), and
MacDonald and Bruce (2002).
9
  Our baseline sample consists of villages close to the Serbian-Croatian border. These villages had been particularly
affected during the war, and most had been occupied. We tried to visit all such villages, excluding the cities of
Vukovar and Osijek which are not comparable to the relatively small villages of the rural areas of the region. As
Figure 1a shows, we missed a small number of villages in this region (the purple dots near the Serbian-Croatian
border) largely because their administrative status had changed. We show below that the results are robust to the
inclusion of these villages.
                                                         5
Appendix for details). In the empirical analysis, we always include county fixed effects to
control for these differences.
        2.2. Serbian radio in Croatia and measures of its availability. There are four major
types of media today in the region of our study, close to the Serbo-Croatian border: Croatian
television, Croatian print media, Croatian radio, and Serbian radio. Croatian television and print
media, however, play smaller roles relative to the radio because of a low penetration of
television sets and newspapers in the rural areas, which are our main focus of our study. Being
relatively cheap and easily accessible, radio has been the most important source of information
about politics since the times of Socialist Yugoslavia. A typical Croatian listens to radio for
approximately 250 minutes a day (Peruško and Jurlin 2006). Most people in the region do not
turn off the radio during the day, and many listen to it on the streets. Local radio stations
dominate the radio market: three national public channels have a joint share of just 10% of radio
audiences. Local radio stations are controlled by local governments who own 70% of the local
media and also indirectly control the remaining stations (Peruško and Jurlin 2006).
       The long diffusion of radio waves implies that the main alternative to Croatian radio for
the majority of population in the border region is Serbian and Bosnian radio stations broadcasts
from the other side of the border.
       There are four Serbian public radio stations: RTS Radio 1 (news), RTS Radio 2 (art),
RTS Radio 3 (intellectual programs), and Radio Belgrade 202 (popular music), in addition to
numerous private stations. With the exception of one private station, Radio B92, founded in
1989 by the Soros foundation and USAID, all Serbian radio stations with some news and
political content support the Serbian government, in part because of a centralized license
allocation process. In particular, Serbian public radios aim at reinforcing the Serbian national
identity, with 9% of coverage dedicated to neighboring countries including Croatia, focusing
primarily on war and war crimes in these countries. Many observers point out that news
broadcasts are biased in favor of Serbia, particularly, in the coverage of the conflict (IREX 2010,
Nedeljkovic, Dubravka and Bacanovic 2007, pp. 214-219, Udovicic 2005, p. 21). In addition,
some non-political broadcasts, such as so-called turbo-folk music, invented during Milosevic
rule, are considered offensive by many Croats and Bosnians as it glorifies Serbs during the war
(Kronja 2004).
        We construct two measures of the reception of Serbian radio in a village. The first
measure, which is available for the baseline sample of 139 villages, is based on hand-collected
data obtained while travelling throughout the region in June 2009 and June 2010. In the center of
each village (near the church or the war monument), we used a portable radio receiver to test
whether the RTS Serbian stations were available. We count a radio station as available if its
quality was good enough to listen to it based on subjective assessment of two people. The
measure of availability is an indicator for whether at least one RTS radio station is available.
        The second measure of reception of Serbian radio is the signal strength constructed using


                                                6
the location and power of RTS transmitters.10 This measure is available for the extended sample
of all 417 villages located within 75 kilometers from the Croatian-Serbian border.11
         Similarly to Olken (2009) and Enikolopov et al. (2011), we apply the Irregular Terrain
Model (Hufford 2002) to calculate the signal loss caused by physical distance and topography
between transmitting and receiving locations. Figure 1a portrays both samples on the map.
Figure 1b displays the geographic variation in both measures for the baseline sample of villages.
The signal strength and the manually-measured reception line up, though the overlap is far from
complete. Online Appendix Figure 1a presents a map of signal strength in the extended sample.
On average, the availability declines with the distance from the Serbian border, though in a
jagged way.12
       2.3. Croatian political landscape and the measures of nationalistic voting. The
Croatian Parliament (Sabor) has one chamber with members elected every four years. There are
10 multi-member electoral districts in mainland Croatia and an additional electoral district
giving representation to Croatians living abroad. The electoral rule in each district is
proportional representation with closed party lists and the minimum of 5% of total vote to get
representation, with 8 seats reserved for ethnic minorities. Our main focus is on the election that
took place in November 2007. This was the third post-war parliamentary election and the first
one taking place in a relatively stable economic and political environment. In total, 145
representatives were elected from 11 districts representing 8 parties (and party alliances). We
also report results using the 2003 and 2011 elections. However, the 2007 elections provide a
cleaner measure of nationalistic sentiments on the local population. In 2003, a large number of
refugees from the region still had not returned to their homes. The 2011 election was the last one
before Croatia’s accession to the European Union, and nationalistic issues were deliberately kept
out of the campaign in fear of a EU negative reaction.13
        The two main political parties in Croatia (HDZ and SDP) have very different views on
the issue of nationalism. The political party that got the largest share of the total vote in 2007
(36.6%) and most seats (66) is the Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ, Hrvatska demokratska
zajednica). It is the main center-right political party with a moderate nationalist pro-Croatian

10
   The location data came from the RTS website and the technical characteristics of the transmitters from
www.fmscan.org.
11
   Villages located more than 75 kilometers from the border have very low signal strength; the reception of the
Serbian radio is highly unlikely in these villages and, therefore, there is no meaningful variation among them. In the
Online Appendix, we show that the results for the extended sample are robust to using a more restrictive sample of
villages within 50 kilometers from the border.
12
   The two measures have advantages and disadvantages. The ITM model does not capture non-topographic
obstacles, such as forest on the line of sight between the transmitter and the receiver. A manually collected measure
takes into account all such obstacles, but depends on the characteristics of the receiver actually used, and is
unavailable for a larger sample.
13
   An important caveat is that both radio reception variables were measured in 2009 and 2010, whereas the election
data are from 2007 (or 2003, or 2011). Our analysis is valid under the assumption that the radio reception did not
change much in this period. We believe that this assumption is reasonable for 2007-2011. During the war some of
Serbian or Croatian transmitters, built in the times of socialist Yugoslavia, were damaged, but the vast majority was
repaired by the beginning of 2000s and was left largely unchanged since. In particular, transmitters, both Serbian
and Croatian, remained the same in 2007-2011.
                                                          7
ideology. The party entered parliament in 1990 and positioned itself as anti-Communist and
anti-Serbian-nationalism of Slobodan Milošević. The second largest political party in Croatia
(with 56 seats and 31.2% of total vote in 2007) is the Social Democratic Party of Croatia (SDP,
Socijaldemokratska partija Hrvatske). This center-left opposition party is usually considered as
the heir of the Communist Party of Croatia. Among all major political parties, SDP has the most
neutral position vis-à-vis Serbia, and it is the most popular party among the Serbian minority in
Croatia.
       The remaining 23 seats of the 2007 Sabor are shared among 6 smaller political parties.
Our main focus is on voting for the ultra-nationalist political party, the Croatian Party of Rights
(HSP, Hrvatska stranka prava) as a measure of nationalistic sentiment. This party is fairly
popular in the border region with Serbia. It got 8% of the total vote in the northern part of the
border region and 5.2% in the southern part; as a result, it gained one seat in the Croatian
parliament of 2007. This party is the main extreme nationalist party in Croatia (Laqueur 1997,
Hislope 1996) with the ideology of supporting "the Great Croatia."14 After the war, two wings of
HSP seceded because of internal party conflicts and formed independent political parties (HP-
HPP and HCSP). These parties share the same ultra-nationalist ideology and find some
(insignificant) support in the border region.15
        We characterize the main Croatian political parties according to the strength of their
nationalistic rhetoric in 2007-2010. We consider HSP together with its former factions (HP-HPP
and HCSP) as extreme nationalistic; HDZ as moderately nationalistic; and SDP as neutral.16
        For each election, we obtained the election results at the level of polling stations from the
Central Election Commission of Croatia. We matched and aggregated these data to the village
level. The vast majority of villages include up to 4 polling stations. Our main electoral outcomes
are vote shares for the extreme nationalist parties (HSP, HP-HPP and HCSP), for the moderate
nationalist parties (HDZ), and for the main party without nationalistic ideology (SDP). Turnout
is measured as the total votes cast divided by the number of eligible voters.
       2.4. Additional data sources. To supplement data on voting outcomes, we collected
information about the presence of ethnically-offensive graffiti on public buildings in the centers
of all villages in the baseline sample. We classified graffiti as being ethnically offensive
14
   “Velika Hrvatska," or Great Croatia, is the ideology of modern Croatian ultra-nationalists, according to which
Croatia should be only for Croats and its territory should unite all the lands that belonged to Croatia before Ottoman
invasions of the 15th, 16th and 17th century. These territories include parts of modern Serbia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and Montenegro (Vienna Profit, August 3 1992 in FBIS Daily Report (Eastern Europe), August 3,
1992. pp, 26-7). In the 1990s, HSP created its own paramilitary unit that aimed to secure Croatian independence
from Yugoslavia (UNCE 1994) and used the symbols resembling those of the fascist state during WWII.
15
    Despite our focus is on relatively small parties, one should not underestimate their potential impact on policy.
E.g., Folke (2011) shows that marginal political representation of small parties had a large effect on environmental
and immigration policies of Swedish municipalities. Also, small extreme nationalistic parties might unexpectedly
gain large popularity in times of economic crisis with potentially disastrous consequences (i.e. the case of Nazi
Party in Weimar Republic).
16
     The other political parties that got representation are as follows: two regionally-oriented parties (Istrian
Democratic Assembly, IDS, and Croatian Democratic Alliance of Slavonija and Baranja, HDSSB); a party with
liberal ideology (HNS-LD); a single-issue pensioners party (HSU) and an agrarian socialist party (HSS - HSLS).

                                                          8
according to the methodology used by local NGO Globalpact in Vukovar in 2008.
Representative examples of these graffiti are slogans as “Ubi Srbina” (“Kill a Serb”) or “Srbe na
vrbe” (“Hang a Serb on a willow”) (Online Appendix Figure 2 presents an illustration). We
generate an indicator variable for villages with graffiti which are “somewhat” or “strongly
offensive” towards Serbs. Of the 139 villages we visited, 36 had ethnically-offensive graffiti.
       In the regression analysis, we use a number of control variables. Demographic controls
come from the Croatian Census of 2001. We use the following village-level variables: logarithm
of population, share of males, fractions of people between 21 and 40, between 41 and 60, and
over 60 years of age. We also control for labor force participation, share of population disabled
after the War of independence, the shares of Croats, and the share of people with higher
education. These controls also come from the Census, but are available at the level of
municipality (općina), which typically includes several villages.
       We collected additional control variables during our visits to the villages in the baseline
sample: (i) the language in which the street names are written – indicators for Cyrillic script and
for Hungarian language and (ii) an indicator for signs that advertised Serbian beer outside
village bars; (iii) an indicator for monuments in honor of Croatians killed during the Serbo-
Croatian war; (iv) an indicator for whether the village played an important role during the war,
as coded by a former military official in charge of defending this region; (v) an indicator of
whether there is a large forest near the village from the Serbian side as forests hamper the radio
signals. We also control for geographic distance as well as time and distance of travel to Serbia.
The sources for these variables are Google Earth and the Geocode Stata module. Finally, we
control for county fixed effects. The baseline sample consists of two counties: Vukovar-Sirmium
and Osijek-Baranja; the extended sample includes three additional counties: Slavonski Brod,
Virovitica-Podravina, and Požega-Slavonia. Summary statistics for all variables used in the
regression analysis are presented in Online Appendix Table 1.

       3. Main Results
        3.1. Do Croats listen to Serbian radio? The measures of radio availability provide us
with variation in whether Croatian villagers are able to listen to Serbian radio. In order to study
the impact of exposure to this radio, one needs to understand if the villagers where Serbian radio
is available actually listen to the broadcast coming from across the border.
        To answer this question, in December 2010 and January 2011 we conducted a face-to-
face survey of 70 individuals in 9 villages in the baseline sample: 4 villages without Serbian
radio access (according to our measures), and 5 villages with access to at least one Serbian
radio. (Online Appendix Figure 1b shows that the 9 villages are contiguous.) We asked people
on the central street of each village whether they could answer a few questions. The response
rate was about 50%. The questionnaire and a more detailed description of the survey are given in
the Online Appendix.
       First, we asked respondents whether Serbian radio is available in their village. As Figure

                                                9
2a shows, 87 percent of the respondents in villages that we categorize as having at least one
Serbian radio respond affirmatively to the question, compared to 56 percent in villages that we
categorize as having no reception.17 We also asked respondents how often they listen to Serbian
radio. As Figure 2b shows, in the villages with at least one Serbian radio station (according to
our hand-collected measure), only 26 percent of the respondents state that they never listen to
Serbian radio; whereas 32 percent state that they listen to Serbian radio at least once a week. In
contrast, in the villages that we code as not having Serbian radio, 62 percent state that they never
listen to Serbian radio; and only 16 percent state that they do so at least once per week. A linear
probability model indicates a statistically significant difference between the two types of
villages in the likelihood of listening to Serbian radios at least some times according to survey
responses (Table 1).
       Figure 2c indicates a similar pattern using the signal strength variable. The dots
representing the villages in the survey indicate a positive relationship between signal strength
and the measure of listening to Serbian radio; the pattern is similar for the question on
availability of Serbian radio (Online Appendix Figure 3a). Columns 3 and 4 of Table 1 indicate
that the relationship is statistically significant. We also asked whether respondents thought that
other villagers listen to Serbian radio and got a similar pattern (Online Appendix Figure 3b).
        The survey also provides information on the availability of Bosnian and Croatian radios
allowing estimation of the patterns of substitution between radios. We find no significant
differences across villages with and without Serbian radio in either the self-reported reception or
the pattern of listening to Bosnian radio (Online Appendix Figures 4a and 4b). In contrast, we
find some substitution away from Croatian radio when Serbian radio is available. Namely, while
there is no difference across the two types of villages in the share reporting reception of Croatian
radio, as all respondents report reception (Online Appendix Figure 4c), in villages with Serbian
radio, respondents are less likely to listen to Croatian radio frequently (Online Appendix Table 2
and Online Appendix Figure 4d and 4e). There is no variation in the likelihood of listening to
the Croatian radio at least sometimes as nearly all respondents report doing so.
        Overall, the survey findings indicate that a significant share of respondents listen to
Serbian radio. In addition, the survey provides a reality check on our hand-collected radio
availability measure and shows that our measure correlates well with survey measures of both
the availability and listenership of Serbian radios.18
         The survey also provides some suggestive evidence on why Croats listen to Serbian

17
   There are several potential explanations for the stated availability of Serbia radio in villages that we classify as
not having such availability. First, our measure is crude and radio receivers differ in their power. We used a
portable receiver, whereas better quality receivers or amplifiers are fairly common. Second, people can listen in cars
or when visiting their friends or relatives in neighboring villages. Third, there is weather-related variation in the
quality of signal. Fourth, we measure the presence of the signal in the center of the village, but there might be
within village variation. Finally, there are different Serbian radios, broadcasted from different places, and the
absence of the availability of RTS radios does not mean there is no Serbian radio in the village. Unfortunately,
people do not remember the names of radios, so we could not ask specifically about RTS radio.
18
   This survey evidence could only be considered suggestive, as the sample of villages is very small and cannot be
representative.
                                                         10
radio. Specifically, people who reported listening to Serbian radio were more likely to express
preferences for Serbian music stating that they support the concerts of Serbian artists in Slavonia
and are familiar with new songs of the Serbian artists etc. (see Online Appendix Table 3). While
this is a simple correlation, it is interesting that we find no such correlation between reported
listening to Croatian or Bosnian radio and preference for Serbian music. This evidence thus
suggests that a preference for the entertainment content embedded in the RTS programming may
be the main reason for the high exposure to Serbian radio, despite its nationalistic content.
        3.2. Inflammatory radio content: experimental results. To provide evidence that
certain types of Serbian radio have inflammatory content for Croats, we designed a laboratory
experiment in which we exposed Croatian students from the region to different remixes of news
and music from radio programs typically broadcast in the region.19
        We randomized the students into three groups. Each group listened to a short radio remix
consisting of three recordings of news broadcasts separated by two songs. The first two news
broadcasts were common to all three groups and drawn from a Croatian radio station. In
contrast, the two songs and the third news broadcast differed between group assignments: The
first group listened to fragments from Croatian radio only and two popular Croatian songs. The
second group listened to a fragment from the independent Serbian radio B92 and two popular
Serbian songs. The third group listened to a fragment from the Serbian Public RTS radio
(substantially more nationalistic than B92) and another two popular Serbian songs.20 None of the
news broadcasts mention the Serbo-Croatian conflict. More details about the experiment are
available in the Online Appendix.
        After the exposure to the radio broadcast, we asked the subjects a number of questions
on attitudes toward different ethnic groups: Serbs, Bosnians, Hungarians, Rusini. Figure 3
displays the effect on a standardized measure, which aggregates the different attitudinal
responses, with the disaggregated evidence presented in Online Appendix Figures 5a-e. The
exposure to Serbian radio had a dramatic effect of inducing more negative attitudes towards
Serbs. This effect is more pronounced for the exposure to the RTS Serbian public radio, which is
the focus of our study, compared to the exposure to the less-nationalistic B92 Serbian private
radio. There is no effect of either treatment on attitudes towards other ethnic groups, as
expected.
       The experimental findings suggest that even a short exposure to the type of content
featured in the Serbian RTS radio (such as the song devoted to a Serbian alleged war criminal)
affects attitudes towards Serbs in the direction of increased anti-Serbian sentiment. As subjects
treated with Serbian public radio, openly hostile to Croatia, were substantially more affected

19
   The experiment was held in the university of Vukovar, the main city in the region occupied by Serbs during the
war.
20
   The songs were chosen to be representative of those typically played on Croatian radio, B92 radio, and RTS
radio, respectively. The songs played in the two Serbian radio treatments are modern, but have direct references to
Serbian national folklore, easily identifiable by Croats. In addition, one of the songs in the RTS treatment has a
direct reference to the Serbo-Croatian conflict, as it is devoted to a former Serbian paramilitary commander accused
of war crimes in Croatia.
                                                        11
compared to those treated with B92 Serbian radio, neutral towards Croats, the likely channel of
the effect of Serbian radio exposure is through reminding Croats about current Serbian
nationalism and anti-Croatian rhetoric rather than reminding just about the proximity to their
former war enemy.
       3.3. Determinants of radio availability. Turning to the analysis of the village-level data
on Serbian radio reception and nationalism, we first document how the measures of availability
of Serbian radio correlate with control variables, which may also be related to nationalistic
sentiment.
       In Panel A of Table 2, we estimate the OLS regression
             Availability _ of _ RTS _ radioi = β0 + β1X i + φr + ε i              (1)
where Availability _ of _ RTS _ radioi is a measure of availability of Serbian radio stations, X i
is a vector of socioeconomic and demographic controls, and ϕ r are county fixed effects. We
first examine the predictability of hand-collected availability of Serbia radio. Column 1 shows
that out of 15 non-geographic controls, only education has a statistically significant effect on the
measured reception of Serbian radio in the villages in the baseline sample. Jointly, the non-
geographic controls are not statistically significant predictors of Serbian radio availability (F-
statistic of 0.99). We obtain similar results in Column 2 where we also control for signal
strength, a strong predictor of radio signal. The joint lack of significance of the non-geographic
controls is consistent with the availability of Serbian radio being idiosyncratic.
        Columns 3 and 4 in Panel A of Table 2 focus on the predictors of the signal strength. The
signal strength of Serbian radio is related significantly to several control variables, including the
distance to Serbia, population, and the number of individuals disabled in the war of
independence. Unlike in the case of measured availability, the non-geographic controls
significantly predict radio availability measured by signal strength (F=3.1 and F=5.6). We
address the identification concerns associated with such correlations below.
        3.4. The effect of Serbian radio on Croatian nationalism. We test whether Serbian
radio affects expressions of nationalistic feelings by Croats, such as voting behavior, and in
particular, voting for Croatian extreme nationalist parties (HSP and its former factions, HCSP
and HP-HPP) and ethnically-offensive graffiti. We estimate the OLS regression:
        dep _vari = β 0 + β1 ⋅ Availability _ of _ RTS _ radioi + β 2 X i + φr + ε i     (2)
in which dep_vari denotes the a particular measure of nationalistic behavior in village i,
Availability _ of _ RTS _ radioi is the measure of availability of Serbian radio stations, i.e., either
an indicator variable for the measured availability or signal strength, X i is a vector of
socioeconomic and demographic controls, and ϕ r are county fixed effects. We weight the
observations by the number of registered voters in 2007 and cluster the standard errors at the
municipality (općina) level.
       Table 3 presents the results of estimation of equation (2) for the vote share of extreme
nationalistic parties in the baseline sample with only county fixed effects as controls (Column


                                                  12
1),21 with geographic and Census demographic controls (Column 2), and with all controls
(Column 3). In the specification with most controls (Column 3), the availability of Serbian radio
increases the vote share for the extreme nationalist parties by 2.6 percentage points relative to a
baseline vote share of 7 percentage points, a statistically and economically significant effect.
Online Appendix Table 4 reports the coefficient on all the control variables for this and other
specifications.
        A key concern is that the availability of Serbian radio could proxy for (unobservable)
confounding variables that are positively correlated with nationalistic sentiment and hence bias
upward the correlation between radio availability and nationalistic vote share. Above, we have
shown that the observables are not significant determinants of the radio availability variable
(Panel A of Table 2). A complementary test in the spirit of Altonji, Elder, and Taber (2005) is to
examine how the introduction of control variables affects the results. If there is an upward bias
in the estimates due to an omitted variable, adding controls should lower the point estimate,
since they reduce the impact of the bias on the estimates. When we apply this test, we find no
evidence that a bias drives the results upward. The point estimate of the effect of radio remains
essentially identical with the addition of controls. While it is possible that our control variables
are not positively correlated with the unobservables which bias the results, the controls include
plausible correlates of nationalism (such as an indicator for importance during the war) and do a
good job of predicting the nationalistic vote share, with an R-squared of 0.60 (Column 3).
       One may worry that the estimated effect of exposure to Serbian radio reflects the impact
of an outlier village, especially given the small sample of 139 villages in the baseline sample, of
which 16 villages are identified as having reception of Serbian radios. To address this concern,
Figure 4a provides a comparison of the c.d.f. of the vote share for the extreme nationalistic party
in the villages with and without reception of Serbian radio, after taking control variables into
account. (We regress the vote share on all the control variables in Column 3 except the radio
reception, and plot the residuals evaluated at the mean; a similar plot, but without taking controls
into account, is presented in Online Appendix Figure 6a). The vote share for the villages with
Serbian radio nearly first order stochastically dominates the vote share for villages with no
Serbian radio. A Kolmogorov-Smirnov test rejects the hypothesis of the equality of distributions
with controls with a p-value of 0.006. Figure 4b provides evidence on the map of a positive
correlation between the availability of Serbian radio and the residual vote share for the extreme
nationalist parties (in deciles) after accounting for controls. Altogether, Figures 4a-4b show that
the results are not due to a single outlier but rather to a pronounced pattern.
        Returning to Table 3, the next specification (Column 4) decomposes the effect of
availability of one Serbian radio versus multiple Serbian radios. In the 9 villages where multiple
(RTS) Serbian radios are available, the audience is more likely to listen to Serbian content
(intentionally or accidentally) and the reception of the Serbian channels is likely to be better.
Indeed, these villages are associated with an (insignificantly) larger impact on nationalistic

21
     There are two counties in our baseline sample, and five counties in our extended sample.
                                                           13
voting than the villages with one radio.
        The estimates so far have made use of the hand-recorded measure of Serbian radio
availability. In Columns 5-7 we present the parallel specifications using signal strength. In the
most controlled specification, we again find a significant effect of signal strength on the
nationalist vote share. Again, the addition of controls has a limited effect on the point estimates.
In Figure 5 we plot for each village the residual signal strength and the residual vote share, after
taking controls into account, and find a monotonic pattern.
       One may argue that, while not jointly significant, the control variables associated with
nationalism positively co-vary with radio availability. Panel B of Table 2 presents a test inspired
by Altonji, Elder, and Taber (2005). We regress our outcome variable – nationalistic vote share
– on an index of observables predicting the availability of RTS radio, i.e., fitted value from
specification (1). This univariate regression allows for a higher-power test of how the
observables that are correlated with radio availability are correlated with the outcome of interest.
As reported in the Panel B of Table 2, we find no statistical evidence of a positive correlation,
which could lead to an upward bias in the main specification (to the extent that the observables
are positively correlated with the unobservable confounds). In Online Appendix Table 5, we
implement the Altonji-Elder-Taber test separately by three groups of controls: geographic,
census, and additional controls. Again, we find no evidence of a significant positive correlation.
There is some evidence of a negative correlation between indices for some groups of controls
and the nationalistic vote share. The fact that none of the three indices has positive correlation
with nationalism irrespective of the Serbian radio measure used bolsters the view that the main
estimates are unlikely to be biased upward.
       Table 4 displays the results for other political outcomes, reproducing the baseline
estimates from columns 3 and 7 of Table 3 in the first two columns, with the corresponding
graphical evidence in Online Appendix Figures 6b-6d. The availability of Serbian radio has a
negative effect on the vote share for the moderate nationalistic parties (Columns 3 and 4); the
effect is especially pronounced in the specification with signal strength. There is some evidence
that the exposure to Serbian radio increased the vote share for the Social Democratic party
(Columns 5 and 6). An interpretation of this result is that exposure to Serbian radio made
Croatian voters more nationalistic at the margin, shifting some voters from the moderate
nationalist party to the extreme nationalist parties, while polarizing the electorate, which leads to
higher vote share for the Social Democratic party. We find no evidence of an effect on turnout
(Columns 7 and 8), though these results are more tentative, as the measure of listed voters is
noisy.
       So far, we presented evidence only on political outcomes. Anti-Serbian feelings among
Croats can be expressed in various ways other than voting for extreme-nationalistic parties. As
an alternative measure of nationalism, we use the presence of graffiti ethnically disparaging of
Serbs in public spaces in the village (e.g. Online Appendix Figure 2). Using a probit
specification with equal weighting (Table 5 and Online Appendix Figure 6e), we find that in

                                                 14
villages with
         w Serbiaan radio the probabilityy of ethnicaally offensivve graffiti in the streetts is 35 to
40 percenntage pointts larger, thhat is, aboutt double as compared to the villaages with no Serbian
radio, a sstatistically significantt differencee. The addittion of conttrols has a small impaact on the
estimatess. We find similar ressults using the continuuous measuure of sign       nal strengthh, and the
results arre similar iff we use a liinear probabbility modeel (Online Appendix
                                                                      A        Taable 6). Theese results
provide eevidence thhat Serbian public rad    dio increases the expreessions of Croatian
                                                                                 C         naationalism
beyond thhe voting boooths.
        T interpret the magnittudes of thee impact off media avaailability onn voting forr extreme
        To
nationalisst parties, we
                      w evaluatee the resultss in terms of   o persuasion rate (DelllaVigna andd Kaplan,
2007). Thhe persuasio on rate is thhe fraction of
                                                o the audience of a meedia outlet whow are connvinced to
change thheir behavio or (in this caase, their voote) as a result of beingg exposed too this mediaa outlet.
       T compute the persuaasion rates,, one needss an estimaate of the share of inndividuals
       To
listening to the meddia in questiion (Serbiann radio) in the treatmeent group (vvillages witth Serbian
radio) annd in the con
                     ntrol groupss (villages without
                                             w       Serbbian radio). As not all residents inn a village
with receeption of Seerbian radioo listen to it
                                             i and somee residents in
                                                                    i villages with no recception of
Serbian rradio (accorrding to ourr measure) do
                                             d listen to it, we use survey
                                                                    s      responses to esttimate the
“first stage.” The esstimates in Table 1 im mply that thhe exposuree to Serbiann radio conttent is 31
percentagge points hiigher in thee villages with
                                              w at least one Serbiaan radio avaailable (Collumn 2 of
Table 1).. In additionn, a unit inccrease in th
                                              he signal strength of Seerbian radio
                                                                                 o is associatted with a
51-percenntage point increase in exposure (Column 4 oof Table 1).
       T compute a persuasiion rate baased on thee dichotom
       To                                                           mous measurre of availability of
Serbian radio, wee use the following formula from DellaVigna annd Kaplann (2007):
                               ν −ν      t          and ν C are the votes for ultra-nationalists in
                           f= T C T .
                                   − C 1− ν C
                               e T −e
villages with                         r          y, e T and e C are the exposures
         w and without Serbian radio, respectively                      e         to Serbian
radio in villages
         v        witth and withhout Serbian                       a tT is th
                                           n radio, resppectively, and      he turnout inn villages
                                           d by Serbiaan radio andd is equal too tT = t = 56
with Serbbian radio. Turnout is not affected                                               6.2% . The
differencce in exposu                                d and equuals to ê T −ê C = 0.313 (Column
                    ure is estimated from the survey data
2 of Tabble 1). The impact on voting equuals νˆ T −νˆ C = 0.0226 (Column
                                                                 (       3 of Table 3)
                                                                                    3 and the
predictedd share of vo                                                              i νˆ C = 0.057 . Thus,
                     ote for ultraa-nationalistts in the abssence of Serrbian radio is
the persuuasion rate is f = (0.022
                                 26 * 0.562) / (0.313* 0..943) = 4.3%
                                                                    % .22
        A
        Alternativelyy, we can compute
                                 c         thee persuasionn rate basedd on the coontinuous measure
                                                                                           m       of
signal strrength using
                     g the formulla from Enikkolopov et al. (2011):
                              1  dν           dt     1  dν de     d      dt 
                       f=            t   +ν  =             t         +ν 
                           1− ν 0 t0  de      d  1− ν 0 t0  da da
                                               de                    d      de 
                                                       (3)

Here          is the nuumber of people
                                p      whoo would vote for ultraa-nationalistts in the abbsence of

22
   Note thaat because the change in expposure is estim
                                                     mated based onn data from a non-representtative survey, some bias
is possible,, so these resu
                          ults should be interpreted with
                                                     w caution.
                                                          15
Serbian rradio; ν andd t are the voote share off ultra-natioonalists and the voter tuurnout in pllaces with
e exposuure to the Serbian publlic radio;         is the efffect of da change
                                                                        c       in thhe signal sttrength of
Serbian radio
         r      on the vote sharre;       is th
                                              he effect of a da changge in the siignal strenggth on the
exposuree; and      iss the effect of de channge in expoosure on tu    urnout. Ou  ur results with
                                                                                               w signal
strength yield that        equalss 4.3 percen nt. This impplies that 95.7
                                                                     9    percentt of Croats could, in
principle, be convinnced by thee radio’s meessage. From column 7 of Table 3, we get that            is
equal to 2.404. The estimated effect
                                 e      of siggnal strengtth on the ex
                                                                     xposure    i 51.3 (Collumn 4 of
                                                                                is
Table 1).. As there iss no effect on turnout, t does not depend on e and hencce the seconnd term in
parenthesses in equation (3) is 0. Thee impliedd persuassion ratee is f
=0.957*00.562*(2.4004/51.3)=2.77%. These results are slightly sm   maller than the results obtained
using a bbinary meassure of radioo availability above annd are on thhe lower en
                                                                              nd of estimaates in the
literaturee of persuasiion effects (DellaVigna
                                   (         a and Gentzzkow 2010).


         4 Robusstness.
         4.
        Table 6 docu
        T           uments the results
                                 r       of vaarious robusstness checkks, both forr the manuaal measure
of receptiion and for the signal strength
                                 s        measure.
        First, we shoow that the results are unlikely duue to the facct that townns with overrall better
radio recception maay have unnobservable features thhat are asssociated wiith nationallism. We
examine the impact of receptioon of Hunggarian radio on the nattionalistic vote
                                                                           v    share. G
                                                                                       Given the
lack of hostilities with Hunggary and thhe fact thaat very few  w Croats speak
                                                                           s      or understand
Hungariaan, we expeect no casuaal impact on
                                          n nationalism
                                                      m. Indeed, we find no impact of this
                                                                                       t radio,
and contrrolling for thheir availabbility does not
                                               n affect thhe main estim
                                                                      mates.
       W also con
       We            nsider the impact of thhe signal sttrength of two major Croatian raadios, the
Radio HR RT group and the Croaatian Cathollic Radio. O    One may woorry that villlages with reception
of Serbiaan radio difffer also in reception
                                    r         of Croatian radios
                                                           r     (desppite survey evidence suuggesting
that all viillages havee reception of
                                   o Croatiann radio). Wee find that coontrolling for
                                                                                  fo the signaal strength
                                                                            23
of these rradios has no
                      n impact onn the estimaated effect of
                                                         o Serbian radio.
         W then coonsider the impact off spatial coorrelation on our estim
         We                                                                        mates. Thee level of
clusteringg in our baseline estiimation allows for arrbitrary corrrelation off error term    ms among
villages iin the same municipalitty, but not across
                                             a       thesee geographiccal units. Inn order to acccount for
spatial coorrelation, in Columns (5) and (6) ( we pressent the maain results with standaard errors
correctedd with the Conley (19999) proced   dure.24 The corrected standard errrors are iff anything
slightly lower once adjusted
                      a      forr spatial corrrelation andd, thus, our results are robust.
                                                                                    r
        We can also decomposee the radio reception
        W                                    r            m
                                                          measure   into the part thaat is driven by signal
decay duue to distan nce from thhe transmittter and thee part that is   i driven byb topograpphy. After
controllinng for free-space signaal strength (i.e., the signnal strengthh that wouldd have beenn obtained


23
   We find some evidencce that stronger signal strenngth for the H
                                                                 HR radio lowers the nationaalistic vote shaare, with no
such effectt for the Cathoolic Croatian radio.
                                        r
24
   The origginal method inn Conley (19999) was extendded to allow for
                                                                  f weighting..
                                                          16
if there was a direct line of sight between the transmitter and the receiver), the manually-
measured radio availability is no more significant (Column 7), but the signal strength remains
significant (Column 8), though less precisely estimated.
        In Online Appendix Table 7, we present an additional series of robustness checks. The
results are essentially identical if we: (i) consider only the vote for the main nationalistic party
HSP (without vote for HP-HPP and HCSP) as dependent variable (Columns 1 and 2); (ii) control
for the intensity of past conflict by introducing a control for the location of the Serbian Krajina
(Columns 3 and 4); (iii) control for the distance to the transmitters and for elevation (Columns 5
and 6); (iv) control for the vulnerability to potential Serbian attacks using driving time to Serbia
and the number of conflict events within 3 km of each village according to Armed Conflict
Location and Event Dataset (Columns 7 and 8); (v) estimate the results with a nearest-neighbor
matching estimator, where we compute the average treatment on the treated by finding the 5
control villages which are the closest to each of the treated villages (that is, each village with
radio reception) (Column 9); (vi) include all villages within a 35 km. range from the border
(Column 10).
       The analysis so far focused on the sub-sample of villages that we visited (baseline
sample). We also analyze the extended sample of 417 villages within 75 kilometers of the
Croatian-Serbian border. In this larger sample, we do not have a direct measure of radio
availability and hence focus on the specification with signal strength. The results are largely
robust to extending the sample as reported in Table 7. The signal strength of Serbian radio is
associated with significantly higher vote share for the extreme nationalist parties (Column 2), a
decrease in the vote share for moderate nationalist parties once controls are included (Column
4), an increase of the vote share for the social-democratic party (Column 6), and a decrease in
turnout (Column 8). Regarding the main result on the vote share of extreme nationalist parties
(Column 2), the estimate is somewhat smaller than the comparable estimate for the baseline
sample (column 6 in Table 3), though not significantly so. Online Appendix Table 8 shows that
the results are very similar if we restrict the sample to villages within 50 kilometers of the
border.
       To understand whether the results are consistent across elections, we examine the impact
of exposure to Serbian radio (as measured in 2009 and 2010) on the 2011 and 2003
Parliamentary elections (Table 8). The results for the 2011 elections are consistent with the 2007
results: exposure to Serbian radio is associated with an increase in voting for the extremely
nationalistic party, a results which is statistically significant in the baseline sample using both
radio measures. The pattern of results on voting for other parties is similar too (Online Appendix
Tables 9 and 10).
        In contrast to the results for 2007 and 2011, there is no evidence of an effect of Serbian
radio exposure measured in 2009 on the election results in 2003 in the baseline sample, with
some evidence in the extended sample (see also Online Appendix Tables 11 and 12). The
different results for the 2003 elections could be explained by the different degree of

                                                17
measurement error. In 2003 the transmitters were still in the process of being repaired and, in
addition, many people still lived and voted in refugee camps.
       We also examine the heterogeneity of the impact of exposure to Serbian radio on voting
by adding to specification (2) an interaction of the availability and signal strength variables with
a particular control variable. As our sample is small, we include interactions with one variable at
a time. Online Appendix Table 13, Panels A and B show that the only consistent pattern is that
the effect tends to be smaller in villages with more disabled during the war of independence and
more important role in the war. In these villages, nationalism is higher most probably because of
the vivid memories of the war experience, and, therefore, the media message is likely to be
infra-marginal.
       Overall, we find the cross-border media effects to be robust.


5. Conclusion
       This paper documents the effect of Serbian public radio on the voting behavior and
nationalistic anti-Serbian sentiment of Croats in Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Srijem,
a post-conflict region of modern Croatia on the border with Serbia. We find that the exposure to
the Serbian public radio convinces some Croats to switch to voting for ultra-nationalist parties
from voting to moderate nationalist party. In addition, exposure to Serbian public radio increases
the incidence of ethnically-offensive graffiti on public buildings in the center of their villages.
The results of a laboratory experiment confirm that Serbian public radio causes an increase in
anti-Serbian sentiment among Croats.
       Our results indicate that media can have substantial cross-group effects in areas
characterized by ethnic tensions with overlapping media markets and groups sharing similar
languages. This suggests that peaceful relations between neighboring ethnic and religious groups
depend in part on the content of media programming, and the extent of media overlap. Hence,
nation-building efforts implicit in the nationalistic content of the group-specific media (in our
case, the Serbian radio) can have important negative spillovers on the persistence of peace.

References
Acemoglu, Daron, and Alexander Wolitzky (2012) “Cycles of Distrust: An Economic Model,” working paper
Allport, G. W. (1954). The nature of prejudice. Cambridge, MA: Perseus Books.
Altonji J., T. Elder, and C. Taber (2005) Selection on Observed and Unobserved Variables: Assessing the
     Effectiveness of Catholic Schools. Journal of Political Economy, 113(1), 151-184.
Bellows, J. and Edward Miguel (2009) "War and local collective action in Sierra Leone," Journal of Public
     Economics, Elsevier, vol. 93(11-12), 1144-1157.
Blattman, Christopher (2009) "From Violence to Voting: War and Political Participation in Uganda", American
     Political Science Review 103: 231-47.
Blattman, C. and E. Miguel (2010). "Civil War," Journal of Economic Literature, American Economic Association,
     vol. 48(1): 3-57.
Bursztyn, L. and D. Cantoni (2011) Clueless? The Impact of Television on Consumption Behavior. Working paper.
Butler, D. M. and A. L. De La O (2011) The Causal Effect of Media-Driven Political Interest on Political Attitudes
     and Behavior, Quarterly Journal of Political Science: Vol. 5:No 4, pp 321-337.


                                                       18
Caselli, F., M. Morelli and D. Rohner (2012) The Geography of Inter-State Resource Wars," mimeo, London
      School of Economics.
Chassang, S. and G. Padró i Miquel (2010) "Conflict and Deterrence under Strategic Risk," The Quarterly Journal
      of Economics 125 (4): 1821-1858.
Conley, T.G. (1999) GMM Estimation with Cross Sectional Dependence. Journal of Econometrics 92, 1-45.
DellaVigna, S., and M. Gentzkow (2010) Persuasion: Empirical Evidence. Annual Review of Economics 2, 643-
      669.
DellaVigna, S. and E. Kaplan (2007) The Fox News effect: Media bias and voting. Quarterly Journal of Economics
      122(3), 807-860.
Dube, Oeindrila, and Juan Vagras (forthcoming) “Commodity Price Shocks and Civil Conflict: Evidence from
      Colombia,” Review of Economic Studies.
Dube, Oeindrila, and Suresh Naidu (2011) “Bases, Bullets and Ballots: the Effect of U.S. Military Aid on Political
      Conflict in Colombia,” working paper
Durante, R., and B. Knight (2012) Partisan Control, Media Bias, and Viewer Responses: Evidence from
      Berlusconi’s Italy. Journal of European Economic Association, 10(3), 451-481.
Enikolopov, R., M. Petrova and E. Zhuravskaya (2011) Media and Political Persuasion: Evidence from Russia.
      American Economic Review, 101(7), 3253–85.
Folke, O. (2011) Shades of Brown and Green: Party Effects in Proportional Election Systems. Mimeo, Columbia
      University.
Gentzkow, M. (2006) Television and voter turnout. Quarterly Journal of Economics 121(3), 931-972.
Gentzkow, M. and J. M. Shapiro (2004) Media, Education, and Anti-Americanism in the Muslim World. Journal of
      Economic Perspectives. 18(3).
Gentzkow, M. and J. M. Shapiro (2011) Ideological Segregation Online and Offline, Quarterly Journal of
      Economics. 126 (4)
Gerber A., Karlan D., Bergan, D. (2009) Does the media matter? a field experiment measuring the effect of
      newspapers on voting behavior and political opinions. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1(2),
      35–52.
Glaeser, E.L. (2005) “The Political Economy of Hatred,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,120 (1), 45-86
Glaeser, E.L., and C. Sunstein (2009) “Extremism and Social Learning,” Journal of Legal Analysis, 1(1), 263-324
Greenberg, Robert D. (2004) Language and Identity in the Balkans. Oxford University Press.
Grosfeld, I., Rodnyansky, A., and Zhuravskaya, E. (2013) Persistent Antimarket Culture: A Legacy of the Pale of
      Settlement after the Holocaust. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 5(3): 189-226.
Hainmueller, J. and H. Kern (2009) Opium for the masses: How foreign free media can stabilize authoritarian
      regimes. Political Analysis, 17, 377–399.
Hess, G. and A. Orphanides (1995) ``War Politics: An Economic rational-voter framework,’’ American Economic
      Review, 85: 4, 828-846
Hislope, R. (1996) Intra-Ethnic Conflict in Croatia and Serbia: Flanking and the Consequences for Democracy. East
      European Quarterly, 30, pp. 471-494.
Hockenos P. (2003) Homeland Calling: Exile, Patriotism and the Balkan Wars. Cornell University Press: Ithaca,
      NY.
Hufford, G.A. (2002) The ITS Irregular Terrain Model, Version 1.2.2 the Algorithm. Available:
      http://flattop.its.bldrdoc.gov/itm.html.
IREX (2010) Media Sustainability Index 2010- Serbia. International Research & Exchanges Board.
Iyengar S, Hahn KS, Krosnick JA, Walker J. 2008. Selective exposure to campaign communication: the role of
      anticipated agreement and issue public membership. Journal of Politics 70:186–200.
Jackson, M.O. and M. Morelli (2007) "Political Bias and War," American Economic Review, 97:4, 1353-1373.
Jackson, M. and M. Morelli (2011) The Reasons for Wars - an Updated Survey. In the Handbook on the Political
      Economy of War, Chris Coyne and Rachel Mathers (eds.), Elgar Publishing, Cheltenham, the UK.
Jha, S. (2013) “Trade, Institutions and Religious Tolerance: Evidence from India,” American Political Science
      Review, Vol. 107, No. 4,
Knight B., Chiang C. (2011) Media bias and influence: Evidence from newspaper endorsements. Review of
      Economic Studies, 78(3), 795-820.



                                                       19
Kronja, I. (2004) Turbo Folk and Dance Music in 1990s Serbia: Media, Ideology and the Production of Spectacle.
      The Anthropology of East Europe Review 22(1), 103-114.
Kurspahić, K. (2003) Prime Time Crime: Balkan Media in War and Peace. Washington DC: United States Institute
      of Peace.
Laqueur, W. (1997) Fascism: Past, Present, Future. New York: Oxford Univerisity Press.
Lawson, C. and J. A. McCann (2005) Television news, Mexico’s 2000 elections, and media effects in emerging
      democracies. British Journal of Political Science 35(1), 1-30.
MacDonald, David Bruce (2002) Balkan Holocausts? Serbian and Croatian Victim- Centred Propaganda and the
      War in Yugoslavia. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Nedeljkovic V., Dubravka, and Visnja Bacanovic (2007) Monitoring and analysis of TV news programs in Serbia-
      RTS, RUV and TV B92: From emotional approach to the fate of Kosovo to progressive civil activism. In
      Indicator of Public Interest: TV prime time domestic news-monitoring and analysis of TV news programs in
      10 SEENPM countries, ed. Radenko Udovicic. Sarajevo: Media Plan Institute.
Olken B. (2009) Do TV and Radio Destroy Social Capital? Evidence from Indonesian Villages. American
      Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1 (4), 1-33.
Paluck, Elizabeth Levy, and Donald P. Green. 2009. Deference, Dissent, and Dispute Resolution: An
      Experimental Intervention using Mass Media to Change Norms and Behavior in Rwanda. American Political
      Science Review 103: 622-644.
Peruško, Z. and Jurlin, K.(2006) The Croatian Media Market: Regulation and Concentration Trends, unpublished
      study for the Media Division of the Council of Europe.
Rohner, Dominic, Mathias Thoenig, and Fabrizio Zilibotti (2012) “Seeds of Distrust: Conflict in Uganda” CEPR
      Discussion Paper No. DP8741.
Skiljan, D. (2000) Semantics of war. In N. Skopljanac Brunner, S. Gredelji, A. Hodzic, & B. Kristofic (Eds.),
      Media and war. Zagreb, Croatia: Centre for Transition and Civil Society Research.
Smajlović, L. (1997) Media in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, IREX Report.
Snyder, J. and Strömberg, D. 2010. Press Coverage and Political Accountability” Journal of Political Economy
      118(2), 355-408.
Strömberg, D. (2004) Radio’s impact on public spending. Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(1), 189-221.
Sunstein, C. R. (2001) Republic.com. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Thompson, M. (1994) Forging War:The Media in Serbia, Croatia and Bosnia-Herzegovina, London: Article 19.
Udovicic R. (2005) Battling political frustration, mediaonline, Available: http://www.mediaonline.ba/en/?ID=343.
UNCE (1994) Final report of the United Nations Commission of Experts established pursuant to security council
      resolution 780 (Annex III.A Special forces) Available : http://www.ess.uwe.ac.uk/comexpert/anx/III-
      A.htm#III.D.
Valentino NA, Banks AJ, Hutchings VL, Davis AK. 2009. Selective exposure in the internet age: the interaction
      between anxiety and information utility. Political Psychology 30:591–613
Voigtländer, Nico, and Hans-Joachim Voth (2012) “Persecution Perpetuated: Medieval Origins of Anti-Semitic
      Violence in Nazi Germany,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3): 1339-1392.
Voors, Maarten J., Eleonora E. M. Nillesen, Philip Verwimp, Erwin H. Bulte, Robert Lensink, and Daan P. Van
      Soest. 2012. "Violent Conflict and Behavior: A Field Experiment in Burundi." American Economic Review,
      102(2): 941–64.
Yanagizawa, D. (2009) Propaganda and Conflict: Theory and Evidence from the Rwandan Genocide. Working
      paper.




                                                       20
Figurre 1a. Map of the area
                          a with the baseline and
                                                d extended samples
of viillages




Figurre 1b. Map of the area
                          a with the baseline sam
                                                mple of villa
                                                            ages showing both
the measured
    m         and
              a the pred  dicted reception of Serbian radio.




                                     21
Figure 2a. Reported reception of Serbian radio (survey response), as function
of availability of Serbian radio in village.




Figure 2b. Reported frequency of listening to Serbian radio (survey
response), as function of availability of Serbian radio in village




Notes: Figures 2a and 2b tabulate the responses to two questions of an in-person survey undertaken in Dec. 2010
and Jan. 2011 in 9 of the Croatian villages in the baseline sample. We report the average responses separately for
the 32 respondents in villages which we code as not having reception of Serbian radio, and for the 38 respondents in
villages which we code as having reception of at least one Serbian radio.




                                                        22
Figure 2с. Reported incidence of listening to Serbian radio (survey response),
as function of signal strength in village.




Notes: Figure 2c shows responses to a question on frequency of listening to Serbian radio in an in-person survey
undertaken in Dec. 2010 and Jan. 2011 in 9 of the Croatian villages in the baseline sample. We report in solid circles
the average responses for the 32 respondents in villages which we code as not having reception of Serbian radio,
and with hollow circle for the 38 respondents in villages which we code as having reception of at least one Serbian
radio. Size of the markers is proportional to the number of respondents in each village.
Figure 3. Attitudes toward different ethnic groups (Laboratory Experiment)




Notes: Difference for feeling towards Serbs between control and RTS treatment significant at 1% level, between control
and B92 treatment at 5%. All other differences are not significant.


                                                         23
Figure 4a. Vote share for extreme nationalistic parties in villages with, and
without, reception of Serbian radio (controls).

                            1


                            .8
   Cumulative Probability




                            .6


                            .4


                            .2


                            0
                                 -.1          0                .1                   .2              .3
                                               Vote share of HSP et al, with controls

                                       No Serbian Radio            At Least One Serbian Radio Available



Figure 4b. Map of the vote share for extremely nationalistic parties (with
controls) and the measured reception of Serbian radio.




                                                              24
Figure 5. Vote share of extremely nationalistic parties as function of signal
strength of Serbian radio (controls, baseline sample).




Notes: The picture shows share of votes for HSP et al. and predicted signal strength of Serbian radio after taking
controls into account. Residuals are taken from the specification presented in column (3) of Table 3.




                                                       25
                              Table 1. Effect of Serbian radio availability on radio listenership: Survey Evidence
Dep. Var. in OLS Regression:                           Indicator for Survey Respondent Who Reports Listening to Serbian Radio At Least Sometimes
Panel A. Listening at all                                       (1)                    (2)                     (3)                      (4)
At least 1 Serbian radio available                          0.362***               0.313**
                                                             [0.113]                [0.120]
Signal strength of Serbian Radio                                                                           55.206**                51.325**
                                                                                                           [23.820]                 [22.673]
Constant                                                    0.375***                 0.405                  1.098**                  1.098**
                                                             [0.051]                [0.412]                 [0.449]                  [0.449]
Controls                                                        No                    Yes                      No                      Yes
Observations                                                    70                     70                      70                       70
R-squared                                                      0.13                   0.45                   0.11                     0.42
Effect of 1 st. dev. change                                                                                   0.14                     0.13
Dep. Var. in OLS Regression:                                    Indicator for Survey Respondent Who Reports Listening to Serbian Radio Often
Panel B. Listening often                                         (1)                      (2)                   (3)                      (4)
At least 1 Serbian radio available                             0.160                    0.144
                                                              [0.100]                  [0.107]
Signal strength of Serbian Radio                                                                             26.564                   27.588
                                                                                                            [22.532]                 [19.415]
Constant                                                      0.156*                   -0.266                 0.076                    0.076
                                                              [0.077]                  [0.260]               [0.216]                  [0.216]
Controls                                                         No                      Yes                    No                      Yes
Observations                                                     70                       70                    70                       70
R-squared                                                       0.03                     0.28                 0.06                     0.27
Effect of 1 st. dev. change                                                                                    0.07                     0.07
Notes: Data from a survey of 70 individuals in 9 villages. Respondents are asked how often, if at all, they listen to Serbian radio. They are considered to listen to Serbian radio
often if they listen to it at least several times per week. Control variables include age, gender, occupation, education, and whether village was surveyed in 2011. Robust standard
errors in brackets * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                        26
              Table 2. Determinants of the availability of Serbian radio and Altonji-Elder-Taber test
Panel A. Determinants of Serbian radio availability

                                                        Indicator for measured Availability               Signal Strength for Serbian
Dep. Var. in OLS Regression
                                                         of at least 1 Serbian (RTS) radio                        (RTS) radio

                                                                (1)                    (2)                     (3)                  (4)
                                                                                    9.183**
Signal strength of all Serbian RTS radios
                                                                                    [3.637]
Distance to Serbia, logged                                    -0.056                 -0.021               -0.0038***            -0.004***
                                                              [0.034]               [0.032]                   [0.001]             [0.001]
Population (logged)                                           -0.026                 -0.034                   0.0009             0.001**
                                                              [0.026]               [0.029]                   [0.001]             [0.001]
% of male population                                          -1.312                 -1.585                   0.0298              -0.011
                                                              [1.084]               [1.142]                   [0.023]             [0.012]
% of aged 21-40                                               -2.187                 -2.273                  0.0094                0.001
                                                              [1.732]               [1.936]                   [0.061]             [0.016]
% of aged 41-60                                               -1.551                 -0.916                -0.0692**            -0.041***
                                                              [1.118]               [1.091]                   [0.031]             [0.013]
% of aged 61+                                                -1.405*                 -1.138                  -0.0291              -0.006
                                                              [0.835]               [0.886]                   [0.027]             [0.010]
% of Croats                                                   -0.189                 -0.053                 -0.0148*              -0.003
                                                              [0.219]               [0.184]                   [0.008]             [0.005]
% of people with higher education                            4.544***               3.543**                  0.1091*              -0.012
                                                              [1.663]               [1.424]                   [0.059]             [0.050]
Economically active population (%)                            -0.239                 -0.209                  -0.0032             0.047**
                                                              [0.927]               [0.959]                   [0.048]             [0.019]
Disabled after the war of independence                        -0.781                 -3.714               0.3194***              0.255***
(%)                                                           [2.327]               [2.877]                   [0.106]             [0.085]
Large forest nearby                                          -0.120*                -0.123*                   0.0004
                                                              [0.069]               [0.065]                   [0.002]
Was important during the war                                   0.057                  0.100                  -0.0047
                                                              [0.142]               [0.121]                  [0.004]
Monument in the honor of died defendants                       0.077                 0.079                  -0.0002
of the town                                                   [0.075]               [0.076]                  [0.002]
Names of the streets in Cyrillic script                       -0.162                -0.152                   -0.001
                                                              [0.150]               [0.134]                 [0.004]
Names of the streets in Hungarian                             0.058                  0.051                  0.0007
                                                              [0.065]               [0.059]                 [0.003]
Serbian beer in bars                                          -0.006                -0.024                   0.002
                                                              [0.124]               [0.120]                 [0.002]
County fixed effects                                            Yes                   Yes                     Yes                  Yes
R-squared                                                       0.17                  0.21                   0.643                0.636
F-stat for joint significance of non-
geographic controls                                            0.99                  0.89                  3.094***            5.655***
F-stat for all the controls                                   2.23**                3.12***                13.35***            122.81***
Sample                                                       Baseline              Baseline                Baseline            Extended
Observations                                                   139                    139                    139                 417

Panel B. Altonji-Elder-Taber test of selection on observables
Dep. Var. in OLS Regression:                                            Vote share for Extremely nationalistic parties
                                                                (1)                                            (2)                  (3)
Prediction (based on all controls) of                          0.031
availability of dummy for 1 Serbian radio
                                                              [0.062]
Prediction (based on all controls) of signal                                                                 -1.858              -0.001
strength of Serbian radio
                                                                                                            [1.279]              [0.459]
Controls                                                   No controls                                   No controls          No controls
Sample                                                      Baseline                                      Baseline             Extended
Observations                                                  139                                           139                  417
Notes: Panel A reports the coefficient of OLS regressions of radio reception on all the control variables for the baseline sample (Columns 1-
3) and for the extended sample (Column 4). The dependent variable is measured radio reception in Columns 1-2 and radio signal strength
in Columns 3-4. Panel B regresses the dependent variable of Table 3 (vote share for extremely nationalistic parties) on the predicted radio
reception based on all variables in Panel A. The univariate regression in Panel B provides information on the correlation between the
predictors for the media variable and the political variable, indicating the potential for bias in the regressions in Tables 3. Observations in
panel B are weighted by the number of eligible voters. In both panels, the standard errors in brackets are clustered by municipality, allowing
for correlation between villages in the same municipality. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                               27
                                    Table 3. Serbian radio and vote for extreme nationalists. Baseline sample.
Dep. Var. in OLS regression:                                                  Vote share for extremely nationalistic parties
                                              (1)                 (2)                (3)                 (4)                (5)                 (6)                 (7)
At least 1 Serbian (RTS)                   0.028**            0.025***            0.026***             0.018*
radio available
                                            [0.011]            [0.008]             [0.008]            [0.009]
At least 2 Serbian (RTS)                                                                               0.025
radios available                                                                                      [0.019]
Signal Strength of Serbian                                                                                               3.671***           2.464***            2.678***
(RTS) radio                                                                                                               [0.975]            [0.622]             [0.617]
Distance to Serbia, logged                  -0.006             -0.015*             -0.016             -0.014               0.005             -0.006              -0.006
                                            [0.008]            [0.008]             [0.010]            [0.010]             [0.007]            [0.007]             [0.008]
County fixed effects                          Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes                 Yes
Census controls                               No                 Yes                 Yes                Yes                 No                 Yes                 Yes
Additional controls                           No                 No                  Yes                Yes                 No                 No                  Yes
Mean of Dependent Variable
                                            0.070               0.070               0.070              0.070               0.070              0.070               0.070
R-squared                                    0.36                0.60               0.60                0.60               0.48                0.63                0.64
Observations                                 139                 139                139                 139                 139                139                 139
Implied Persuasion Rates                     0.05                0.05               0.05                0.03               0.043               0.03                0.03
Implied ATT                                  0.09                0.08               0.08                0.06               0.07                0.05                0.05
Notes: The specification reports the results of OLS specifications, with the observations weighed by the number of eligible voters. The baseline sample includes
villages directly visited by the authors in 2009 and 2010 to measure the radio availability in the main street. Columns (1)-(4) use the measure of reception of RTS
Serbian radio recorded on an in-person visit, while columns (5)-(7) use the signal strength computed using the transmitter location. The full set of control variables is
listed in Table 2. Persuasion rates (DellaVigna and Kaplan, 2007) are computed according to the formula in the text. Implied Average Treatment on Treated effect
(ATT) is computed as the ratio of the coefficient for the effect of radio on vote to the coefficient of the effect of radio on listenership from Table 1. The standard errors
in brackets are clustered by municipality, allowing for correlation between villages in the same municipality. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at
1%




                                                                                     28
                                    Table 4. Serbian radio, vote for other parties and turnout. Baseline sample.
Dep. Var. in OLS regression:                   Vote Share of                      Vote Share of                     Vote Share of                            Turnout
                                           Extreme Nationalists              Moderate Nationalists                Social-Democrats
                                             (1)         (2)                   (3)          (4)                    (5)        (6)                     (7)               (8)
At least 1 Serbian (RTS)                  0.026***                            -0.041*                            0.009                              -0.009
radio available
                                           [0.008]                            [0.024]                            [0.015]                           [0.017]
Signal Strength of Serbian                                  2.678***                          -4.099***                           1.884**                            -0.981
(RTS) radio                                                  [0.617]                           [0.838]                            [0.846]                            [1.067]
County fixed effects                         Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes
Census and geographic
                                             Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes
controls
Manually collected controls                  Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes
Mean of Dependent Variable                  0.070            0.070             0.362            0.362            0.251             0.251            0.550             0.550
R-squared                                    0.60             0.64              0.74             0.76             0.69              0.71              0.62              0.62
Observations                                 139              139               139              139              139               139               139               139
Implied Persuasion rates                     0.05             0.03             -0.13            -0.06             0.02              0.02             -0.04             -0.02
Implied ATT                                  0.08             0.05             -0.13            -0.08             0.03              0.04             -0.03             -0.02
Notes: The specification reports the results of OLS specifications, with the observations weighed by the number of eligible voters. The baseline sample includes
villages directly visited by the authors in 2009 and 2010 to measure the radio availability in the main street. The full set of control variables is listed in Table 2. First two
columns reproduce columns (3) and (7) from Table 3. The standard errors in brackets are clustered by municipality, allowing for correlation between villages in the
same municipality. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                       29
                                                Table 5. Serbian radio and ethnically offensive graffiti.
Dap. Var. in Probit Regression                                    Indicator for ethnically offensive graffiti in a village
                                              (1)           (2)            (3)              (4)              (5)             (6)                                   (7)
At least 1 Serbian (RTS)                   0.364***       0.355**       0.361**           0.311
radio available                             [0.139]       [0.171]        [0.161]         [0.245]
At least 2 Serbian (RTS)                                                                  0.076
radios available                                                                         [0.294]
Signal Strength of Serbian                                                                              10.883**           8.559*                              10.288**
(RTS) radio                                                                                              [4.975]           [4.589]                              [5.109]
County fixed effects                          Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes                                  Yes
Distance to Serbia, logged                    Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes                                  Yes
Census and geographic
                                              No                 Yes                Yes                 Yes                 No                Yes                 Yes
controls
Additional controls                           No                 No                 Yes                 Yes                 No                 No                 Yes
Mean of Dependent Variable
                                             0.26               0.26                0.26               0.26                0.26               0.26               0.26
Observations                                 139                139                 139                139                 139                139                139
Notes: All estimations use probit model. All observations are equally weighted. The baseline sample includes villages directly visited by the authors in 2009 and 2010
to measure the radio availability in the main street. The dependent variable is an indicator for the presence of a graffiti offensive towards Serbs in the village streets, as
measured on an in-person visit in 2009 and 2010. The full set of control variables is listed in Table 2. Marginal effects are reported. The standard errors in brackets are
clustered by municipality, allowing for correlation between villages in the same municipality. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                     30
                      Table 6. Serbian radio and vote for extreme nationalists, Robustness Checks. Baseline sample.
Dep. Var.:                                                       Vote share for extremely nationalistic parties
Sample                                                                              Baseline
                                                                                            Standard errors
                                       Control for exposure to Control for exposure to                                                            Control for free-space
Specification                                                                             corrected for spatial
                                          Hungarian radio           Croatian radio                                                                   signal strength
                                                                                             autocorrelation
                                           (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)           (6)                                         (7)             (8)
At least 1 Serbian (RTS) radio          0.026**                 0.030***                 0.026***                                                    0.008
available                               [0.010]                  [0.010]                  [0.008]                                                   [0.010]
                                                     2.699***                2.446***                  2.678***                                                   1.7111**
Signal Strength of Serbian (RTS) radio
                                                      [0.602]                 [0.675]                   [0.382]                                                    [0.818]
                                         0.001
At least 1 Hungarian radio available
                                        [0.023]
                                                       0.223
Signal Strength of Hungarian radio
                                                      [0.941]
Signal Strength of Croatian Catholic                               0.16        0.216
radio                                                            [0.742]      [0.751]
                                                                -1.221***    -0.810**
Signal Strength of Croatian HR radios
                                                                 [0.341]      [0.321]
Free-Space Signal Strength of Serbian
                                           No           No          No          No          No            No                                          Yes            Yes
(RTS) radio
Standard errors corrected for spatial
                                           No           No          No          No          Yes           Yes                                         No              No
autocorrelation
Observations                              139           139        139          139         139           139                                        139             139
R-squared                                 0.60         0.64       0.63         0.65        0.60          0.64                                        0.64            0.65
Implied Persuasion Rates                  0.05         0.03       0.06         0.03        0.05          0.03                                        0.02            0.02
Implied ATT                               0.08         0.05       0.10         0.05        0.08          0.05                                        0.03            0.03
Notes: The specification reports the results of OLS with the observations weighed by the number of eligible voters. The baseline sample includes villages directly visited
by the authors in 2009 and 2010 to measure the radio availability in the main street. All specifications control for the full set of control variables listed in Table 2. The
standard errors in brackets for OLS regressions are clustered by municipality, allowing for correlation between villages in the same municipality. * significant at 10%; **
significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                     31
               Table 7. Extended sample results (Villages within 75km of Croatian-Serbian Border).
                                         Vote share of        Vote share of                     Vote share of social-
Dep. Var. in OLS regression:                                                                                                            Turnout
                                      extreme nationalists moderate nationalists                     democrats
                                          (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)             (8)
Signal Strength of Serbian             2.058**       1.552**       -0.931        -1.934**         0.993          1.235        -1.504** -3.080***
(RTS) radio                             [0.880]      [0.623]       [0.987]        [0.934]        [1.404]        [0.908]        [0.717]  [0.767]
County fixed effects                      Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
Distance to Serbia, logged                Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
Census and geographic                     No           Yes           No             Yes             No            Yes            No            Yes
controls
Mean of Dependent Variable              0.061         0.061         0.349          0.349          0.215          0.215          0.215         0.215

R-squared                                0.27          0.40          0.53           0.61          0.030           0.50           0.11         0.33
Observations                              417          417           417            417            417            417            417           417
Implied Persuasion Rates                0.026         0.019        -0.017          -0.028         0.015          0.017         -0.040        -0.052
Implied ATT                             0.040         0.030        -0.018          -0.038         0.019          0.024         -0.029        -0.060
Notes: The specification reports the results of OLS specifications, with the observations weighed by the number of eligible voters. This extended
sample includes villages in the broader Croatian region up to a 75 km. distance from the Croatian-Serbian border. The full set of control variables
is listed in Table 2. The standard errors in brackets are clustered by municipality, allowing for correlation between villages in the same municipality.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                            32
                  Table 8. Serbian radio, vote for extreme nationalistic parties in 2003 and 2011.
Dep. Var. in OLS regression:                                    Vote Share of Extreme Nationalistic Parties
Elections:                                           2003 Election                                          2011 Election
Sample                                       Baseline Sample       Ext. Sample                      Baseline Sample       Ext. Sample
                                             (1)          (2)           (3)                         (4)          (5)           (6)
At least 1 Serbian (RTS)                   -0.006                                                0.024***
radio available
                                           [0.008]                                                [0.008]
Signal Strength of Serbian                                  -0.115           0.748*                                1.266***           0.484
(RTS) radio                                                 [0.505]          [0.384]                                [0.446]          [0.500]
County fixed effects                         Yes              Yes              Yes                  Yes               Yes              Yes
Census and geographic
                                             Yes              Yes               Yes                 Yes               Yes              Yes
controls
Manually collected controls                  Yes              Yes               No                  Yes               Yes               No
Mean of Dependent Variable                  0.072            0.072            0.076                0.052            0.052             0.052
R-squared                                    0.44             0.44             0.19                 0.40             0.39              0.36
Observations                                 121              121              369                  123              123               375
Implied Persuasion rates                    -0.01             0.00             0.01                 0.05             0.01              0.01
Implied ATT                                 -0.02             0.00             0.01                 0.08             0.02              0.01
Notes: The specification reports the results of OLS specifications, with the observations weighed by the number of eligible voters. The
number of observations for the 2003 and 2011 elections differs somewhat from the one in the baseline sample because the electoral
committee does not provide village-level data for polling places comprising more than one village in these other years. The sample in
Columns 1-2 and 4-5 includes villages directly visited by the authors in 2009 and 2010 to measure the radio availability in the main street
for which the voting data for the respective year is available. The sample in Columns 3 and 6 includes the extended sample used in Table
7. The full set of control variables is listed in Table 2. The standard errors in brackets are clustered by municipality, allowing for correlation
between villages in the same municipality. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                       33
